Review Essay 
 
Turning GOLD into EPG:  Lessons from Low-
Tech Democratic Experimentalism for Electronic 
Rulemaking and Other Ventures in 
Cyberdemocracy 
PETER M. SHANE* 
Reviewing ARCHON FUNG AND ERIK OLIN WRIGHT, EDS., DEEPENING 
DEMOCRACY: INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS IN EMPOWERED 
PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE (VERSO, 2003). 
ABSTRACT 
Empowered Participatory Governance, or EPG, is a model of 
governance  developed  by  Archon  Fung  and  Erik  Olin  Wright 
Wright that seeks to connect a set of normative commitments for 
strengthening  democracy  with  a  set  of  institutional  design 
prescriptions intended to meet that objective.  It is derived partly 
from democratic theory and partly from the study of real-world 
attempts  to  institutionalize  transformative  strategies  for 
democratizing social and political decision making.  This essay 
reviews Fung and Wright’s recent volume, Deepening Democracy: 
Institutional Innovations in Empowered Participatory Governance, 
and  considers  the  relevance  of  the  authors’  and  other 
contributors’  insights  for  the  future  of  a  phenomenon  called 
“electronic rulemaking.” Electronic rulemaking is a species of 
government  on-line  deliberation,  which  the  author  abbreviates 
“GOLD,” that seeks to facilitate greater citizen involvement in the 
formal processes of elaborating the binding administrative rules 
that implement federal law.  Although the Fung and Wright volume 
hardly mentions information and communications technologies at 
all, there appears to be an extraordinary fit between the capacities 
of new ICTs and the needs of EPG, in terms of both  accomplishing 
a supportive context and actually implementing the recommended 
institutional designs. Whether electronic rulemaking will prove a 
significant way station towards EPG is uncertain, but, given the 
promise of the EPG experimental agenda and the need to enlarge 
opportunities for meaningful citizen participation in decisions that 
 
 
 
 
  * Joseph S. Platt - Porter, Wright, Morris & Arthur Professor of Law and Director, Center 
for  Interdisciplinary  Law  and  Policy  Studies,  Moritz  College  of  Law,  The  Ohio State 
University.  Copyright © 2004 by Peter M.Shane. 148  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
affect  their  lives,  EPG  proponents  should  give  more  active 
consideration  to  the  potential  role  of  GOLD  initiatives  in 
achieving EPG aims. 
 
  For cyberdemocrats – researchers and activists who champion the 
potential  for  new  information  and  communications  technologies 
(ICTs)  to  improve  upon  our  practice  of  democracy  –  electronic 
rulemaking seems a tantalizing prospect.  Federal agencies engrafting 
web-based tools onto notice-and-comment rulemaking are operating 
across  a  domain  of  policymaking  that  affects  the  lives  of  every 
American.  Within this domain, federal law already mandates, even if 
indirectly,  that  agency  experts  and  their  politically  accountable 
supervisors  take  some  deliberative  account  of  public  input.1  The 
federal commitment to electronic rulemaking thus seems to hold out 
the potential to enlarge significantly a genuine public sphere in which 
individual citizens participate directly to help to make government 
decisions that are binding on the entire polity. 
  Central to this vision of what might be called “Government On-
Line  Deliberation,”  which  I  abbreviate  GOLD,  are  values  of 
democratic collaboration and participation that align the project of 
cyberdemocracy  with  a  family  of  reforms  that  political  scientist 
Archon  Fung  and  sociologist  Erik  Olin  Wright  call  Empowered 
Participatory Governance, or EPG.  EPG is a style of deliberative 
democracy that seeks to “deepen the ways in which ordinary people 
can  effectively  participate  in  and  influence  policies  which  directly 
affect  their  lives.”2  Fung  and  Wright’s  superb  volume,  Deepening 
Democracy:  Institutional  Innovations  in  Empowered  Participatory 
Governance, employs a combination of specific case studies and more 
general analysis to assess the prospects for institutionalizing real-world 
governance reforms in pursuit of that aspiration.  Such reforms would 
facilitate  “active  political  involvement  of  the  citizenry,”  forge 
 
 
 
 
  1 Agencies engaged in making rules must ordinarily publish their rules in proposed form 
for public comment.  5 U.S.C. § 553 (c).  Under 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A), final rules can be set 
aside by a court if found to be “arbitrary” or “capricious.”  Among the grounds available for 
challenging a rule as arbitrary or capricious is that the agency neglected to take into sufficient 
account those issues brought to the agency’s attention through public comment on the 
agency’s proposed rules.  United States v. Nova Scotia Food Prods. Corp., 568 F.2d 240 (2d 
Cir. 1977) (vacating FDA regulations on the processing of smoked whitefish on the ground, in 
part, that the FDA failed to respond adequately to regulatory alternatives suggested during the 
notice-and-comment period). 
  2 Archon  Fung  &  Erik  Olin  Wright,  Thinking  About  Empowered  Participatory 
Governance,  in  DEEPENING  DEMOCRACY:  INSTITUTIONAL  INNOVATIONS  IN  EMPOWERED 
PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 3, 5 (Archon Fung & Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003) [hereinafter 
Thinking About EPG]. 2005]  SHANE  149 
 
“political consensus through dialogue,” and help implement “public 
policies that ground a productive economy and healthy society.”3 The 
authors  seek  what  they  call  “real  utopias,”  that  is,  “pragmatically 
accessible” reforms that are genuine “waystations” toward a more just 
and more inclusive form of governance.4 EPG, as they describe it, is 
“part of a broader collaboration to discover and imagine democratic 
institutions that are at once more participatory and effective than the 
familiar  configuration  of  political  representation  and  bureaucratic 
administration.”5 
  Although Deepening Democracy mentions the use of information 
and communication technology (ICT) only once, and rather trivially,6 
the twelve authors assembled by Fung and Wright have produced a 
uniformly well-written, insightful, and well-integrated volume that can 
be of enormous use to cyberdemocrats.  That is because Deepening 
Democracy attends thoughtfully to the significant issue that, so far, is 
the  topic  least  usefully  theorized  in  the  burgeoning  literature  on 
electronic democracy, namely, the conundrum of power.  Researchers 
and activists have persuasively demonstrated the theoretical potential 
for ICTs to undergird more robust democratic practices, strengthening 
both the deliberative and representative aspects of our institutional 
life.7 What has been less successfully addressed is the question of how 
to get “there” from “here.”  In particular, what are the social conditions 
and conditions of political power that would make it practicable to 
implement  and  sustain  some  version  of  GOLD  that  is  genuinely 
collaborative,  participatory,  and  democratic?    To  put  the  question 
another way, to the extent that ICTs might enable state power to be 
deployed with greater transparency, broader participation, and more 
stringent accountability, why would those already in power embrace 
such changes? 
  In the hope of both doing justice to Deepening Democracy on its 
own  terms  and also exploiting its insights for the development of 
cyberdemocratic theory, I will now briefly do three things.  First, I will 
 
 
 
 
  3 Id. at 3. 
  4 Erik Olin Wright, Preface: The Real Utopias Project, in DEEPENING DEMOCRACY: 
INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS IN EMPOWERED PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE vii (Archon Fung 
& Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003). 
  5 Thinking About EPG, supra note 2, at 15. 
  6 See infra, text at note 58. 
  7 See, e.g., A. Michael Froomkin, Technologies for Democracy, in DEMOCRACY ONLINE: 
THE PROSPECTS FOR POLITICAL RENEWAL THROUGH THE INTERNET 3 (Peter M. Shane ed., 
2004). 150  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
sketch the theory of EPG as Fung and Wright present it, and as it is 
refined by other commentators in their volume.  Second, I will argue 
for  the  centrality  of  the  issues  of  power  highlighted  by  Fung  and 
Wright  to  any  realistic  assessment  of  the  future  of  electronic 
rulemaking.  I will do this by elaborating on how questions of power 
pervade  every  aspect  of  the  electronic  rulemaking  agenda  as  it  is 
currently  being  both  studied  and  implemented,  and  consider  the 
lessons to be drawn from Deepening Democracy for the future of this 
particular form of GOLD.  I will ask, following Fung and Wright’s 
model, whether electronic rulemaking can itself be envisioned as a 
waystation en route to more robust forms of EPG.  Finally, I will 
discuss whether there is a role for GOLD or other ICT initiatives in 
EPG projects other than electronic rulemaking.  That is, to the extent 
Fung, Wright, and their collaborators identify obstacles to EPG in the 
low-tech case studies they put forth, what might be the role of ICTs in 
addressing those obstacles or limitations? 
I.  WHAT IS EPG? 
  EPG is a model of governance that Fung and Wright derive partly 
from  democratic  theory  and  partly  from  the  study  of  real-world 
attempts to institutionalize “transformative democratic strategies”8 for 
democratizing social and political decision making.  The model seeks 
to  connect  a  set  of  normative  commitments  for  strengthening 
democracy with a set of institutional design prescriptions intended to 
meet  that objective.  Deepening Democracy begins with a general 
essay, in which Fung and Wright explain their model and the issues 
they  believe  it  poses  for  both  researchers  and  activists.    Four 
succeeding chapters present case studies of experiments in democratic 
transformation that, to a greater or lesser extent, illustrate the potential 
for EPG in action.  These are a participatory budgeting program in 
Porto Alegre, Brazil;9 decentralized planning efforts in West Bengal 
and  Kerala,  India;10  neighborhood  governing  councils  addressing 
 
 
 
 
  8 Thinking About EPG, supra note 2, at 4. 
  9 Gianpaolo  Baiocchi,  Participation,  Activism,  and  Politics:  The  Porto  Alegre 
Experiment,  in  DEEPENING  DEMOCRACY:  INSTITUTIONAL  INNOVATIONS  IN  EMPOWERED 
PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 45 (Archon Fung & Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003). 
  10 T. M. Thomas Isaac & Patrick Heller, Democracy and Development: Decentralized 
Planning in Kerala, in DEEPENING DEMOCRACY: INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS IN EMPOWERED 
PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 77 (Archon Fung & Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003). 2005]  SHANE  151 
 
issues of policing and of public education in Chicago;11 and habitat 
conservation planning under the federal Endangered Species Act.12  
Five more chapters by other democracy scholars interrogate the Fung 
and  Wright  model  in  light  of  the  case  studies.    Although  all  are 
supportive of EPG, the commentators pose a number of significant 
questions  that  remain  unanswered,  but  which  the  authors  believe 
should  animate  further  empirical  research  or  theoretical  inquiry.  
Implicitly or explicitly, their comments highlight issues related to the 
generalizability of the EPG model and call into question whether all of 
the proffered case studies truly amount to EPG in practice.13 
  Perhaps most pressing in this last regard are issues related to what 
Joshua Cohen and Joel Rogers call the “conditions of background 
power”14  that  make  more  or  less  reasonable  “the  hopeful,  radical-
democratic assumption”15 that underlies EPG.  This is the assumption 
“that  ordinary  people  are  capable  of  reducing  the  political  role  of 
untamed power and arbitrary preference and, through the exercise of 
their common reason, jointly solving important collective problems.”16  
Doubts  about  that  assumption  are  not  only,  or  even  primarily,  a 
reflection on the capacities of the participating citizens themselves.  As 
Rebecca Neaera Abers poses the key issue:   
 
[W]hy  would  governments  transfer  decision-making  power  to 
deliberative spaces in which “ordinary people” have influence and 
why  would  those  ordinary  people,  most  of  whom  have  little 
political experience beyond the occasional vote, voluntarily subject 
 
 
 
 
  11 Archon Fung, Deliberative Democracy, Chicago-Style: Grass-roots Governance in 
Policing and Public Education, in DEEPENING DEMOCRACY: INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS IN 
EMPOWERED PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 111 (Archon Fung & Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003). 
  12 Craig  W.  Thomas,  Habitat  Conservation  Planning,  in  DEEPENING  DEMOCRACY: 
INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS IN EMPOWERED PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 144 (Archon Fung 
& Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003). 
  13 At least some of the Habitat Conservation Plans discussed by Thomas, id., rather 
plainly do not conform to the requirements of EPG.  Bradley C. Karkkainen, Toward 
Ecologically  Sustainable  Democracy?,  in  DEEPENING  DEMOCRACY:  INSTITUTIONAL 
INNOVATIONS IN EMPOWERED PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 208 (Archon Fung & Erik Olin 
Wright eds., 2003). 
  14 Joshua  Cohen  &  Joel  Rogers,  Power  and  Reason,  in  DEEPENING  DEMOCRACY: 
INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS IN EMPOWERED PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 237, 241 (Archon 
Fung & Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003). 
  15 Id. at 240. 
  16 Id. 152  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
themselves to time-consuming and often frustrating deliberative 
processes?17   
 
A  concluding  chapter  by  Fung  and  Wright  tries  to  come  to  grips 
explicitly with these questions.18  This chapter, along with the first, can 
be synthesized into a fairly clear account of Fung and Wright’s theory 
of what EPG is and the conditions likeliest to create and sustain it. 
  Most  generally,  EPG  is  a  form  of  institutionalized  deliberative 
democracy.  That is, it is a way of producing legitimate governmental 
decision making through reasoned public dialogue that is conducted 
under conditions of equality.  As described by Fung and Wright, EPG 
projects seek to involve those people who are affected by specific, 
tangible  problems  in  addressing  those  problems  through  the 
deliberative development of solutions that are actually implemented by 
institutions of state power.19  Citizen forums to help determine the 
allocation of public budget resources to specific neighborhood projects 
in Porto Alegre, Brazil;20 the “grama sabhas” or local assemblies of 
citizens engaged in planning efforts in Kerala, India;21 and the Local 
School  Councils  elected  for  every  school  in  the  Chicago  Public 
Schools22 all illustrate this idea.  The emphasis on specific, tangible 
problems  is  intended  to  facilitate  collaboration  in  democratic 
decisionmaking among erstwhile policy competitors who are enabled 
to  focus  their  problem  solving  attention  on  a  constrained  set  of 
issues.23  The direct engagement of ordinary citizens assumes that their 
experiential  knowledge  and  immediate  participation  will  improve 
problem solving through enhanced information, as well as increase 
accountability for the implementation of any solutions developed.24  
 
 
 
 
  17 Rebecca  Neaera  Abers,  Reflections  on  What  Makes  Empowered  Participatory 
Governance Happen, in DEEPENING DEMOCRACY: INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS IN EMPOWERED 
PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 200, 201 (Archon Fung & Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003). 
  18 Archon Fung & Erik Olin Wright, Countervailing Power in Empowered Participatory 
Governance,  in  DEEPENING  DEMOCRACY:  INSTITUTIONAL  INNOVATIONS  IN  EMPOWERED 
PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 259 (Archon Fung and Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003) [hereinafter 
Countervailing Power]. 
  19 Thinking About EPG, supra note 2, at 15-16. 
  20 See generally Baiocchi, supra note 9. 
  21 See generally Isaac and Heller, supra note 10. 
  22 See generally Fung, supra note 11. 
  23 Thinking About EPG, supra note 2, at 16. 
  24 Id. 2005]  SHANE  153 
 
Experts remain deeply engaged in such institutions, but, ideally, as 
enablers, not deciders.  Experts are important to “facilitate popular 
deliberative  decision-making  and  to  leverage  synergies  between 
professional and citizen insights.”25 
  The case studies in Deepening Democracy highlight three design 
features on which EPG initiatives generally rely in order to stabilize 
and deepen the practice of its animating principles.  First, EPG seeks to 
“devolve” decision making authority to empowered local units.  This 
reflects the skepticism among many contemporary activists about the 
problem-solving capacities of highly centralized state organizations.26 
On  the  other  hand,  because  local  units  cannot  solve  all  problems 
themselves and can also benefit from the sharing of insights and from 
objective  oversight,  EPG  initiatives  tend,  as  a  second  feature,  to 
depend upon “formal linkages of responsibility, resource distribution, 
and communication”27 between local units and central state offices.  
Finally, EPG must be embodied in state institutions that actually make 
decisions and are capable of implementing an allocation of public 
resources that is both more effective and more equitable in addressing 
public problems.28  EPG thus envisions a kind of “inside” revolution.  
The authors emphatically distinguish EPG from the wholly voluntary 
and  spontaneous  organizational  efforts  that  seek  to  influence  state 
outcomes  through  outside  pressure  alone.    Instead,  “these 
transformations attempt to institutionalize the ongoing participation of 
ordinary  citizens,  most  often  in  their  role  as  consumers  of  public 
goods, in the direct determination of what those goods are and how 
they should be best provided.”29 In adumbrating these three design 
features – devolution, linkage, and embeddedness in state institutions – 
Fung  and  Wright  recognize  that  they  are  identifying  only  design 
features that seem common to EPG initiatives thus far; too little is 
known to be sure that they are absolutely necessary to the success of 
EPG.30 
  Of course, EPG projects cannot be expected to arise or be sustained 
by  good  intentions  or  noble  aspirations  alone.    The  likelihood  of 
engaging  citizens  successfully  in  such  ventures  will  depend,  for 
 
 
 
 
  25 Id. at 17. 
  26 Id. at 20. 
  27 Id. at 16. 
  28 Id. at 22. 
  29 Id. 
  30 Id. at 20. 154  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
example, on their own attitudes and capacities, such as literacy. The 
case studies seem to demonstrate, however, that attitude and capacity 
are far from insurmountable obstacles.  Even at an early stage in this 
field of research, evidence shows it is possible to mobilize ordinary 
citizens, including those of profoundly modest means, into genuinely 
deliberative  institutions  that  effectively  make  significant  public 
decisions.   
  The tougher hurdle is one of political context, namely, the existing 
allocation  of  political  decision  making  power  in  the  domain  over 
which activists might wish to achieve EPG.  EPG is an effort, as Fung 
and Wright state, to “try to change the central procedures of power 
rather than merely attempting occasionally to shift the vector of its 
exercise.”31 The existing procedures of power, however, are likely in 
all societies to reflect some imbalance of influence and control, in 
which  relatively  advantaged  groups  are  disproportionately  able  to 
direct the distribution of social resources in their favor.   As Fung and 
Wright recognize, these “inequalities of background power can subvert 
the  democracy-enhancing  potential  of  institutional  designs  such  as 
EPG.”32  The question is, what can be done about it? 
  Fung and Wright do not so much offer a confident answer to this 
question  as  underscore  its  significance.    They  elaborate  on  the 
possibility  of  what  they  call  “countervailing  power,”  a  “variety  of 
mechanisms  that  reduce,  and  perhaps  even  neutralize,  the  power-
advantages  of  ordinarily  powerful  actors.”33    Mechanisms  of 
countervailing power may include such things as effective grass-roots 
organizing or a judicial order requiring some powerful institution to 
respond in particular ways to less powerful interests.  Fung and Wright 
do not yet have a theory as to the mobilization of countervailing power 
or how much is enough to achieve the democratic potential of EPG 
institutional  designs.    They  do,  however,  assert  four  relevant 
propositions:   
 
(cid:122) EPG will not yield its intended benefits in a context without a 
substantial presence of countervailing power; 
 
(cid:122) The  sources  and  forms  of  countervailing  power  that  are 
efficacious in the collaborative exercise of power are likely to 
differ  from  those  sources  or  forms  that  are  effective  in 
 
 
 
 
  31 Id. at 22. 
  32 Countervailing Power, supra note 18, at 260. 
  33 Id. 2005]  SHANE  155 
 
redressing power imbalances under conditions of adversarial 
interest group pluralism; 
 
(cid:122) The adversarial and collaborative forms of countervailing power 
are not easily converted to one another, so that actors effective 
in mobilizing for the underrepresented in one context may not 
have the “skills, sources of support, and bases of solidarity”34 
necessary for success in the other; and 
 
(cid:122) Well-designed  public  policies  and  institutional  designs  can 
facilitate, but will not themselves generate, the countervailing 
power needed for collaborative governance.35 
 
Fung and Wright point to political parties, “adversarial organizations,” 
and social movements as sources of countervailing power, but do not 
develop the idea much further.  They urge that both proponents and 
critics of EPG move beyond intuitive responses to the problem of 
power and actually study “the roles, forms, and sources of political 
power in the distinctive structure and politics” of EPG.36 
  The  facial  plausibility  of  Fung  and  Wright’s  four  cautionary 
propositions  might  alone  be  thought  sufficient  to  generate  a  fair 
amount of pessimism about the future of EPG.  EPG’s prospects seem 
more than a little remote if (a) governance reforms are unlikely to meet 
EPG’s transformative aspirations without the presence of substantial 
countervailing power that new political policies and institutions are 
themselves unlikely to originate, and (b) if we are unlikely to derive 
effective countervailing power from forms and institutions that already 
exist and prove somewhat efficacious in the context of “adversarial 
pluralism” – think of the role, for example, of groups like the Sierra 
Club or Natural Resources Defense Council in environmental litigation 
against the federal government for the last three decades.37 
  On  a  more  hopeful  note,  it  may  be  a  mistake  to  think  about 
transformation  in  general,  or  EPG  specifically,  in  quite  such 
categorical  terms.    Sociology  graduate  student  Rebecca  S.  Krantz, 
focusing insightfully on the Porto Alegre case study through the lens of 
her own research into participatory planning in Madison, Wisconsin, 
suggests it is most helpful to understand EPG reforms as part of a 
larger trend toward direct participatory innovation, a trend that may be 
 
 
 
 
  34 Id. at 266. 
  35 Id. at 266-267. 
  36 Id. at 286. 
  37 Id. at 264. 156  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
advanced by steps more partial or gradual than the case studies Fung 
and Wright highlight.  The key question, she posits, is not whether 
EPG  can  erupt  full-blown,  but  whether  “gradualist  forms  of 
participatory civic  innovation might contribute to more widespread 
adoption of EPG.”38 Under the Krantz model, what is needed to nudge 
things  forward  is  only  a  political  context  in  which  sufficient 
countervailing power is present to trigger some degree of participatory 
institutional  reform.    This  reform,  in  turn,  can  generate  new 
governance structures, which may influence civil society sufficiently in 
a positive direction to strengthen the forces of countervailing power, 
thus reshaping the political context sufficiently to trigger yet another 
round of institutional reform.39   
  In this way, there might be hope, in the words of Fung and Wright, 
for  a  “reorganization  of  formal  state  institutions  [to]  stimulate 
democratic engagement in civil society, and so form a virtuous circle 
of  reciprocal  reinforcement.”40  This  could  happen,  for  example,  if 
institutional  reform  yielded  benefits  both  to  those  traditionally 
empowered and to those traditionally disempowered.  As expressed by 
Rebecca Abers: “[T]he success of participatory institutions depends on 
a dual process of commitment-building.”41  The key is for each round 
of reform to intensify the motivation of “state actors (ranging from 
politicians to bureaucrats) and ordinary people . . . to support, take part 
in, and respect EPG experiments.”42 
  Krantz is herself cautious even about this more realistic prognosis, 
however. EPG depends upon the embeddedness of reform in state 
institutions,  but  that  embeddedness  may  itself  pose  obstacles  to 
genuinely deliberative citizen participation.  Already empowered state 
actors  may  simply  not  want  to  share  discursive,  much  less 
decisionmaking power with the citizenry.  But, as Krantz explains:  
 
If a participatory process educates people about decision-making 
without allowing them to question the process or the norms of 
bureaucratic and expert disciplines that constrain decisions, the 
 
 
 
 
  38 Rebecca S. Krantz, Cycles of Reform in Porto Alegre and Madison, in DEEPENING 
DEMOCRACY: INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS IN EMPOWERED PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE 225 
(Archon Fung & Erik Olin Wright eds., 2003). 
  39 Id. at 231. 
  40 Thinking About EPG, supra note 2, at 15. 
  41 Abers, supra note 17, at 201. 
  42 Id. 2005]  SHANE  157 
 
process is less than fully deliberative, and the net effect on civil 
society could be one of co-optation rather than empowerment.43 
 
  Taken as a whole, then, these essays perform three services of 
enormous  use  to  researchers  and  practitioners  in  cyberdemocracy:  
They offer a model of EPG under which institutional reforms would 
truly deepen democratic effectiveness and legitimacy.  They offer a 
sensible rubric for conceptualizing conditions under which reforms 
tending toward EPG are likely, at least, to be plausible.  They identify 
the obstacles likeliest to impede the realization of those conditions.  
These elements provide a firm basis for asking the question: what is 
the role of GOLD in the future of EPG? 
II.  ELECTRONIC RULEMAKING AND EPG 
  At  first  blush,  electronic  rulemaking  of  the  sort  now  either 
implemented or on the “drawing board” of the federal “E-Rulemaking 
Initiative,” does not easily fit the EPG model.44 As noted above, EPG’s 
aspirations  are  (1)  to  involve  “ordinary  people”  in  (2)  addressing 
specific, tangible problems through (3) the deliberative development of 
solutions that (4) will actually be implemented by state institutions.  
Electronic rulemaking as presently conceived is open to any citizen 
and does involve the solicitation of citizen opinion with regard to 
administrative decisions that will be implemented by the state. But, as 
Beth  Noveck  explains,  the  process  is  not  deliberative.45    Current 
electronic rulemaking resembles a global suggestion box, appended to 
an electronic library.  Agencies use the World Wide Web as a vehicle 
for facilitating both citizen access to information about rulemaking and 
the  capacity  to  submit  comments  efficiently.    But  electronic 
rulemaking does not yet involve actual dialogue among citizens or 
between citizens and agencies about either proposed rules or about 
comments  already  submitted.46  Neither  does  anything  about  the 
 
 
 
 
  43 Krantz, supra note 37, at 234. 
  44 See  Regulations.Gov,  E-Government  Information,  at  http://www.regulations.gov/ 
erulemaking-2.cfm (last visited Nov. 19, 2004), for links to key documents explaining the 
Federal E-Rulemaking Initiative; see Regulatory Policy Program at Harvard University’s 
Kennedy  School  of  Government,  E-Rulemaking  Resource  Web  Site,  at 
http://ksgwww.harvard.edu/cbg/rpp/erulemaking/home.htm (last visited Nov. 19, 2004), for 
additional background information and research. 
  45 Beth Simone Noveck, The Future of Citizen Participation in the Electronic State, 1 I/S 
1 (2005). 
  46 See  Regulations.Gov,  Welcome  to  the  eRulemaking  Initiative,  at  http://www. 
regulations.gov/eRuleMaking.cfm (last visited Nov. 19, 2004). Phase II of the Federal E-158  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
process provide assurance that agencies will give greater weight to 
electronically  transmitted  citizen  comments  than  to  citizen  views 
conveyed in the days of pre-digital notice-and-comment rulemaking. 
  Nor is there any necessary connection between the citizens who 
participate in electronic rulemaking and some set of specific problems 
that  the  rules  address  and  that  affect  the  commenting  citizens  in 
specific and tangible ways.  Rulemaking operates on a national scale; 
there is no devolution at work.  The interest a rule elicits may have 
more to do with abstract ideology than actual problem solving.  For 
example, as of the occasion of writing this review, the Department of 
Education has open for comment via electronic rulemaking a proposed 
regulation  on  equal  access  for  the  Boy  Scouts  of  America  to  the 
facilities of the nation’s public schools.47  It seems a safe guess that 
there will be a great many people motivated to comment on this issue 
who have no direct involvement with it.  They will comment chiefly 
out  of  the  desire  to  prompt  regulatory  action  that  vindicates  their 
personal values, whether or not they belong to the Boy Scouts, attend 
public school, or have children or students who belong to the Boy 
Scouts or attend public school. 
  This is not to say that electronic rulemaking, even in its current 
form,  has  no  significant  role  to  play  in  deepening  the  quality  of 
democratic life.  The Regulations.Gov website,48 a centralized portal 
through  which  citizens  can  obtain  access  to  all  open  rulemaking 
dockets at dozens of federal agencies, represents an exponential leap in 
the  degree  of  transparency  that  attends  the  rulemaking  process.  
Because of the Regulations.Gov search engine, it is not necessary for 
citizens to know which agencies are in charge of which rules; keyword 
searches make it easy to find open rulemakings on a particular topic, 
no matter which or how many agencies are engaged in policymaking 
relevant to that topic.  It is possible, moreover, that increased citizen 
participation will increase the quality of rulemaking by bringing to the 
attention of agency technical personnel a wider range of information 
                                                                                                                   
Rulemaking Initiative, currently under development, will be “a federal government-wide 
centralized docket management system. This system will allow [users] to access and search all 
publicly available regulatory material, such as Federal Register notices and rules, supporting 
analyses, and comments submitted by the public.” The advent of universal access to public 
comments under Phase II will enable far more deliberative commenting because of the 
capacity of each discussant to refer to arguments made by others. 
  47 Equal Access to Public School Facilities for the Boy Scouts of America and Other 
Designated  Youth  Groups;  Proposed  Rule,  69  Fed.  Reg.  61,555  (2004),  available  at 
http://www.ed.gov/legislation/FedRegister/proprule/2004-4/101904a.pdf (last visited Feb. 1, 
2005). 
  48 Regulations.gov, at http://www.regulations.gov (last visited Nov. 19, 2004). 2005]  SHANE  159 
 
and perspectives that ought to be brought to bear in deciding among 
regulatory alternatives.  The very fact that the government is opening 
itself  to  an  unprecedented  diversity  and  volume  of  citizen 
communication may enhance public confidence in the legitimacy of 
our administrative government. 
  Yet, the gulf between these aspects of democratic reform and the 
transformative aspirations of EPG remain substantial.  As the Noveck 
paper demonstrates, the barriers to moving toward an EPG model are 
not technological.  Software tools already exist that could be deployed 
to support online democratic deliberation.49  It is already possible to 
imagine, with currently available software, the following model of 
electronic  rulemaking:  a  government  agency  –  perhaps  the 
Environmental Protection Agency – sets up deliberative groups around 
the country with access to software for conducting online deliberations 
both asynchronously and in real time.  Various of these groups are 
invited, depending on the issues presented, to develop deliberative 
recommendations concerning issues on the agency’s agenda.  The EPA 
would support “formal linkages” among these deliberative groups; it 
might  even  convene  regional  and  national  online  assemblies  of 
representatives  elected  from  local  and  regional  discussions, 
respectively.  Even if the deliberative groups were not empowered with 
formal decisional influence, as full-blown EPG would require, such a 
network of deliberative bodies would much more closely resemble the 
style of democratic governance that Fung and Wright have in mind. 
  The  reason  this  scenario  seems  so  unlikely  is  not  that  the 
technology is especially daunting.  It is because of the inertial force 
exerted  by  the  current  allocation  of  power  with  regard  to  federal 
rulemaking decisions.  This is true at every level.  First, insofar as 
rulemaking is an exercise in what Fung and Wright call “top-down 
adversarial  governance,”50  there  are  numerous  firms  and organized 
groups, representing business interests, government entities, and like-
minded citizens, who have mastered the current system.  They are able 
either to elicit substantive results satisfactory to their clients or to 
persuade  their  clientele  sufficiently  of  the  importance  of  their 
adversarial activity as to remain viable actors on the current political 
stage.   
  In addition, within each agency, there is an existing equilibrium of 
power for the management of rulemaking that the infusion of new 
information  technologies  necessarily  threatens  to  disturb.    For  one 
thing, an exponential increase in the volume of citizen comment will 
 
 
 
 
  49 Noveck, supra note 45, at 21. 
  50 Countervailing Power, supra note 18, at 261-62. 160  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
necessarily make the job of analysts more difficult, and might well be 
thought to limit what would otherwise be the discretion of agency 
experts  to  formulate  and  implement  their  own  ideas  of  regulatory 
policy, relatively unhindered.  Further, the resources to support new 
technologies  and  to  analyze  their  output  will  have  to  come  from 
somewhere.    During  a  time  of  ballooning  national  deficits,  the 
congressional prospects for budgetary enhancements to accommodate 
electronic rulemaking are slim, and any agency’s internal reallocations 
to strengthen the operations of its CIO are going to make someone else 
in the agency worse off.  Also, there are presumably people within 
every  agency  who  have  succeeded  at  managing  the  pre-digital 
rulemaking process; they might not have the same level of capacity or 
effectiveness when it comes to managing an electronically enabled 
process.  Even tools that seem apolitical, such as the “relatedness 
analysis tool,” advocated by Lau, Law, and Wiederhold,51 can alter the 
balance of power within an agency by helping to produce an analytic 
process that is more transparent and, therefore, more susceptible to 
surveillance and control.  On the whole, many of the potential benefits 
of  electronic  rulemaking  are  likely  to  seem  both  diffuse  and 
speculative to relevant decision makers, while the jolts to existing 
policy and management practices are likely to seem more focused and 
more certain. 
  This  does  not  mean  that  proponents  of  a  more  transformative 
version  of  electronic  rulemaking  are  utterly  without  current  and 
potential sources of countervailing power.  The deregulatory forces 
who  seem  to  predominate  in  the  current  Congress  might  become 
enamored of deliberative forms of electronic rulemaking if they think 
that  more  deliberative  policy  making  will  actually  delay  new 
regulations,  an  end  that  many  powerful  interests  will  likely  find 
attractive  in  itself.52    Moreover,  if  deliberative  processes  hold  the 
promise of sensitizing agencies to adopting regulatory alternatives in a 
variety of contexts that are more palatable to small business and to 
state, county, and local entities, that, too, would be a boon for federal 
legislators.    Agency  decision  makers  could come to see genuinely 
 
 
 
 
  51 Gloria T. Lau, Kincho H. Law & Gio Wiederhold, A Relatedness Analysis Tool for 
Comparing Drafted Regulations and the Associated Public Comments, 1 I/S 95 (2005). 
  52 This would not be the first time that reformers of administrative procedure would be 
suspected of desiring, at base, simply to delay or scuttle rulemaking altogether.  Compare 
OMB Watch, The Reality of Data Quality Act’s First Year, at DQ-1 (2004), available at 
http://www.ombwatch.org/info/dataqualityreport.pdf  (last  visited  Nov.  19,  2004)  (“While 
promoting data quality may sound reasonable and innocuous enough, many government 
officials, public interest groups, academics and others expressed a great number of concerns 
that these particular policies could be misused to delay, derail and dilute safeguards and rules 
being written at federal agencies.”). 2005]  SHANE  161 
 
deliberative electronic rulemaking as a way of building public support 
for an agency, always helpful at budget time.  And there may exist 
reform  entities,  such  as  the  American  Bar  Association  or  the 
Administrative  Conference  of  the  United  States,53  who  might  be 
mobilized to care about quality of the decision making process, and 
who  would  be  capable  of  nudging government forward in a more 
participatory direction. 
  One also should not underestimate the possible influence of peer 
reputation.  The trend toward online citizen consultation is global and 
is  likely  to  accelerate.    (Prospects  seem  especially  bright  in  the 
European Union, where policy makers are concerned with offsetting 
anxieties about the “democracy deficit” in an increasingly integrated 
Europe  governed  by  community-wide  bodies.54)    Agency  policy 
makers travel in international professional circles, where innovation 
gives rise to bragging rights.  For example, in reporting to Congress on 
its  regulatory  activities,  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget 
routinely refers to the regulatory affairs research of the international 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
headquartered in Paris.55  The OECD has been a strong champion of 
cyberdemocracy efforts.56 
  Things  also  look  more  promising  if  we  ask  a  question  less 
ambitious than whether electronic rulemaking is likely itself to be so 
transformative  as  to  generate  EPG.    Following  Rebecca  Krantz’s 
analysis, the better question is whether, and under what circumstances, 
 
 
 
 
  53 The Administrative Conference of the United States was created in 1964 to, among 
other things, “study the efficiency, adequacy, and fairness of the administrative procedure 
used by administrative agencies in carrying out administrative programs.”  5 U.S.C. § 594(1).  
It went out of business when Congress, in 1995, declined to continue appropriating funds for 
its operation.  Nonetheless, Congress has recently reauthorized its funding; whether any 
money is actually appropriated remains to be seen.  Pub. L. No. 108-401, 118 Stat. 2255 
(2004). 
  54 Greece, during its presidency of the European Commission, made a special point of 
advancing an e-democracy agenda.  George A. Papandreou, e-Democracy for the European 
Union, IPTS REPORT (June 2003), available at http://www.jrc.es/home/report/english/articles/ 
vol75/EDI2E756.htm (last visited Nov. 21, 2004). Among its initiatives was a project called e-
Vote, an effort at EU-wide online polling on important issues facing the European Union.  See 
e-Vote, at http://evote.eu2003.gr/EVOTE/en/index.stm (last visited Nov. 21, 2004). 
  55 See, e.g., Office of Management and Budget, Informing Regulatory Decisions: 2004 
Draft Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations and Unfunded 
Mandates on State, Local, and Tribal Entities, at 31. 
  56 See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Engaging Citizens 
Online for Better Policy-making (March 2003), available at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/62/ 
23/2501856.pdf (last visited Nov. 21, 2004). 162  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
electronic rulemaking could come to represent one of those “gradualist 
forms of participatory civic innovation [that] might contribute to more 
widespread adoption of EPG.”57  With the transformational aim stated 
in such incrementalist terms, it may be that the greatest contribution of 
electronic rulemaking to EPG would be the imitative effort it spawns 
at the state and local levels.  Rather than pursuing forms of electronic 
rulemaking now that will immediately shake our adversarial, pluralist 
system  of  federal  notice-and-comment  rulemaking  into  something 
collaborative and participatory, the federal government could assess 
tools  and  develop  model  processes  for  online  citizen  deliberation 
which, in turn, would be available for adoption by local governments 
that would not otherwise have the resources to launch such an effort. 
  Of course, even this may seem fanciful.  It may well be that the 
burgeoning of ICT-infused deliberative democracy at the local level is 
better seen as a precondition, rather than as an objective of federal 
transformative efforts.  In administrative procedure, however, federal 
models have long been influential at the state level.58  It seems all but 
inevitable that well-publicized federal experiments in online citizen 
consultation, even if episodic, would stimulate local efforts along the 
same  lines  to  invigorate  citizen  input  into  public  policy  making.  
People would begin to ask, “If they can do it, why can’t we?”  It also 
seems predictable that, the more local the effort, the greater would 
become  the  likely  expectation  that  the  formal  processes  of  actual 
decision making would have to take account of the input gleaned from 
online citizen forums.  That is, for the very reasons Fung and Wright 
tie EPG to local decision making, the pressures to give online citizen 
consultation  genuine  decisional  influence  would  seem  greatest  for 
smaller government units. 
  In sum, the obstacles to the promulgation of genuinely deliberative 
electronic rulemaking strongly resemble the obstacles Fung and Wright 
identify as facing EPG generally.  Those obstacles seem quite powerful 
enough, in the near-term, to rebuff any serious movement toward an 
ICT-enabled  paradigm  shift  in  the  role  of  citizens  in  federal 
administrative rulemaking.  They seem less daunting, however, if the 
objective is not near-term federal transformation, but only sufficient 
innovation  at  the  federal  level  both  to  inspire  and  facilitate  local 
efforts.  A spread of local participatory policymaking could, of course, 
create a new round of pressure on the federal government to intensify 
its democratic ambitions as well.  Whether any of this is plausible will 
 
 
 
 
  57 Krantz, supra note 37, at 225. 
  58 See, e.g., Arthur Earl Bonfield, The Federal APA and State Administrative Law, 72 
VA. L. REV. 297 (1986) (on the influence of the federal Administrative Procedure Act on state 
administrative procedure). 2005]  SHANE  163 
 
require more substantial analysis.  It is clear, however, that Fung and 
Wright provide helpful conceptual tools for assessing the possibilities. 
III.  GOLD AND EPG 
  The  foregoing  analysis,  urging  that  electronic  rulemaking  be 
understood  as  a  possible  prod  to  local  Government  On-Line 
Deliberation, or GOLD, necessarily leads to the question: would local 
versions of GOLD be helpful in institutionalizing EPG? 
  As  a  threshold  matter,  it  should  be  stressed  that,  while  the 
relationship  between  electronic  rulemaking  and  EPG  may  seem 
attenuated, the more general relationship ICTs and EPG surely is not.  
Cyberdemocracy devotees will have little trouble, upon reading the 
case studies in Deepening Democracy, spotting innumerable ways in 
which  new  ICTs  could  both  enhance  the  quality  of  EPG-inspired 
governance institutions and help mobilize the countervailing power 
necessary to their generation and sustenance.   
  The only reference to ICTs in Deepening Democracy, made by 
political scientist Craig W. Thomas, is to the potential for a web-based 
library of draft and final Habitat Conservation Plans, which would 
facilitate public input and monitoring and the diffusion of expertise in 
this  Department  of  the  Interior  experiment  in  collaborative 
environmental planning and management.59  But, of course, every one 
of the EPG models described in Deepening Democracy would benefit 
from online repositories of expertise, relevant data, and records of past 
decisions.  This is true for the planning efforts in India, the budgetary 
assemblies in Brazil, the school councils in Chicago, and even the 
Chicago police beat consultation groups.  Given the ease with which 
vast amounts of critical information can be made available cheaply to 
unprecedented numbers of people, one would wish that some sort of 
online library were incorporated into every effort at democratic reform. 
  Information  and  communication  technology  can  also  be  of 
profound  utility  with  regard  to  training,  data  gathering,  and 
monitoring.  In their conceptual overview of EPG, Fung and Wright 
stress  the  capacity  of  EPG  institutions  to  function  as  “schools  of 
democracy.”60  The case studies focusing on Porto Alegre,61 Kerala,62 
 
 
 
 
  59 Thomas, supra note 12, at 164. 
  60 Thinking About EPG, supra note 2, at 29, 32.  See generally the discussion of EPG’s 
impacts on the self-development of its participants.  Id. at 28-29. 
  61 Baiocchi, supra note 9, at 55-56. 
  62 Isaac & Heller, supra note 10, at 99. 164  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
and Chicago63 all emphasize the importance of training to empower 
citizens  with  the  mastery  of  both  data  and  deliberative  processes 
critical to sustaining effective deliberative problem-solving at the local 
level.  Much of this training would surely be amenable to presentation 
in the form of online tutorials and simulations.  GIS64-oriented web 
sites  would  enable  citizens  to  visualize  much  more  richly  the 
resources,  opportunities  and  challenges  confronting  particular 
neighborhoods,  towns,  and  counties.    Interactive  GIS  tools  could 
enable citizens to upload information to a community web site about 
the location of environmental hazards, roads in need of repair, traffic 
safety problems, or other geographically-based public needs. 
  Similar tools could vastly improve the quality of monitoring efforts 
during the implementation phase of EPG governance.  Projects could 
be  publicly  tracked  online.    Complaints  could  be  channeled  more 
efficiently to relevant administrators.  Individual citizens could check 
on  the  progress  of  local  agencies  in  responding  to  specific  needs.  
Perhaps most famously, the advent of process-tracking software in 
Seoul, Korea not only enhanced government efficiency, but greatly 
reduced suspicions of “irregular” practices and municipal corruption.65 
  On top of all this, the proliferation of web-based organizing tools 
among civil society groups could greatly magnify their capacity to 
provide the checking and balancing of more powerful interests that is a 
necessary element of EPG under the theory of countervailing power.  
The deployment of web-based tools in the 2004 presidential election in 
the United States enabled the Democrats to compete with Republican 
fund-raising,66  turn  out  enormous  numbers  of  volunteers,  schedule 
countless planning meetings, and elicit more voters for a presidential 
challenger than in any prior presidential election in American history.67  
 
 
 
 
  63 Fung, supra note 11, at 119-120. 
  64 “GIS” stands for “geographic information system,” which is a combination of hardware 
and software designed to enable the storage, retrieval, mapping, and analysis of information 
tied to specific physical locations. 
  65 Seoul’s project is called OPEN, which stands for Online Procedures Enhancement for 
Civil Applications. See World Bank, OPEN: Seoul’s Anticorruption Project, available at 
http://www1.worldbank.org/publicsector/egov/seoulcs.htm (last visited Nov. 21, 2004), for an 
overview. 
  66 Jim VandeHei & Thomas B. Edsall, Democrats Outraising the GOP This Year But 
Republicans Still Have Financial Lead, WASH. POST, Jul. 21, 2004, at A1 (“From Jan. 1 
through June 30, Kerry and Democrats raised $292 million, compared with $272 million for 
President Bush and Republicans.”). 
  67 See  U.S.  Electoral  College,  1789-2000  Elections,  at 
http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/electoral_college/votes/index.html#source  (last 
visited Nov. 21, 2004), for popular vote totals for all presidential elections. 2005]  SHANE  165 
 
The  same  tools,  deployed  locally,  could  have  effects  of  equally 
profound importance, focused on a smaller venue. 
  What, then, would GOLD add?  All of the tools I have mentioned 
already  would  help  provide  a  context  for  sustaining  deliberative 
democracy, but would not extend deliberation itself. Among the most 
profound potential contributions ICTs can make to EPG is precisely 
that:  to  extend  deliberation  beyond  the  limited  times  and  limited 
venues  of  face-to-face  deliberation.    I  am  not  suggesting  the 
substitution of one for the other, but an augmentation of face-to-face 
encounters through computer-mediated discussion.  The reliance of 
deliberative  democratic  institutions  solely  on  face-to-face  meetings 
necessarily imposes a drastic limitation on the scale of possible citizen 
participation.    By  webcasting  face-to-face  meetings  (and  perhaps 
receiving  online  input  even  in  those  sessions),  and  then  allowing 
conversations  to  be  extended  through  both  asynchronous  bulletin 
boards  and  self-scheduled  real-time  online  meetings  would  permit 
large numbers of citizens to participate who otherwise could or would 
not.  
  Delibera,  an  open  source  software  product  to  support  online 
deliberation,  is  being  developed  at  Carnegie  Mellon  University 
precisely for the purpose of enabling users to access a rich menu of 
online deliberative options.68 Once registered, a Delibera participant 
logs in and finds herself able to access one or more “forums,” each of 
which is a set of discussions around a particular subject or objective.  
Within each forum, there exist both “bulletin boards” for asynchronous 
posts and a “conferencing module,” for the conduct of online meetings 
in real time.  A bulletin board or a conference can be configured for 
any topic within the overall framework of the forum.  Users can post to 
the bulletin board either through text or audio.  For a live conference, 
each person’s audio contribution is recorded, so that the conference is 
preserved as a sequential archive of audio clips.  Users also have 
available an online library, to which they can upload contributions, and 
polling functionalities.  The aim is to facilitate ongoing deliberation 
among groups of citizens who have available to them a sufficient range 
 
 
 
 
  68 Thomas Claburn, Giving the Political Process an Online Boost, INFORMATION WEEK, 
Nov. 21, 2003, available at http://informationweek.com/story/showArticle.jhtml?articleID= 
16400186 (last visited Nov. 21, 2004).  I am Principal Investigator (which is academic talk for 
“executive producer”) on the National Science Foundation-funded team that is developing 
Delibera.  The team includes political scientist Peter Muhlberger, who developed the detailed 
experimental plan for our early uses of Delibera and contributed substantially to its design; 
Robert Cavalier, who directs the Multimedia Laboratory of the Center for the Advancement of 
Applied Ethics in Carnegie Mellon’s Philosophy Department, and who has taken the lead in 
user interface issues; and software engineer Stuart Easterling, our technical lead, who is both 
our senior programmer and chief project manager on the technical side. 166  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
of convenient online tools to sustain long-term discussions on virtually 
any topic. 
  It  is  easy  enough  to  anticipate  four  possible  objections  to  the 
recommendation to GOLD-enhanced EPG institutions: GOLD costs 
money.  The  “digital  divide”  will  distort  the  population  of  online 
discussants.    The  formats  for  online  discussion  privilege  those 
categories of citizens who prefer the modes of communication that 
work most effectively online.  Finally, online deliberation is less likely 
than face-to-face discussion to induce the feelings of mutual respect 
and solidarity on which long-term EPG depends. 
  The first point is undeniable.  Even if GOLD is sustained by open 
source software69 – avoiding any issue of licensing fees – all software 
needs  support,  whether  in-house  or  contracted  to  others.    Any 
worthwhile system will entail monitoring and the updating of content.  
The cost of hardware systems administration will go up.  These costs, 
however, are not likely to be prohibitive, and need to be weighed 
against  the  benefits.    Government  agencies  may  well  be  able  to 
negotiate favorable terms for some of the necessary services given the 
volume  of  business  involved.    And  EPG  may  lead  to  ideas  for 
accomplishing  sufficient  economies  in  the  spending  of  public 
resources to generate the revenues needed to sustain GOLD. 
  The digital divide question seems more serious because it runs 
counter to the aspiration for genuinely democratic vitality on which 
EPG rests.  The digital divide is not a weighty argument for eschewing 
GOLD, however.  As long as the legitimacy of EPG depends in part on 
its inclusion of substantial numbers of citizens, it is difficult to see that 
empowering larger numbers of citizens to contribute through online 
participation hurts more than it helps.  This is true even if not every 
mechanism for expanding participation reaches every segment of the 
population with equal success. Moreover, there is no a priori reason to 
believe that the online participating population will always be less 
representative  than  the  face-to-face  participating  population.  Low-
income single parents, people of limited physical mobility, citizens 
uncomfortable with speaking in public – these are just a few of the 
population  subgroups  likely  to  be  underrepresented  in  face-to-face 
deliberations.  Although significant gaps in access to hardware and 
Internet service remain, more than half of all U.S. households now 
have Internet connections.70  There is virtually no access-based “digital 
 
 
 
 
  69 See J. T. Westermeier, Considering the Benefits, Opportunities, and Risks of Open 
Source Software, 5 COMP. TECH. L. REPT. 444 (2004), for a thorough discussion of the “open 
source” concept and its various legal flavors. 
  70 U.S. Department of Commerce, A Nation Online: Entering the Broadband Age, at 4 
(Sept. 2004), available at http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/anol/NationOnlineBroadband04. 
pdf (last visited Jan. 17, 2005). 2005]  SHANE  167 
 
divide”  by  gender.71    Even  underrepresented  populations  on  the 
Internet – for example, Latinos and African-Americans, non-college 
educated  Americans,  and  low-income  Americans  –  nonetheless 
participate at significant rates.72  Computers and Internet service are 
both  common  features  of  increasingly  large  numbers  of  libraries, 
senior centers, and community centers of all sorts, which frequently 
make Internet access available for free to their clienteles.   
  The more profound long-term “digital divide” issue may pertain 
not to physical access, but to an unequal distribution of the skills 
necessary to motivate civic engagement through the Internet. Research 
is showing that a potential participant’s lack of confidence that he or 
she knows how to use the Internet in a way that will yield a rewarding 
experience may be a more significant barrier to Internet use than is the 
lack of home computer access per se.73  This does not militate against 
using GOLD, however, but rather, it underscores the importance of 
combining GOLD efforts with the proliferation of computer literacy 
training for all adults.   
  In  her  thoughtful  chapter  in  Deepening  Democracy,  Jane 
Mansbridge  points  out  that  innumerable  differences  among  people 
create inequalities, but not all inequalities are relevant to democratic 
legitimacy.74  She asserts that, in a deliberative democracy framework, 
inequalities  are  most  serious  if  they  coincide  with  a  particular 
perspective that might otherwise go unexpressed; under a participatory 
democracy  framework,  we  need  be  concerned  chiefly  about 
inequalities  that  lead  to  a  sense  of  being  disrespected  or  prevent 
individuals from taking advantage of opportunities for participation 
that help them develop their faculties.75  It is not clear whether the 
population  most  likely  to  be  skilled  at  GOLD  would  be 
unrepresentative of the full range of policy perspectives on a given 
issue, but this concern should be alleviated by the co-existence of 
GOLD  with  opportunities  for  face-to-face  deliberation.    The  latter 
concern, however, is more serious.  Lack of online adeptness does 
 
 
 
 
  71 Id. at A1. 
  72 Id.  
  73 See generally Peter Muhlberger, Access, Skill and Motivation in Online Political 
Discussion: Testing Cyberrealism, in DEMOCRACY ONLINE: THE PROSPECTS FOR POLITICAL 
RENEWAL THROUGH THE INTERNET 225 (Peter M. Shane ed. 2004). 
  74 Jane  Mansbridge,  Practice-Thought-Practice,  in  DEEPENING  DEMOCRACY: 
INSTITUTIONAL  INNOVATIONS  IN  EMPOWERED  PARTICIPATORY  GOVERNANCE  175,  192-193 
(Archon Fung & Erik Olin Wright eds. 2003). 
  75 Id. at 192. 168  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
deprive  individuals  of  taking  advantage  of  opportunities  for  civic 
participation that would enable them to develop their capacities for 
deliberation  and  problem  solving.    That  is  why,  with  or  without 
GOLD, universal education in Internet literacy ought to be a priority 
objective of EPG activists.  Citizens equipped with the capacities for 
information, communication, and networking afforded by the Internet 
may well be among the most profound sources of countervailing power 
in the history of human politics. 
  The  third  likely  objection  to  GOLD,  that  formats  for  online 
discussion  will  privilege  certain  categories  of  citizens  over  others 
based  on  their  preferred  modes  of  communication,  hugely 
underestimates the potential of new technologies.  This might be a 
more  serious  concern  if  we  were  stuck  with  text-only,  English-
language  Internet  communications.    Delibera,  however,  already 
supports both text and audio inputs.  It is easy to imagine a version of 
Delibera or similar software that would support video as well.  The 
addition  of  language  translation  software  can  enable  multilingual 
exchange  to  a  degree  never  before  possible.    Protocols  for  online 
meetings,  such  as  software-enforced  time  limits  to  individual 
comments, can prevent domination of real-time discussions.  Again, 
there  is  no  a  priori  reason  to  believe  that  GOLD  will  be  less 
potentially inclusive than face-to-face meetings of persons who differ 
in their articulateness or preferred modes of communication. 
  Finally, the objection that online deliberation is less likely than 
face-to-face  discussion  to  induce  feelings  of  mutual  respect  and 
solidarity is far from being proven; but even more to the point, this 
concern  is  all  but  irrelevant  to  institutions  where  face-to-face  and 
online encounters supplement and reinforce each other.  It is a great 
mistake  to  envision  real  space  and  online  encounters  as  mutually 
exclusive.    Not  only  do  face-to-face  interactions  strengthen  the 
community-building potential of online interaction, but the possibility 
of continuing discussions online means that the momentum and sense 
of  common  purpose  generated  by  face-to-face  meetings  can  be 
supported even in the necessary hiatus between such occasions. 
  Rebecca Abers notes that the case study literature on participatory 
democracy is, on the whole, pessimistic about whether participation is 
sufficiently  widespread  in  such  projects  to  sustain  the  claim  of 
enhanced democratic legitimacy.76  Given that fact, the appeal of new 
technologies that conquer the limits of time and space for deliberation, 
that  can  be  configured  to  prevent  domination  and  promote  civil 
discourse, and that can hugely broaden the range of potential citizen 
involvement in policy discussion ought to be profound.  The “hard 
 
 
 
 
  76 Abers, supra note 17, at 200. 2005]  SHANE  169 
 
work” of EPG research and analysis, which Fung and Wright note,77 
ought  to  include  vigorous  experimentation  with  the  provision  of 
opportunities through GOLD to enrich citizens’ capacity to participate 
in collective self-governance at the local level. 
  ICTs  can  also  be  used  to  create  and  sustain  favorable 
circumstances for the maintenance of EPG, as well as bolstering its 
structural features.  Deploying ICTs for community organizing will 
foster  the  countervailing  power  that  provides  EPG’s  sustaining 
context.    The  Internet  can  support  the  “formal  linkages  of 
responsibility, resource distribution, and communication”78 that Fung 
and Wright take to be essential to EPG design.  Providing online 
documentation  of  local  government  decision  making  and  enabling 
citizens to contribute their knowledge through both deliberative and 
data-gathering applications will insure enhanced levels of transparency 
and accountability.  For all of these reasons, development of ICTs 
aimed  at  strengthening  EPG’s  effectiveness  ought  to  enjoy  high 
priority status on the agenda of EPG researchers and activists. 
CONCLUSION 
  The editors of and contributors to Deepening Democracy provide 
the foundation for a promising model of democratic governance, EPG.  
Not only does that model have desirable objectives, namely, effective 
problem solving, increased equity, and broad participation, but the 
authors provide a sensible account linking their objectives to particular 
features  of  real-world  institutional  design.    They  offer  reasonable 
hypotheses as to the potential superiority of EPG in terms of problem-
solving and implementation.  They make the case that a commitment 
to real-world problem solving, together with the institutionalization of 
modes of decision making that include more direct participation by the 
poor and disadvantaged and in which decision procedures are governed 
by reason, not power, should tend toward more equitable outcomes.79 
  The authors are under no illusions that these will be easy outcomes 
to achieve.  Yet, they have provided both case studies and a conceptual 
analysis which, even if short of a blueprint, are both clear enough and 
compelling  enough  to  inspire  considerable  interest  among 
cyberdemocracy researchers and activists.   From a cyberdemocratic 
perspective,  there  readily  appears  an  extraordinary  fit  between  the 
 
 
 
 
  77 Countervailing Power, supra note 18, at 286. 
  78 Thinking About EPG, supra note 2, at 16. 
  79 Id. at 25-27. 170  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 1:1 
 
capacities  of  new  ICTs  and  the  needs  of  EPG,  in  terms  of  both 
accomplishing  a  supportive  context  and  actually  implementing  the 
recommended institutional designs.  It is not clear whether electronic 
rulemaking will prove a significant way station toward EPG.  What 
seems clearer, given the promise of the EPG experimental agenda and 
the  need  to  enlarge  opportunities  for  citizens  to  participate 
meaningfully in decisions that affect their lives, is that the future of 
GOLD at least deserves to be bright. 