How Antonin Scalia Punched 
Down
by Peter Shane
 (http://washingtonmonthly.com/people/peter-shane/)
                                       
The encomiums bestowed upon the late Justice Antonin Scalia know no partisan limits. Tributes from 
conservatives have been earnest and effusive, untroubled, of course, by philosophical disagreement. But 
the homages that begin, “Although we agreed about nothing,” have been no less heartfelt or expansive. 
Many across the ideological spectrum were privileged to experience Justice Scalia as a warm, generous, 
witty, charming, larger-than-life companion and mentor.In candor, these were not the qualities I encountered when I did see the justice up close. The worst of
these moments occurred when he lectured at my law school on originalism, his favored approach to
constitutional interpretation. One of his 埔rst questioners from the audience was an audibly nervous law
student. She asked whether we might owe less allegiance to the precise views of our constitution’s
dra퟼ers and rati埔ers, given that women, African-Americans, and Native Americans were excluded from
those roles. Justice Scalia all but sneered in response, “Well, it’s obvious you just don’t believe in the
Constitution!”
It’s one thing to bare one’s teeth to another justice or even to a combative law professor. To scoff
sarcastically — and, one must add, nonsensically — at a nervous student just felt like bullying. We all
have our worst moments, but witnessing that encounter inevitably complicated for me any future
appreciation of the Antonin Scalia that even my liberal friends who knew him describe so earnestly.
My assessment of Justice Scalia on the court is likewise ambivalent. As late as the 1980s, when Professor
Scalia became Judge and then Justice Scalia, “originalism” in constitutional interpretation and
“textualism” in statutory interpretation lived largely at the margins of contemporary legal thought. In
uniting mostly right-wing politics with a vigorous theoretical defense of both methods, Scalia laid the
cornerstone for an edi埔ce of conservative legal thought that has had an incalculable impact on thirty
years of American law. That edi埔ce will frame constitutional advocacy both within and beyond the
judiciary for many more decades.
Justice Scalia’s work thus stands as an enormous institutional achievement, although driven, at least in
my estimation, as much by the man’s prose style and charisma as by the intrinsic merits of his ideas. His
forcefulness, however, hugely enriched American law by provoking a far deeper and more serious
engagement with interpretive theory, by both his advocates and detractors, than had been seen in the
decades preceding his ascent. His engagement strengthened both sides.
At the same time, Justice Scalia routinely deployed his methods largely in service of bad causes. In cases
on race and sex discrimination, the rights of gays and lesbians, the Eighth Amendment, voting rights,
consumer rights, environmental law — pretty much every cause progressives have embraced since the
New Deal — he voted the positions of a committed revanchist determined to turn back the political and
jurisprudential clock.
Almost as bad, in both dissents and separate concurrences, Justice Scalia was famously prone to lace his
analyses with scorn and ridicule for those with whom he disagreed. These were and are texts destined to
be read by generations of lawyers and law students, as well as by the general public. They are regrettablenot only in their lack of professionalism but because they no doubt help to legitimate a corrosive form of
intellectual discourse which confuses contempt with reason, and which has become all too common.
Because Justice Scalia’s career was so varied and substantial in its impact, there will be a vigorous cottage
industry among law professors and legal historians assessing his intellectual and institutional legacy.
There will be articles defending both his methods and the particular results to which his methods led
them. Some of those papers may even offer stronger arguments than those Justice Scalia himself put
forward in defense of his methods and results.
At the same time, there will be writings challenging Justice Scalia across the board, in some cases —
again, I am con埔dent — deepening the critiques that emerged during his lifetime. There will be articles
showing not only theoretical vulnerabilities in his methods, but also his inconsistencies in applying
those methods — inconsistencies perhaps suggesting that the political desire for particular results
sometimes overcame theoretical purity. This is a fault to which no judicial faction is immune.
Today, however, Justice Scalia has le퟼ me with two tasks. One, as always, as I teach constitutional law, is
to help my students wrestle with Justice Scalia’s ideas — to be able to see his positions in their most
favorable, as well as their most vulnerable light and thus, I hope, to help my students advance as well-
informed, independent thinkers, reaching their own nuanced assessments of Justice Scalia’s legacy. The
second is to extend my heartfelt sympathies to those members of my own circle of friendship and
acquaintance who were close to Justice Scalia and who have no doubt lost a treasured friend.
Peter Shane
 (http://washingtonmonthly.com/people/peter-shane/)
Peter Shane teaches constitutional law at the Ohio State University's Moritz College of Law and is the
author of 
Madison's Nightmare: How Executive Power Threatens American Democracy (http://www.amazon.com/madisons-
nightmare-executive-threatens-democracy/dp/0226749398)
(University of Chicago Press 2009). 
 © 2017 Washington Monthly.