The PetroChina Syndrome: Regulating Capital Markets in
the Anti-Globalization  Era
Stephen F. Diamond*
I.  INTRODUCTION  ..................................................................................................  39
II.  THE PETROCHINA OFFERING ..............................................................................  45
A.  The New Structure. ......................................................................................  46
B.  The Chinese Context .....................................................................................  50
1.  Economic Reform .....................................................................................  50
2. A ChangingO  il Industry .........................................................................  53
C.  Human Rights ..............................................................................................  55
D.  Corporate Governance ................................................................................  61
1.  The Size and Priceo f the Deal. ...............................................................  63
2.  The Use of Proceedsf rom the Offering ...................................................  64
3.  Competitiveness of the New Entity ..........................................................  64
4.  Parenta nd Party Control. .........................................................................  65
III.  THE PETROCHINA CAMPAIGN ................................................................................  66
IV.  THE UNGER LETTER .........................................................................................  70
V.  SOME INITIAL ARGUMENTS ................................................................................  73
A.  The TraditionalS ecurities Law Approach ...................................................  74
B.  A Structural Approach. ..................................................................................  84
C.  A PoliticalA pproach. ....................................................................................  87
VI. THE NEW ERA: FROM KEYNES TO FRIEDMAN ....................................................  90
VII.  CONFRONTING THE LEGITIMATION DEFICIT .....................................................  96
V III. C ON CLU SIO N .......................................................................................................  10 1
IX.  PO STSCRIPT .........................................................10.2............................................... 
I. INTRODUCTION
As  one  of her  last  acts  as  Acting  Chairman  of the  Securities  and  Exchange
* Assistant  Professor of Law, School of Law, Santa Clara University; Visiting Assistant Professor of Law,
Cornell Law School; J.D., Yale Law School, 1994; Ph.D., Political Science, University of London, 1991; B.A.,
Development Studies, University of California at Berkeley, 1977. Earlier versions of this Article were presented
to  seminars at Boalt  Hall, Santa Clara, and Stanford Law Schools and  to the Cornell/York  Workshop on
Corporate Citizens  in Corporate Cultures at Osgoode Hall. I am grateful  to Margalynne Armstrong, June
Carbone, Martha Fineman, William B. Gould IV, Angela Harris, Katherine Van Wezel Stone, and Stephanie
Wildman for providing me the opportunity to engage with their colleagues and students in the formation of my
ideas. The results, of course, are solely my responsibility.The Journalo  f CorporationL aw [Fall
Commission, in the spring of 2001, Laura Unger threw what the FinancialT imes called a
"bombshell"  into the global capital markets.1 Responding to pressure from Congress and
an  emerging  independent  political  campaign,  Chairman  Unger  issued  a  letter  that
acknowledged that the human rights violations by issuers of securities can be considered
"material"  to investors, and, therefore,  foreign issuers of securities in the United States
will now be required to provide disclosure of the risks associated with any investments by
these issuers in countries where the United States has imposed sanctions for human rights
or other legal violations.2 The Unger Letter followed the unprecedented  effort over the
previous year by a range of labor, religious, human rights,  and anti-slavery  groups to
change American securities law in part by attempting to derail the initial public offering
(IPO) of common stock by PetroChina Company Ltd. (PetroChina), a large oil-producing
company controlled by the government of the People's Republic of China (PRC).
For decades, the U.S. capital markets have been considered relatively free of the risk
and uncertainty of political  interventions that are common in many other jurisdictions.
Thus,  issuers  have  been thought to  benefit from  a lower cost  of capital  and greater
transparency  and  predictability  about  regulatory  action.  Because  of these  apparent
advantages,  it is argued that,  in recent years, a larger number of foreign issuers  have
tapped into the deep and liquid U.S. capital markets by listing their securities on a U.S.
exchange. In the words of Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan:
[T]he  openness  and  the  lack  of political  pressures  within  the  [American
financial]  system ...h as made it such an effective component of our economy
and,  indeed,  has  drawn  foreigners  generally  to  the  American  markets  for
financing as being the most efficient place in many cases where they can raise
3
funds.
Thus, the Unger Letter on the U.S. capital markets represents a significant break with the
hands-off tradition in the United States. Indeed, perhaps not surprisingly, its impact was
felt  almost  immediately.  Soon after  the  release of the  Unger  Letter,  Lukoil,  a  large
Russian oil company that was considered a crown jewel in that country's privatization
and economic reform process, announced that it would withdraw a planned listing of its
common stock on the New York Stock Exchange in order to list its shares instead on the
United  Kingdom's  London Stock  Exchange.  In  a brief statement,  Lukoil  said that it
wanted to avoid what it called  the "political risk" now associated with a U.S.  listing.4
This followed a decision some weeks before by the PRC to withdraw a planned sovereign
debt offering in the United States.5 These were precisely the kinds of developments that
1. Edward Alden, SEC Chief Inherits Disclosure Bombshell, FIN. TIMES, May 11, 2001, at 1. Note that
the SEC continues to use the word "Chairman" despite widespread usage of gender-neutral titles in other parts
of the government.
2.  Letter from Laura Unger, Acting Chairman, Securities and Exchange Commission, to Frank P. Wolf,
Congressman, U.S. House of Representatives (May 8, 2001) (on file with author) [hereinafter Unger Letter].
3.  The Federal Reserve's Second Monetary Policy Report for 2000: Hearing Before the Senate Comm.
on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, 106TH CONG.  13 (2000) (statement of Alan Greenspan, Chairman,
Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System) [hereinafter Greenspan].
4.  Alison Beard, Russia's Lukoil Disappoints US Investors with London Listing, FIN.  TIMES, July 2,
2001, at 23.
5.  Joe Leahy & Aline Van Duyn, Spy Plane Incident Hits Bond Sale in US, FIN. TIMES, May 16, 2001, at
31  ("Recent changes  to  SEC  procedures  regarding  the  amount  of documentation  required  from  foreign2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
critics of the approach taken by Unger had feared.6 Nonetheless,  this  reaction  to  the
Unger  Letter  did  not  stop  those  who  argue  that  the  capital  markets  are  now  an
appropriate, and indeed, crucial arena for advocacy of certain political goals. The AFL-
CIO, for example, the thirteen million-member umbrella body for America's trade union
movement that had played a key role in the protests about PetroChina's IPO, followed
that  effort with a campaign to block the proposed tender  offer by integrated  oil giant
Amerada Hess (AHC) for the publicly traded shares of the exploration and production
specialist  Triton Oil (Triton).7 AHC had a twenty-five  percent stake  in the British  oil
company Premier, one of the  last major multinational companies to maintain an active
investment  in  Burma,  or  Myanmar,  a  country  laboring  under  a  brutal  military
dictatorship.8 In addition, Triton has operations in Equatorial Guinea, on the west coast
of Africa, and in Colombia. Both countries have severe intemal political strife and are the
locale of concerns about human rights violations. The AFL-CIO has also been conducting
an  aggressive  shareholder campaign  to force  Unocal,  the  California  oil producer, to
change  its investment policy in Burma in light of accusations that the company, among
other allegations of human rights violations, engaged military forces there to use forced
labor to help build a natural gas pipeline.9
This unprecedented  development  in the capital  markets,  I will argue, can only be
understood in the context  of the broader debate about globalization' °  that has emerged
over the last several years. A problem is emerging in the global economy that may indeed
borrowers might also have delayed the process of issuing a bond into the US market .... ").
6.  Greenspan, supra note 3 ("[T]o the extent that we block foreigners from investing, from raising funds
in the United States, we probably undercut the viability of our own system.").
7.  Union Peak Body Callsf or Amerada Hess Vote on Triton, OIL & GAS TODAY, Aug. 8, 2001, available
at http://www.ogtoday.com/archives/0108/010506/010808b37.html  (last visited Nov. 16, 2003).
8.  In late 2002, AHC  and Premier Oil gave in to shareholder and public pressure and sold off their
Burmese assets to a Malaysian company friendlier to the dictatorial regime. Terry Macalister, Premier Oil Gets
Out of Burma, THE GUARDIAN,  Sept. 17, 2002, available at http://www.guardian.co.uk  (last visited Nov. 4,
2003); Press Release, The Burma Campaign UK, Campaigners Celebrate as Premier Oil Pulls Out of Burma
(Sept. 16,  2002), available at http://www.burmacampaign.org.uk/pressreleases/160902.html  (last visited Sept.
17, 2003).
9.  Press  Release, AFL-CIO, Worker Shareholders Challenge Unocal's Plansf or New Investment in
Burma  and  Ask  for  Commitment  to  Global  Labor  Standards  (May  20,  2002),  available  at
www.aflcio.org/mediacenter/prsptm/pr05202002.cfm  (last visited Nov. 16, 2003).
10.  The concept "globalization" remains controversial and difficult to pinpoint. For the purposes of this
Article, I consider globalization to represent the attempt to spread the Anglo-American  model of capitalism,
particularly seen in the expansion of cross-border flows of capital in both its fictitious and physical forms (i.e.,
investment and trade) that has been so marked in the last twenty years. In addition to the increase in flows, the
ability to locate  first-class production  facilities in low cost areas around the globe,  a process facilitated by
financial and  technological developments, gives  a new significance  to capital mobility and threatens long-
standing social  and  economic  arrangements  together  with the  political  and  institutional  frameworks that
accompanied those arrangements. For a generally favorable view of the impact of globalization, see THOMAS L.
FRIEDMAN, THE LEXUS AND THE OLIVE TREE (1999).  For critical views from the left, see JOSEPH E. STIGLITZ,
GLOBALIZATION  AND  ITS DISCONTENTS  (2002);  PETER  GOWAN,  THE  GLOBAL GAMBLE:  WASHINGTON'S
FAUSTIAN BID FOR WORLD DOMINANCE (1999);  and WILLIAM GREIDER, ONE WORLD READY OR NOT: THE
MANIC LOGIC OF GLOBAL CAPITALISM (1998). For a critical assessment from the right, see JOHN GRAY, FALSE
DAWN:  THE DELUSIONS OF GLOBAL CAPITALISM (1998).  On the WTO protests in  Seattle, see Stephen F.
Diamond,  Bridging the Divide: An Alternative Approach to  International Labor Rights after the Battle of
Seattle, 29 PEPP. L. REV. 115 (2002) [hereinafter Diamond, Bridging the Divide].The Journal of CorporationL aw [Fall
prove to be fatal for Anglo-American  capitalism1  as we now know it. This model of
capitalism has evolved and survived for some two hundred years or more in significant
part because of its ability to generate legitimacy, understood as a sense inculcated in the
general population  that the system is not only the best that can be achieved  under the
circumstances, no  matter how unjust or unequal actual social outcomes, but that these
outcomes are  reached  in  a  manner  that reflects the needs  or desires of a substantial
majority of the population.12 The ability of capitalism to generate this legitimacy depends
crucially on certain compromises  crafted with the general population  through ideology,
institutions,  and mass  organizations.  This  was true,  for example,  throughout  the  four
decades of the Cold War, for both contending parties. The bureaucratic regimes  of the
east justified  their existence  by appealing  to  the alleged material  improvements  they
provided  for  the  bulk of their  populations.  This  apparent  achievement  helped those
regimes generate an attractive ideological agenda that appealed to hundreds of millions of
desperately poor people around the world, and thus posed a serious political challenge to
the  traditional  capitalist  regimes  of the  West. Stalinism  made  (and,  in the  case  of a
handful of countries like Cuba, China, and North Korea, continues to make) this appeal
not just through the exercise of mindless propaganda, but also through the active efforts
of mass organizations controlled rigidly from above by the government or a Communist
party. 13
A variation of this legitimation process was also found in the West in tripartite and
corporatist institutions that, for example, brokered wage and productivity deals between
workers, employers,  and the government.  In the West, of course,  the strength of the
system's legitimacy was not found largely in arguments about the material conditions of
the  working  class,  though  such  arguments  were  certainly  made,  but  rather  in  the
argument that basic civil liberties guaranteed freedom for all its citizens. The existence of
process acting as a check on the arbitrary exercise of power, through institutions like free
trade unions  and collective bargaining,  helped western  capitalism  win  the hearts  and
minds of its working class. 14
11.  1w rite of the Anglo-American model in distinction from the European and Asian models. The Anglo-
American model,  as will be clear from discussion below, relies heavily on arms-length  capital markets,  as
opposed to friendly creditors, as a source of capital for, and as a device for the discipline of, corporations. The
core principles (and principals!)  of this model have become central to the globalization process of the last
twenty years. See MICHEL ALBERT, CAPITALISM AGAINST CAPITALISM (1993)  (arguing that a "new phase of
capitalism"  emerged  with the rise to power of Margaret  Thatcher  in  1979 and Ronald Reagan  in 1980);
RONALD  DORE, STOCK MARKET CAPITALISM:  WELFARE CAPITALISM-JAPAN  AND GERMANY VERSUS THE
ANGLO-SAXONS  (2000) (discussing emergence of new model of capitalism where "firms run primarily, even
exclusively, for the benefit of their shareholders").
12.  On legitimacy and capitalism generally,  see JORGEN HABERMAS,  LEGITIMATION CRISIS  19 (1973)
("[P]rivate ownership of the means of production..,  in the long run threatens social integration [but] within the
framework of a legitimate order of authority, the opposition of interests can be kept latent and integrated for a
certain time. This is the achievement of legitimating world-views or ideologies."); I MAX WEBER, ECONOMY
AND SOCIETY 213 (1968) ("Experience shows that in no instance does domination voluntarily limit itself to the
appeal to material or affectual or ideal motives as a basis for its continuance. In addition every such system
attempts to establish and to cultivate the belief in its legitimacy."), cited in HABERMAS, supra, at 97.
13.  For an exploration  of the internal political dynamics of the Stalinist and neo-Stalinist regimes,  see
Stephen F. Diamond, Class and Power in Revolutionary Nicaragua:  The Rise and Decline of the Sandinista
Movement (1991)  (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of London) (on file with author).
14.  See  E.P.  THOMPSON,  WHIGS  &  HUNTERS  265  (1977)  ("[T]he  notion  of the  regulation  and2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
The result, in both East and West, was the widespread social acceptance, at least for
several decades, of what can be thought of as a social variation of Pareto optimality: the
working class would not revolt no matter how much better off the wealthiest or politically
connected became, as long as the participatory institutions available to the working class
generated steady improvement in their welfare.15 With the collapse of the Soviet Union
and its subsidiary regimes in Eastern Europe, the Stalinist variation of the legitimation
process  disappeared.  No  ideology  has  since  emerged  which  attempts  to justify  its
existence on the basis of widespread material improvement of the population. In fact, to
the extent that coherent  ideologies advertising a general explanation of the world's ills
have emerged, such as Islamic fundamentalism or racialist nationalism, they actually aim
to take the world back to a pre-capitalist, if not primitive, era.16 While the absence on the
world stage of the Stalinist approach has been widely remarked upon, particularly in the
West  during  the  heady  triumphalist  period  of the  1990s,  what  has  been  less  well
understood  is  the  change  in  the  kind  of appeal  that  that same  western,  or  Anglo-
American,  capitalism  now  makes, whether  consciously  or not, to  the  billions  of the
world's desperate, poor, and hungry. Western capitalism has, in fact, also broken with its
approach to legitimacy, thus opening up an ideological and institutional vacuum in the
global economy.
While  the Cold  War  forced  both  East  and  West  to  legitimate  their  respective
systems, now that a more aggressively neo-liberal form of capitalism has emerged from
that period, its advocates no longer feel the same social or political pressure to craft the
institutions that were once relied upon to generate legitimacy. Thus, in the new global,
reconciliation  of conflicts  through the rule of law-and the elaboration of rules and procedures which, on
occasion,  made  some approximate  approach  towards  the  ideal-seems to  me a  cultural  achievement  of
universal significance.").
15.  In the West, the general acceptance of this view was signaled by the emergence of the "difference
principle" arguments of John Rawls in A THEORY OF JUSTICE 75 (1971)  ("The intuitive idea [of the difference
principle] is that that social order is not to establish and secure the most attractive prospects of those better off
unless doing so is to the advantage of those less fortunate."). As Philip Selznick summarized this view:
In a doctrine he calls the 'difference principle,'  Rawls asserts that social and economic inequalities
may be necessary and desirable, but their moral worth must be judged by what they contribute to
the welfare  of the least advantaged ....T he difference principle is founded in rationality and
reciprocal advantage, not in sympathy and benevolence ....Y et the difference principle, as Rawls
understands it, is an expression of human solidarity. Within his theory of justice, the abstract ideal
of fraternity takes on a new and more specific meaning. What began as a shrewd calculation-a
hedge against unfavorable outcomes-generates a spirit of brotherhood and is a building block of
community ....R awls imagines a social contract in which free, equal, and rational persons agree
on the terms  of their future  cooperation  by choosing principles  of justice. Behind a  veil of
ignorance about their individual circumstances, they choose the least bad or safest alternatives. No
one can be sure of not ending up highly vulnerable to loss of liberty or at the bottom of the social
ladder. Therefore he or she wants to insure against the worst alternative. The outcome is a set of
principles-compelled by rationality-that protect the interests of the least advantaged and the
basic liberties of all.
Philip Selznick, The Idea of a Communitarian Morality, 75 CAL. L. REV. 445, 446 (1987) (citations omitted).
This was expressed more cynically and with pointed humor in the eastern bloc. Russian workers in the Soviet
era were heard to quip: "They pretend to pay us, we pretend to work." On games that workers in the Stalinist
world played to survive, see MIKLOS HARASZTI, A WORKER INA  WORKER'S STATE (1978).
16.  John Lloyd, Radical Islam Sees Itself Just as Communism Did-In a Battle With a Hostile World, FIN.
TIMES, Jan. 11-12, 2003, at I.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
post-Cold  War  environment,  Western  capital  has  joined  hands  with  a  new  post-
Communist elite to forge new corporations, markets, and, indeed, entire countries. This
process is taking place largely from above with less and less consideration of its impact
on the general population. At the same time, however, an independent response is being
crafted from below through new social movements and also through variations in activity
by those older institutions,  such as trade unions,  that once participated  actively, if not
always willingly or enthusiastically, in the legitimation process of the Cold War era. 17 A
new kind of global fracture is emerging, not on a geographical basis, not between east
and west, as in the Cold War, but on a social basis, between those, on the one hand, who
control  dominant institutions from above and, on the other hand, from below by those
who  are  impacted  by  these  institutions.18  This  fracture  signals  the  emergence  of a
legitimation deficit created by the globalization process. The anti-globalization  protests
against the World Trade Organization in Seattle in November 1999 are the most visible
9
evidence of this phenomenon.'
To explore this new social fracture and its  challenge to the legitimacy  of Anglo-
American  capitalism, this Article  presents a case  study of the attempt by the Chinese
government and major Wall Street investment banks to complete an initial public offering
by a major Chinese corporation. Their efforts represented a classic example of the effort
to build a new global  capitalist order from  above without significant concern  for the
legitimation question.  And,  as  we  shall see,  the  effort  was  met  from below with  a
vigorous  social  response.  Thus,  I suggest  that  a kind  of syndrome,  the  PetroChina
17.  In the case of the trade unions, this is much more the case in the West where the labor movement
retained some level of independence from the system throughout the Cold War. In the east, the so-called trade
unions were merely party appendages  unable, for the most part, to generate any independent  life after the
collapse of the regimes.
18.  This Article signals the existence of a deeper concern about the nature of law  itself The author
belongs to a tradition marked by the work of E.P. Thompson who noted that law is not simply "another mask
for the rule of a class,"  rather law is the outcome of complex social conflict: "What was often at issue [in
Thompson's examination of 18'b century battles between independent hunters and royal land-owners] was not
property,  supported  by  law,  against  no-property;  it  was  alternative  definitions  of property-rights .... "
THOMPSON, supra note 14, at 259-61.  In a word, men and women make law, but not just as they please. Thus,
an important challenge for legal scholarship in the twenty-first  century is to expose the unique social conflicts
emerging in a new global environment, a new form of what Justice Holmes called "experience,"  and examine
and debate the appropriate legal forms and institutions necessary to resolve those conflicts. This intellectual
challenge is similar to the one that confronted legal thought in the late nineteenth century as the emerging era of
industrial capitalism posed  a  new intellectual challenge.  As Justice Holmes  wrote of his approach to the
problem: "The life of the law has not been logic:  it has been experience." OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, THE
COMMON LAW 1 (1991)  (emphasis added). See also his dissent in Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45, 76 (1905)
where with his memorable comment, "[gieneral  propositions do not decide concrete cases,"  Holmes signaled
the emergence of a battle against "Mr. Herbert Spencer's Social  Statistics." A valuable reprise of Holmes'
thinking, particularly his approach to "experience,"  is found in LOUIS MENAND, THE METAPHYSICAL CLUB
337-47 (2001). Thompson, much like Holmes, believed in the importance of reason, noting in the foreword to
one of his most important works: "I commenced to reason in my thirty-third year, and, despite my best efforts, I
have never been able to shake the habit off." E.P. THOMPSON, THE POVERTY OF THEORY AND OTHER ESSAYS i
(1978). Both Holmes and Thompson, can "be distinguished...  from... skeptics, who question ...  the power
of  legal  reasoning  of  any  kind."  Robert  Brauneis,  "The  Foundation of Our  'Regulatory Takings'
Jurisprudence" : The Myth and Meaning of Justice Holmes 's Opinion in Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon,  106
YALE L.J. 613, 644 (1996).
19.  Diamond, supra note 10.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
Syndrome if you will, is emerging that reflects the failure to resolve new conflicts caused
by the globalization  process. Part II of the Article examines the PetroChina IPO itself,
explaining  the  reasons  why  the  stock  offering  occasioned  such  controversy  and
demonstrating the unwillingness of the Chinese regime, the company and its advisors to
consider its associated social and political problems. Part III discusses the unprecedented
campaign against  the IPO  itself so that  the political  forces generating  the PetroChina
Syndrome are better understood. Part IV describes the key features of the resulting Unger
Letter.20 Part V reviews conventional explanations  and arguments that help, in part, to
explain the Unger Letter and the PetroChina Campaign,  including traditional securities
law  concerns,  a change  in the  political  climate  represented  by  the anti-globalization
movement  and  structural  changes  in  the  global  capital markets.  Part  VI  begins  the
discussion  of the  emergence  of the  legitimation  deficit  by  exploring  the  work  of
economic historian Massimo De Angelis. De Angelis'  innovative reconsideration of the
work of two archetypal economists of the twentieth century-John Maynard Keynes and
Milton Friedman-helps us come to a deeper understanding  of the issues raised by what
can be called the PetroChina Syndrome. I will argue, in Part VII, that this understanding
is incomplete without a deeper exploration of the role of process in generating legitimacy
in the modern industrial era. Without that concern for process, the PetroChina Syndrome
cannot be correctly diagnosed. The legitimation deficit this Syndrome signals can only be
filled by the design of new institutions that respond constructively to the problems of the
new era.
II. THE PETROCHINA OFFERING
In  early  2000,  an  international  consortium  of  investment  banks,  law  firms,
consulting groups, and accounting firms, led by the American investment bank Goldman
Sachs  launched an  initial public  offering  of the common  stock  of the  newly-formed
mainland  Chinese  oil  company  PetroChina  Company  Limited,  popularly  known  as
"PetroChina."21 When plans for the  IPO first surfaced,  the company  and its advisors
hoped that it would mark the largest ever public offering  of stock in a Chinese state-
owned  enterprise  (SOE)  and represent  a watershed  event for pro-free  market  reform
elements  currently  in  power  in  China.  But  the  transaction  also  meant  potential
devastation  for the workforce  of the  Chinese  oil industry,  as more than one  million
workers  at  the restructured  company  were  to be  dismissed as  "redundant"  with  only
minimal social protections and, at best, uncertain prospects for alternative employment.22
20.  The Unger Letter is a hybrid instrument, most similar to the more standardized "Interpretive  Releases"
that the SEC issues regularly. It combines an interpretation of existing rules with a proposal for modification of
those rules and also relays to Congress a staff memorandum that discusses the Commission's research and
investigation of the issues involved.
21.  See  Final  Prospectus,  PetroChina  Company  Limited  (March  27,  2000)  (on  file  with  author)
[hereinafter PetroChina Prospectus].
22.  Indeed, the frustrations of the laid off workers boiled over into open protest in the Spring of 2002, as
part of what one close observer has called a "veritable labor insurgency"  now underway in the PRC. Ching
Kwan Lee, From the Specter of Mao to the Spirit of the Law: Labor Insurgency in China, 31 THEORY & SOC'Y
189, Apr. 2002. Conflict was particularly acute in the Daqing oilfields now owned by PetroChina. See Stephen
F. Diamond,  The Chinese Market: An Enigma Unraveled, DISSENT 95 (Summer 2002). These strikes were
widely expected, yet PetroChina told potential investors that its relationship with its employees was "good" andThe Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
In accord with longstanding plans, the PetroChina IPO was to be the first of several
that  the  Chinese  government  planned  to  bring  to  the  global  capital  markets  in  the
following year. In each case, the workforces of major industrial companies would face
unemployment  as  downsizing  and  restructuring  were  forced  upon  them.  These
transactions were not to be subjected to the widely accepted checks and balances found in
the  developed  world.  China  remains  without  the  basic  democratic  institutions  that
investors  and  the  wider  public  outside  of  China  take  for  granted.  There  are  no
legislatively established, transparent, and accountable regulatory agencies to oversee the
social impact of major economic changes. There is no independent trade union movement
or a collective bargaining process to provide some form of representation for the tens of
millions of workers whose lives are being severely impacted by economic reform.23 In
addition, there are no open, efficient, and regulated capital markets to provide investors
and companies with a viable pricing mechanism for their assets. Further, investors in the
proposed IPOs were to be sold only minority stakes and serve as junior partners of the
Chinese state that planned to retain for itself majority control and effective influence over
the future of these entities.24 This first section explores each of these key areas in greater
depth,  including  the  new  corporate  structure  at  PetroChina,  the  changing  Chinese
economic context in which the IPO took place, the human rights concerns raised by the
offering and an assessment  of the  offering  from the  standpoint of traditional  investor
concerns about corporate governance.
A.  The New Structure
PetroChina was formed in November of 1999 as a result of months, perhaps years,
of planning by the government of the People's Republic of China (PRC).25 PetroChina
was initially established  as a wholly-owned subsidiary  of its parent  company-China
National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC).  CNPC is one of several Chinese state-owned
oil companies. The three largest of these are CNPC, the China Petrochemical Corporation
(Sinopec),  and the Chinese National  Offshore  Oil Corporation (CNOOC).  CNPC  and
Sinopec divide  among themselves the  assets of all of China's  domestic oil extraction,
refining, and distribution. Roughly, CNPC operates in northern and western China, and
Sinopec in the eastern and coastal regions of the country.26 Meanwhile, CNOOC, as its
name  suggests,  is responsible  for offshore  production  and  distribution,  including the
strategically important oil reserves in the South China Sea.27
provided no information or background on the potential for worker unrest. PetroChina Prospectus, supra note
2 1, at 143.
23.  Though beyond  the scope of this Article,  it is important  to note that while the lack of basic civil
liberties and trade union rights are extreme in the PRC, a variation on these conditions is increasingly the norm
in the newly-industrializing areas of the so-called emerging market countries, thus feeding into the "legitimation
deficit" discussed here.
24.  See PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21,  at 31-33 (stating that PetroChina "will be controlled by
CNPC, whose interests may differ from those of our other shareholders").
25.  Many details of the IPO remain confidential to this day. For example, there were reports that the entire
restructuring of the oil industry was planned by the Chinese regime secretly with the World Bank. However,
neither the Bank nor the PRC have made a report or other form of public accounting of this process.
26.  On the restructuring, see PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21, at 73.
27.  Id. CNPC and Sinopec do engage  in foreign  investments to supplement  shortfalls  in domestic oil
production. In particular, CNPC is a joint venture partner in an oil production effort underway in the Sudan.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
PetroChina emerged from within the much larger CNPC as an attempt to create a
business that could attract foreign capital. PetroChina is viewed by the Chinese and its
foreign advisors as holding the "crown jewels" of the assets of CNPC, including the key
Daqing oil fields and the pipelines that move eighty-four percent of China's natural gas.
It  has  five  business  units:  oil  and  gas  exploration  and production,  oil  refining  and
petrochemical  production, oil sales and pipeline operations,  foreign joint ventures, and
research  and  development.  It controls  more than  two-thirds  of China's  oil  and  gas
production  and  ranks  among  the  world's  largest  oil  companies.28  It  contributes  a
substantial portion of the total profits earned by China's largest SOEs. PetroChina took
with it from CNPC close to 500,000 of the total 1.5 million workers employed by CNPC.
The  1 million who remain are considered largely redundant and are now in the process of
being dismissed with minimal severance payments.29 With government plans to lay-off
tens of millions of workers throughout China in the next several years as restructuring of
other  SOEs  moves  forward,  Chinese  oil  workers  are  unlikely  to  find  alternative
employment easily. Industry analysts even argue that the 500,000 workers that will go to
work for PetroChina  are far more than necessary.  Exxon  employs only one-fourth  as
many people.30 The oil industry generally considers China's oil companies to be "grossly
overstaffed, even by the bloated standards of other national oil companies."31
A small army consisting of more than two thousand investment bankers, consultants,
accountants, and lawyers, designed the new PetroChina structure. The lead manager of
the IPO was the American investment bank, Goldman Sachs. The key co-manager was
the China International  Capital Corp.,  a joint venture of the PRC's China Construction
Bank  and  Morgan  Stanley  Dean  Witter.  PricewaterhouseCoopers  (accounting),
McKinsey  & Co. (consultancy),  and seven foreign law firms  rounded out the foreign
team advising the Chinese company.32
The new company attempted to lure several key business leaders in the oil industry
and elsewhere to serve as outside directors. Of the three names that surfaced during the
This triggered  the opposition  of several human  rights and  religious groups to the PetroChina  IPO.  Peter
Wonacott & Ian Johnson, PetroChina Hopes to Shake Off Its Past, WALL ST. J., Jan. 14, 2000, at A13. As we
will see below, the Sudan link is a major factor in the process that led to the Unger Letter.
28.  Mark L. Clifford & Dexter Roberts, Can this Giant Fly: China's Oil Company Hopes for $5 Billion
from Wall Street, Bus. WK., Feb. 7, 2000, at 94B [hereinafter Clifford, Can this Giant Fly].
29.  Wang Xiangwei, PetroChinai n Pledge to Slash Costs, S. CHINA MORNING POST, Jan. 31,  2000, at I
(stating "about one  million  workers ...h ave  been made redundant  through the  restructuring"); Michael
Forsythe, Chinese Minister Says More Must Be Done to Help Fired Workers, BLOOMBERG NEws,  Apr. 12,
2002 (explaining that in 2001 CNPC and Sinopec "fired 600,000 workers between them").
30.  In fact, since the IPO, PetroChina has engaged in a series of layoffs, despite reported profitability and
aggressive expansion plans, in response to investor expectations. See Petrochinat o Invest 2.2 bin Yuan in 1,500
Petrol Stations this Year, AFX ASIA, Aug. 29, 2002 ("The  company will continue  to lay off employees to
further improve operating efficiencies");  J.V. Cruz, Jr., Hither and Thither-The Chinese Way, BUS. WORLD
(Philippines), Aug. 30, 2002, at 5, stating:
Exxon  Mobil,  with  revenues  almost six  times  bigger  than  PetroChina's, has  about  123,000
employees. PetroChina's employee headcount is about 1.4 million. Each employee of Exxon Mobil
thus accounts for US$1.5 million of revenues, while each employee of PetroChina accounts for
US$21,000 ....P etroChina  seems  overstaffed.  If it  is,  it's only  because  China  is  trying  to
minimize the pain of a program that has already brought on considerable anguish.
31.  Clifford, Can this Giant Fly, supra note 28, at 94B.
32.  Id. See also PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21, at 55-59.The Journalo f CorporationL  aw [Fall
marketing  of the deal,  only two  accepted:  Chee-chen  Tung, the brother of the Chief
Executive of Hong Kong, and Wu Jinglian, a leading PRC economist and an advisor to
Premier Zhu Rongji.33 Another senior government economist, Liu Hongru, who received
his academic training at the University of Moscow in 1959, replaced Wu Jinglian in late
2002.34 Franco Bernabe, former head of the Italian oil conglomerate ENI, initially turned
down the opportunity but later became the sole non-Chinese member of the Board.35 The
two "outside"  Chinese  directors were likely, in fact,  to act as proxies for the Beijing
regime  given  their  close  ties  to  the government.36  To  appear  more  like  companies
familiar  to  the  international  investment  community,  several  Board committees  were
established  as well,  including an audit committee;  a health, safety and environmental
protection  committee;  an  examination  and  salary  committee;  and  an  investment  and
development committee.37 However, without a competitive market for corporate control
or an independent  judiciary, there  were  no  clear guarantees  that  these bodies would
operate in a manner comparable to their counterparts in developed market economies.
Initially, it was reported that PetroChina hoped to raise as much as US $10  billion in
the IPO.  This  figure  was  then  scaled back  several  times as bankers  ran into  severe
political and financial headwinds.38 When the dust settled, the company was only able to
raise US $2.9 billion, and much of that was provided at the very last minute by friendly
Hong Kong investors and BP, the large UK oil company, in side deals negotiated by the
underwriters.  All told, this represented an approximate ten percent stake in PetroChina.
The parent company, CNPC, retained majority control of PetroChina  as owners of the
remaining ninety percent of the common stock. In addition, PetroChina put in place a
dividend distribution policy that obligated the company to share half of its future earnings
with CNPC. One leading oil industry source stated: "CNPC remains in total control of the
39
new entity."
As state-owned enterprises, CNPC, Sinopec, and CNOOC are controlled, in turn, by
the government of the People's Republic and, hence, by the Chinese Communist Party.
Corporate officers of the SOEs are appointed by the government and serve at its whim. In
fact,  at one  point during the  IPO process,  Dow Jones  reported that the President  of
Sinopec, Li Yizhong, had been reassigned to become "governor or the communist party
secretary" of the Gansu province in northwest China.40 Replacing Li at Sinopec would be
the current President and Chairman of CNPC, Ma Fucai.  Ma Fucai had been  slated to
serve as  Chairman  of PetroChina  and, hence, lead the planned  "road  show"  to Hong
33.  PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21, at 139.
34.  Liu Hongru, Executive Profiles, PetroChina.com,
available at http://www.petrochina.com.cn/english/gsjs/21119.htm (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
35.  Franco Bernabe, Executive Profiles, PetroChina.com,
available at http://www.petrochina.com.cn/english/gsjs/1 231 .htm (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
36.  Sang Xu & Mary Ho, PetroChina: International Corporate Governance with Chinese Characteristics,
Center for Asian Business Cases, School of Business, The University of Hong Kong, HKU183, Feb. 15, 2002,
at 8.
37.  Id. at 17.
38.  See infra text accompanying notes 105-107.
39.  Lawrence Basapa, China Launches  "World Class" Petro Giant, CHEMICAL NEWS & INTELLIGENCE,
Nov. 10, 1999.
40.  Xu Yihe,  China's Petroleum Industries  Undergoing Major Management Overhaul, Jan.  19, 2000,
available at http://integrate.factiva.com/search/article.asp (last visited Nov. 16, 2003).2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
Kong, London, and New York-a crucial corporate step in the effort to sell an IPO to
major institutional investors. The new President of CNPC, replacing Ma Fucai, was to be
Yan Sanzhong, a former deputy director of the government agency that oversees the oil
and petrochemical  industry. He did not have extensive  experience, however, in the oil
extraction operations that are key to PetroChina and he had only been a vice president of
CNPC for six months.
This move was very unpopular with potential investors and was eventually reversed.
"Analysts  doubt  if Ma  and  Yan  are  qualified  for their  new  positions,"  Dow  Jones
reported. "[T]he  managerial  overhaul sends a confusing signal to the oil industry as it
comes  just  before  the  two  companies  launch  their  initial  public  offerings."41 The
motivation for these changes appeared to be domestic political considerations. They were
"seen as part of the government's strategy to accelerate the development of northwestern
42
China."
To impose such a significant change in corporate leadership in the middle of an IPO
would be considered  a disaster  in the United States  or Europe.  In fact, it  would be
unthinkable because  no government  diktat  could force  a  company  to move  its CEO
around  in such  a manner. Although many  state-owned companies  in Western Europe
have been privatized through public share offerings in the last decade, this kind of move
has never been made. It was no surprise that this change was cancelled,  but the mere
reporting  of  such  a  possibility  made  potential  investors  very  nervous  about  the
governance  structure  in place  at the  new entity.  Evidence  of the political  connection
between  the  company  and the  regime  has  continued  since  the  IPO.  In  early  2002,
PetroChina announced it was conducting exploratory discussions with Husky Energy, a
Canadian  oil  company  controlled  by  Hong  Kong-based  billionaire  Li  Ka  Shing.
However, when the discussions fell apart, the public announcement by PetroChina that it
was withdrawing  from the negotiations  was  made by the  PRC's  State  Development
Planning Commission vice-minister Zhang Guobao, with PetroChina Chairman Ma Fucai
sitting silently beside him.43 Commenting on the nature of the announcement, a writer in
the South China Morning Post noted that "[w]hat this PetroChina cameo illustrates is that
Beijing has yet to recognise the sanctity of listed private companies ...  shareholders have
to add on a new level of risk if politicians, with their different set of priorities, can waltz
in and turn things upside down."44 Serving time in the senior management at PetroChina
also  remains  a conduit  for political  power.  Ma  Fucai  was  recently  appointed  as  an
alternate member of the Central  Committee of the Communist Party.45 And the former
head of PetroChina parent CNPC  was recently named head  of the Ministry  of Public
Security, which controls China's police forces. This Ministry has been responsible for the
41.  Id. As will be discussed below, the PetroChina IPO is the lead project in a planned stream of public
offerings by Chinese SOEs.
42.  Id.
43.  Jon Ogden, ShareholdersR emain Pawns in Party Line, S. CHINA MORNING POST, May 8, 2002, at 12
("[P]icture the amazement  if a table  of Exxon Mobil executives  featured  United  States Energy  Secretary
Spencer Abraham telling the press Exxon would not be buying ChevronTexaco because he deemed the price too
high.").
44.  Id.
45.  List of Alternate Members of the 16th CPC Central Committee, XINHUA ECONOMIC NEWS SERVICE,
Nov. 15, 2002.The Journalo  f CorporationL aw [Fall
crushing of the Falun Gong religious movement in China.46
B. The Chinese Context
1. Economic Reform
The PetroChina  IPO must  be  viewed  in  the context  of the  dramatic  economic
changes that have been taking place in China for several years. As far back as the early
1980s, the Chinese Communist Party began to search for alternative economic forms that
would  allow  it  to  maintain  its political  control,  while  at  the  same  time  improving
economic growth and worker productivity. Reaction to the excesses of the Maoist era led
to  the  emergence  of a  concept  called  "market  socialism,"  where  the  regime  would
establish  a variety  of new  structures that made  room  for a private sector and foreign
investment. Initially, these were limited to the freeing up of prices for the agricultural
sector, the encouragement of a small-scale private sector in consumer and light industrial
goods, and the establishment of Special Economic Zones, particularly in coastal regions.
The  latter were  able  to  take  advantage  of their proximity  to the  regional  economic
powerhouses like Japan and the so-called "tigers" of East Asia, including South Korea,
Hong Kong, Malaysia, and Singapore.47
Slowly the reform process expanded to the point where the core assets of the state-
owned economy were to be restructured and privatized. In theory, the regime's goal is to
privatize the great majority of SOEs.48 Many of these have already carried out a form of
homegrown  privatization  built  around  "debt  for  equity"  swaps,  where  a  company's
workforce is forced to buy shares in their own debt-laden and unproductive firms or else
face  dismissal.  Alternatively,  worker  pension  funds  are  expropriated  by  current
management and invested as operating capital in the money-losing ventures "so workers
become 'shareholders'  by default without any say in the management of the enterprise
and, in addition, risk losing their share when the company is sold."'49 Often, despite their
reorganization  as  joint-stock  companies,  management  remains  the  same  and  local
government officials continue to control the entities.50
46.  Michael  Forsythe,  China Names  Former PetroChina Head  Top  Cop, People's Daily Says,
BLOOMBERG NEWS, Dec. 9, 2002.
47.  For an overview of the reform process, see Diamond, supra note 10.
48.  There  are roughly  380,000  SOEs  in China.  The largest  of these are  controlled  by  the central
government as in the case of CNPC. Smaller and medium size SOEs are controlled by local and provincial
governments. It is estimated that this sector employs directly more than 100 million people, and supports the
livelihood of an additional 200 million people. Xinqiang Sun, Reform of China's State-owned Enterprises: A
Legal Perspective, 31 ST. MARY'S L.J. 19 (1999);  see also JOE STUDWELL, THE CHINA DREAM: THE QUEST FOR
THE LAST GREAT UNTAPPED MARKET ON EARTH 260-61 (2002) (arguing that "government's response to looming
fiscal  crisis ...  is to claim that  the state  owns  all kinds  of valuable assets that it  can sell  to cover its
expenditures"); Diamond,s upra note 10.
49.  International Union of Foodworkers, Hong Kong: IUF Mission Report, Dec. 1977, at 3 [hereinafter
IUF Mission Report].
50.  Sun, supra note 48, at 32. Also, "the SOE's are linked closely with.., government agencies ....T he
managers of these SOE's are state cadres .. . assigned to an SOE to work not as an enterpriser [sic] but as a
bureaucrat."  Id.  at 46.  This  introduces  a  further  complexity:  as  cadre,  managers  are  not  subject  to
unemployment risk if the SOE fails-only the rank and file workers are, as the Chinese saying goes, "pushed
into the sea" of unemployment.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
This process is linked intimately to efforts to cut costs and slash work forces. The
economically-active population of China consists of about 890 million people, with some
600  million in rural  areas  and  280 million in  urban  areas.  The state  sector  employs
approximately 100 million people, and it is thought that as many as one-third of these are
slated for dismissal.  In addition,  100 million rural workers are said to be surplus labor
and are now  being encouraged to move to urban areas,  despite the dim prospects that
await them there. Some 82,000 rural migrants to Beijing, for example, earn their living as
scavengers of the city's trash dumps, sharing their workspace with rats and flies.51
The risk that the regime faces in this restructuring effort is the possibility that it may
spark social turmoil that it cannot control. Thus, "modernization"  of some sort becomes
crucial, both to provide new jobs and to earn income  to provide some minimal social
safety net. The unanswered question  for Chinese  society is the final outcome of this
important transition. The IPO of PetroChina was viewed by the regime as "a propeller for
the mainland's painful state-sector restructuring,"  which Premier Zhu hoped would win
the "heart and soul" of international investors back to China after the East Asian financial
crisis of 1997-1998.52 In 1999, an attempted IPO by CNOOC, the offshore oil company,
failed to attract serious investor interest and was shelved.53 Capital markets also reacted
weakly to an offering of stock in the Beijing Capital International Airport entity.54 These
events highlight the risks that a privatization and capital market strategy entails for the
state. In one view, the attempt to tap foreign capital markets is a way to provide a bridge
to a new era of renewed growth and economic development. However, this strategy can
also be viewed as an attempt by a dying bureaucratic  regime, one that has outlived its
social and economic relevance, to preserve its privileges.
Prior to his recent retirement, Premier Zhu was the leader of a faction within the
Chinese Communist Party that is known as the "Shanghai mafia" or the "Shanghai gang."
He  is  a  former  mayor  of Shanghai  as was  his  predecessor,  Jiang  Zemin.  The  last
Shanghai mayor was said by U.S. businessmen to spend more time in Beijing than in
Shanghai and was once thought of as a potential successor to Zhu. Many appointees to
the top leadership positions in China are considered members of this faction.55 Because
of its long history as a port and industrial city, Shanghai has been the center of efforts to
develop alternative economic forms in China. The Shanghai-headquartered  Baoshan Steel
Group was slated to become the next IPO for the regime once the PetroChina IPO was
51.  Erik Eckholm, Amid Garbage and Disdain, China Migrants Find a Living, N.Y. TIMES, Feb. 11, 2000,
at Al.
52.  Wang Xiangwei, PetroChinaS ets Out Stall of Sweeteners for Investors, S. CHINA MORNING POST,
Jan. 24, 2000, at 1.
53.  CNOOC Says Listing Withdrawal Due to Change in U.S. Policy/Weak Confidence, AFX-AStA, Nov.
11,  1999. Christine Chan, China Plays Suffer as Move Seen Putting Damper on Beijing's Plans to Fund State
Reform, CNOOC Postpones Dual Listing, S. CHINA MORNING POST, Oct. 16, 1999, at 1.
54.  Ho Swee Lin, Shortfall in BeijingA irport Equity Offering, FIN. TIMES, Jan. 28, 2002, at 33.
55.  See James Kynge & Richard McGregor, Chinese Old Guard Gives Way to New in Orderly Handover,
FIN. TIMES, Nov.  15, 2002, at 11; Richard McGregor, Rising Star Named New Shanghai Mayor, FIN. TIMES,
Feb. 21,  2003, at 9; see also Richard McGregor,  "Shanghai Gang" Faces Life  Without Benefactor Jiang:
China's Leader Surrounded Himself with Acolytes from Shanghai. Will They Survive  Without Him?, FIN.
TIMES, Nov. 8, 2002, at 9 ("Known collectively as the "Shanghai Gang," these comrades act as a tight network
at the commanding heights of the central government."); Five Clear Jiang Allies in New China Leadership,
AFX EUROPEAN Focus, Nov. 15, 2002.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
completed.56  (Though, as we  will see below,  those  plans had to  be  altered once  the
PetroChina IPO ran into serious trouble.).
Although the Shanghai gang's "market socialist" ideology now predominates in the
Communist Party, Maoist views favoring a strong state still receive a hearing. Events like
the bombing  of the Chinese  embassy  in Serbia, or the entry of China into  the World
Trade Organization, are used by the anti-reform elements to assert their views.57 Thus,
the leadership must navigate between the so-called "left,"  on the one hand, and, on the
other, elements within  the reform groups that want to push reform  faster, or that have
personal  stakes in the success of their particular industry or party faction. The decision,
for example,  to make PetroChina the first IPO  in the planned  pipeline was  apparently
made only after an  intense internal battle  in the regime. The other domestic oil entity,
Sinopec, hoped to go first, but top executives  in PetroChina parent CNPC threatened a
kind of "shock therapy" to win the  day.58 They asserted that they were so in need of
foreign investment, without it they would be forced to lay off up to one million workers
overnight, thus threatening  the regime with widespread  social unrest. It is  no surprise,
therefore, to find that there was speculation that Premier Zhu played a personal role in the
59
offering process.
Behind the PetroChina IPO is the fear of the Chinese state bureaucracy that as China
opens up to the outside world,  it risks a collapse of key industries that can no longer
compete on a global basis. The choice for the regime can be viewed as a fork in the road,
with one  road leading  to  Singapore  and  the other to  Moscow. If the  regime  gets  to
Singapore,  it will  have  established  a  modem  industrial  country without major social
unrest and yet have maintained its authoritarian power over Chinese society. The road to
Moscow demonstrates  the alternative:  the regime could  try the  imposition  of "shock
therapy"  in  an  effort  to  "catch  up"  with  the  West  overnight,  but  it  may  face  the
unintended collapse of the older SOE's which cannot  match the superior competitive
power of foreign capital.
Clearly, the regime wants to get to  Singapore but fears it may wake up and find
itself in Moscow. Thus, the modernization of its "crown  jewels" in the energy sector
serves a dual purpose: provide the increased resources necessary for continued economic
expansion, and defend the ability of its oil industry to compete, or at least hold its own,
with foreign capital. PetroChina is optimistic about its ability to lead this effort. In the
view of company spokesman Zhang Xin: "We believe PetroChina has the strength, given
the wide range of CNPC reforms in recent months to become  one  of the world's top
56.  Ho Swee Lin, Baoshan Iron and Steel Group Sets $1bn Targetf or Share Issue, FIN. TIMES, Feb. 9,
2000, at 33.
57.  See Willy Wo-Lap Lam, Leftists Make Late Bid to Slow Reforms, S. CHINA MORNING POST, Feb. 10,
2000, at 9 (noting that "heavyweight leftists, or quasi-Maoists"  oppose privatization as "succumb[ing]  to the
temptation of 'bourgeois liberalisation').
58.  Gabriel Lafitte,  Tibet's Natural Resource Heritage on Sale to  Wall Street Bidders: A Report from
Milarepa Fund (Draft),  Jan. 2000, at 2,  23-24  (arguing that "Chinese  state policies  in recent years have
deliberately shut down CNPC's competitors" noting that "all three oil SOE's are jostling to recapitalize by
floating their shares" and noting "the lengths CNPC managers have gone to in order to win official permission
to list their enterprises' shares"). Interview with Ho Swee Lin, Author, FIN. TIMES, Hong Kong/Beijing Bureaus
(Mar. 10, 2000).
59.  Id.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
hydrocarbons majors."60 Industry experts, however, think this goal is more than a decade
away.61 Premier Zhu's goal was to find a way to build a competitive oil sector without
using state assets. He is viewed as the "architect" of the policy of tapping international
equity markets to find the needed cash.62
2. A Changing Oil Industry
With economic growth comes an increase in energy use.63 China is no exception.
China experienced  double-digit growth  in the  early  1990s and the  economy was still
growing at a pace of 8 to 9% at the end of the decade. Total primary energy use, a Rice
University study indicates, rose from 665 million tons of "oil equivalent" (mtoe) in 1990
to 935  mtoe in  1996.  This figure  could double by 2010. The relative  decline  in the
importance of oil to the advanced economies  is a process that China is not yet able to
benefit from. In fact, the  rate of oil use could accelerate as  the economy  develops-
transportation needs alone could drive this process.
Inevitably, China has in recent years become an oil importer after decades of being
able to rely solely on its own land-based and offshore reserves. Domestically, China can
rely on proven reserves of some nineteen billion barrels-less than half that of Russia and
far below the reserves of the leading OPEC members.64 China must now import between
500,000 and 700,000 barrels of oil a day (b/d) but this is expected to climb to as much as
3.5 million b/d by 2010. Imports in 1999 alone jumped 43%.65
China has attempted to secure additional reserves internationally. To date, its efforts
consist largely of various joint venture projects such as those by CNPC in Kazakhstan,
Peru, Venezuela,  and Sudan.66 China also  had plans  to invest in Iraq  once  the U.N.
sanctions were lifted. Industry experts believe, however, that these efforts have a natural
limit-unless China can modernize its refinery assets, it cannot process large amounts of
the type of oil available from many of these sources. Its efforts to secure offshore sources
of oil in the South China Sea-through CNOOC-have borne fruit but are now reaching
a limit. Crude  oil production from offshore sources dropped  in 1999 after a five-year
60.  Lawrence Basapa, China Launches "World Class" Petro Giant, CHEMICAL NEWS & INTELLIGENCE,
Nov. 10, 1999.
61.  Id.
62.  Malcolm Nixon, ed., PetroChina' s IPO -More to it Than Meets the Eye?, HART'S ASIAN PETROLEUM
NEWS, Jan. 31, 2000.
63.  The figures presented here are drawn from CHINA AND LONG-RANGE ASIA ENERGY  SECURITY: AN
ANALYSIS OF THE POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS SHAPING ASIAN ENERGY MARKETS
(Baker Institute Study No. 11,  Center for International Political Economy and James A. Baker III Institute for
Public Policy, Rice University, Apr. 1999) [hereinafter Baker Institute Study],
available at http://www.bakerinstitute.org/Pubs/workingpapers/claes/index.html  (last visited Nov. 15, 2003).
64.  Id.; see also BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2003, at 4.
65.  Baker Institute Study, supra note 63; see also China Accelerates Shift in Energy Policy, Restructuring
of State Petroleum Firms, OIL & GAS J., Jan. 10, 2000.
66.  It is the latter project that is the source of domestic U.S. opposition to the PetroChina IPO raised by a
number of religious and other groups. See David B. Ottoway, Chinese Fought on NYSE Listing; Groups Cite
Oil Firm's Role in Sudan, WASH. POST, Jan. 27, 2000, at E01 (noting that "conservative religious and human
rights groups have launched a campaign to block" PetroChina offering);  Mark Landler, China's No. 2 Oil
Company Prepares to Go Public, N.Y. TIMES, Oct. 12, 2000, at WI (noting that investment by PetroChina
parent in Sudan  "led  human  rights and  labor  groups to organize  a bitter  campaign against  PetroChina's
offering").The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
plateau in growth rates. New fields are to be brought on line in joint ventures with foreign
companies.  But until recently,  China's offshore production  was largely earmarked  for
export (mainly to Australia) to earn much-needed foreign exchange. This has changed. In
2000, for example, exports were down two-thirds from the previous year. The oil is now
needed domestically to compensate  for reduced output driven by cost cutting coupled
with growing  domestic  demand. Thus foreign  investors see three major opportunities:
reliance on high sulfur Middle East oil requires expensive upgrades to China's refineries;
the breakup  of the  domestic  oil industry  gives  foreign  capital  new  opportunities  to
compete; and the pace of economic growth has led to a permanent shift in the source of
China's oil supply.
The planned IPOs then, led by PetroChina, represent a last ditch attempt to protect
key state assets from the inevitable onslaught of the global market. It is thought that one
of the arguments used by the domestic oil industry managers in discussions with the top
Beijing leadership rested on what was being called "the  last free lunch"-an argument
which said, in effect, the state owes us this one last favor (support for access to capital
markets) before  the state carries out its intention to join the World Trade Organization
(WTO). Once in the WTO, China will face increasing pressure to open up key sectors of
the economy  to direct competition  and greater foreign ownership,  and this could well
spell the end of the days of privileged SOE's.67 "The Chinese oil companies have to act
now, before it is too late, to improve their efficiencies," in the words of one oil industry
68
source.
A  variation on  this  theme  suggests that  it  is the Government  itself, not  the oil
potentates of CNPC, that want to retain control of the oil industry. Proponents  of this
view point to  the desire of the PRC to appear to be competing while retaining actual
control of the publicly traded firms. "PetroChina management will not be able to prevent
the looting of its resources on the instructions of its parent or even the government, which
many  fear  may happen  if crisis  situations,  especially  of a  financial  nature,  develop
making  dipping  into  PetroChina's  pockets  irresistible,"  a leading  oil industry  source
argued.69  The parent  company, CNPC, retains majority ownership and is a privileged
recipient of earnings distributions.70 In turn, the Chinese government retains control of
CNPC.
Thus,  it  is plausible  to  suggest that the  division of assets between  Sinopec  and
CNPC is intended to create a permanent duopoly rather than spark domestic competition.
As  one  leading  oil  industry  source  put  it,  "[t]he  purpose  of  the  CNPC-Sinopec
monopolies was to strengthen resistance to foreign petroleum company penetration of the
business, which would take place at some non-negotiable defined stage, after China was
67.  On the  impact of joining the WTO, see GORDON C. CHANG,  THE COMING  COLLAPSE OF CHINA
(2001).
68.  Restructuring of China's Oil Industry Continues as Doubts About its Success Loom, OIL & GAS J.,
Jan. 3, 2000, at 19.
69.  Nixon, supra note 62.
70.  PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21,  at 1-31 (stating that "CNPC, as the majority shareholder of the
Company, may seek to influence the determination of the amount of dividends paid by the Company with a
view to satisfying its cash flow requirements including those relating to its obligations to provide supplementary
social services to its employees and a limited number of third parties").2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
admitted  to the WTO.' 71  This  suggests that the  restructuring  strategy devised  by the
CNPC, the Chinese  government, and the Goldman Sachs-led team of advisers, in fact,
relies on the lack of domestic competition. Together with an extended phase-in period of
the WTO-forced opening of the energy  sector, this would give the Chinese oil giants
"several years to strengthen their fortresses, making it very difficult and certainly costly
for any foreign  firms  to take  them  on in their own  respective backyards."72 As  one
thorough study of the restructuring put it:
CNPC [PetroChina's parent entity]  has been groomed to be at the forefront of
China's strategy to enter the global top 500 transnational corporate league.  The
Chinese  party-state  has, over  many years,  selectively  favored its petroleum
monopoly corporation, with many policy decisions designed to make it bigger,
stronger, more profitable,  and better able to compete, both within China and
around the world, with the major oil corporations  which are household names
to anyone in the western world who owns a car.73
The key move was to find a way to offer up the best of the assets available without
the "dead weight" of the aging state monopoly. This need was reinforced by the failure of
the CNOOC offering in 1999 and led to the so-called "Plan B": PetroChina was set up
with only the best operational  assets of CNPC, very few of the debts, and none of the
overhead  associated  with retaining  a million redundant  workers  and  their families.74
According to Hart's Asian Petroleum News:
[T]he fundamental policy being put in place confirms that CNPC and Sinopec
will put into practice their domestic market muscles aimed at keeping foreign
intruders  at arms length. The use of foreign money, through minority  stock
sales will  continue to  be pursued, on the theme that  'their money'  will be
sought and used, but control will always be in the PRC hands.75
C. Human Rights
Just as the PetroChina IPO was ready to launch, reports were reaching the West that
the Chinese  regime had undertaken  yet another crackdown  on alleged  affiliates of the
spiritual movement, the Falun Gong.76 A Hong Kong-based human rights group reported
that Chinese  security forces  detained approximately  2,000 members  of the movement
during  February  of 2000.  The group estimated that  5,000 members  had been  sent to
prison labor camps for "re-education"  and another 300 sent to jail since the crackdown
started last year.77 This crackdown began to reach even those Chinese who might have
been  thought, in the Chinese context at any rate, to be above the  law:  a Chinese civil
court judge was detained for three months and "given daily injections of a drug that made
71.  Nixon, supra note 62.
72.  Id.
73.  Lafitte, supra note 58, at 2.
74.  Id.
75.  Id.
76.  2,000 Falun Gong Members Arrested During Spring Festival, JAPAN ECON. NEWSWIRE,  Feb. 10,
2000.
77.  Id.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
him sleepy and muddled  ..  -78
Membership in Falun Gong is illegal in China, though the threat to public safety that
might justify such a law is unknown to outsiders. The regime believes that any form of
independent  organization  is  a  threat  to  its  legitimacy  and  power.  This  untimely
crackdown  was  apparently  sparked  by a demonstration  by Falun  Gong  members  on
Chinese  New  Year's  Eve,  the  fourth  of  February.  Demonstrators  assembled  in
Tiananmen Square in Beijing and attempted to unfurl banners. One hundred people were
arrested, and the arrests then spread to more than forty cities throughout China.
This fear of independent  activity by the population  serves well as a general theme
for assessing the  approach  of the PRC to human rights  in general  and labor rights in
particular. Thus, in a statement to senior party figures in early 2000,79 PRC President
Jiang  Zemin  "warned  that  the  Falun  Gong  sect  poses  as  much  of a  threat  to  the
Communist Party as the Solidarity movement did to the  communists in Poland  in the
1980s."80  Of course,  to  deal  with  Polish  Solidarity,  the  Polish government  imposed
martial law for a decade, arresting  thousands, and setting back the democratic  reform
process in Eastern Europe for years. Jiang suggested that the sect members, together with
"unemployed  farmers and workers and splittists among ethnic minorities  [are] the most
destabilizing factors in society."'81 Jiang "expressed concern that the jobless in rural and
urban  areas  might  'join  hands'  to  pose  a  challenge  to  the  leadership."82  As  the
International Union of Foodworkers put it in a 1997 report following a research mission
to Hong Kong: "There is no dispute about the nature of the regime in China: it is a one-
party state where the CPC bureaucracy constitutes a ruling class exercising a monopoly
of power enforced by extensive police control and by the repression of dissident opinion
'83
and activity."
The  Falun Gong crackdown  is  only the  latest example  of the  approach that the
Chinese  Communist  regime  has long taken to  basic civil  liberties and  human rights.
Amnesty International summarized the human rights picture in China at the end of 1999
on the eve of the PetroChina IPO:
Hundreds,  possibly thousands,  of activists  and suspected  opponents  of the
government  were  detained  during the year. Thousands  of political prisoners
jailed  in  previous  years  remained  imprisoned,  many  of them  prisoners  of
conscience.  Some had been sentenced after unfair trials, others were still held
without charge  or trial. Political  trials continued  to fall short of international
fair trial standards.  Torture and ill-treatment remained endemic, in some cases
resulting in death. The death penalty continued to be used extensively.84
Despite  suggestions by some that limited reform  is leading China to the "rule of
law,"  it is very clear that the country remains under the arbitrary "rule of men."  China
78.  Cindy  Sui,  China  Using  Asylums  to  Suppress;  Banned  Movement's  Followers Reportedly
Institutionalized,W ASH. POST, Feb. 12, 2000, at A 17.
79.  Willy Wo-Lap Lam, Jiang Compares Sect's Threat to Solidarity, S. CHINA MORNING POST, Feb. 12,
2000.
80.  Id.
81.  Id.
82.  Id.
83.  IUF Mission Report, supra note 49, at 17.
84.  Al REPORT 1999: CHINA, AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL,  1999 [hereinafter Al REPORT 1999].2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
signed the International  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in October of 1999 and
allowed the UN High  Commissioner  for Human  Rights,  Mary Robinson,  to visit the
country,  but,  according  to  Amnesty  International,  "repression  of dissent  continued,
culminat[ed]  in December in the trial of high profile dissidents" and the introduction of
new regulations controlling "social  groups"  and publishing.85 Amnesty concluded  that
these were signs of "increasing restrictions on freedom of expression and association."86
Those minimal  legal  protections that  do exist  are  often  abused.  "Political  trials
continued to fall far short of international fair trial standards," Amnesty concluded, "with
verdicts and sentences usually decided by the authorities before trial, and appeal hearings
usually a formality."'87 Amnesty reports that a series of trials of pro-democracy activists
took place in several provinces  where defendants  were not provided adequate  time or
resources to mount effective defenses. One veteran pro-democracy activist and bookseller
from Qingdao in the Shenzung province, Chen Zengxiang, was "reportedly tried in secret
[in October 1999] and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for 'seeking to subvert the
State power.' 88 He had been held in jail without access to a lawyer since May of 1999.89
One legal scholar who attempted to put an optimistic face on recent legal reforms in
China nonetheless  admitted, "[r]e-education  through labor continues to be imposed on
dissidents ....  90  He noted that this penalty  could be used to  incarcerate  individuals
without a charge or trial. He describes several instances of torture of those held in the re-
education  camps.91 The PRC Ministry  of Justice itself admits that 200,000 people are
living in prison labor camps.92 The Laogai system forces  prisoners "to plant, harvest,
engineer,  manufacture  and process all  types of products  for sale in the domestic  and
international  markets."93  Ironically,  perhaps  tragically,  Dun  &  Bradstreet  actually
publishes statistics that assess the output of these prisons. In a 1998 report, they indicated
that  ninety-nine of these camps  produced  more  than $800 million in revenue  for the
state.94 The camp list included the Nanbao Salt Works, where famed Chinese dissidents
Wei Jingsheng and Wang Dan were once held.95 Here is how Wei described Nanbao:
At Nanbao,  political criminals  and other criminals labor as slaves-with no
income,  no  job  safety-and  make  this  enterprise  one  of  the  largest  salt
chemical  factories  in Asia.  Every year, millions of yuan in profit  from this
industry contribute  to the  Chinese  government's  efforts  to oppress  its own
85.  Id.
86.  Id.
87.  Id.
88.  Id.
89.  Al REPORT 1999, supra note 84.
90.  Daniel C. Turack, The New Chinese CriminalJ ustice System, 7 CARDOZO J. INT'L. & COMP. L. 49, 58
(1999).
91.  Id. at 59.
92.  Id. at 58.
93.  THE LAOGAI RESEARCH FOUNDATION, A RARE INSIGHT INTO CHINA'S LAOGAI ECONOMY: DUN  &
BRADSTREET  DIRECTORY  LISTS  FORCED  LABOR  CAMPS,  at  13  (June  30,  1999),  available  at
http://www.laogai.org/economy (last visited Nov. 16, 2003) [hereinafter LAOGAI RESEARCH FOUNDATION].
94.  Id. at 9.
95.  Wei Jingsheng's activities  on behalf of democratic  rights extend  back to the "Democracy  Wall"
movement of 1970s. Wang Dan was a leader of the student movement that took over Tiananmen Square in
1989, sparking widespread support among Chinese workers.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
96
people.
The  Dun  &  Bradstreet  report  includes  a  wide  range  of  industrial  companies
encompassing  cement, rubber, machine tools, motorcycle engines, aluminum products,
diesel engines, a paper mill, a fertilizer factory, and a silk plant.
Given China's continued abuse of the civil liberties and human rights of its general
population, it should come as no surprise that it brutally suppresses any effort to establish
a free trade union movement and the labor rights that are generally associated with such a
movement.  Independent  trade  unions  are  outlawed  in  China. The  right  to  strike  is
forbidden. An effort to establish an Autonomous Workers Federation as part of the wider
Democracy  Movement  of  1989  was  met  with  particularly  harsh  repression.  Many
affiliates of that Federation are still in prison or labor camps. Amnesty details numerous
ongoing abuses of workers for their organizing and other activity.97 Arrests and arbitrary
detentions were made throughout 1999, as labor unrest increased due to the worsening
economic situation. Here are some of the examples they report:
Li Qingxi, a laid-off worker from the Datong coal mine in Shanxi province,
was  arrested  in  January  when  he  posted publicly  a  statement  calling  for
independent trade unions. He was sentenced in March without charge or trial to
one year of "re-education  through labour,"  reportedly to be served "at home."
Zhang Shanuang, a labour rights activist from Hunan province, was detained in
July after trying to set up a group to help laid-off workers. He was sentenced in
December to  10 years'  imprisonment,  accused of having "illegally provided
information to overseas  hostile organizations  and individuals,"  reportedly for
speaking  about  farmers'  protests  in  his  province  in  a  Radio Free Asia
98
interview.
The widely respected China Labour Bulletin, based in Hong Kong, confirms that the
process  of "[e]conomic  restructuring has led  to huge  pressures  on the Chinese  labour
market ...m any workers laid off from SOEs have expressed...  dissatisfaction with the
long working hours, short-term contracts and miserly benefits  that more than not await
them in the private  sector."99 Linked to this dissatisfaction  is a rise in labor disputes,
despite  the  frightening risk that such voicing of grievances  to official  bodies  entails.
According to Tim Pringle, a longtime and very close follower of Chinese labor conditions
based in Hong Kong,
[T]he [Chinese Government's] Ministry of Labour and Social Security [reports
that] there were increases in labour disputes in all types of enterprises in 2000.
Of the  327,152  that  officially  occurred, 24.2  percent  [were]  in  SOEs,  20
percent  in so-called  collectively-owned  enterprises,  15.5  percent in foreign-
96.  PR Newswire,  The Laogai Research Foundation: Dun & Bradstreet Provides Rare Insight Into
Financial  Scope  of  Chinese  Forced  Labor  Camps  (June  30,  1999),  available  at
http://www.findarticles.com/cf_0/m4PRN/1999_June_30/55035248/pl/article.jhtml  (last visited Jan. 14, 2004).
97.  Al REPORT  1999, supra note 84. AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL, PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA: LABOUR
UNREST AND THE SUPPRESSION  OF THE RIGHTS TO FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND EXPRESSION (WORKERS
WANT TO EAT-WORKERS WANT JOBS), Mar. 4, 2002.
98.  Al REPORT 1999, supra note 84.
99.  Unemployment  in  China,  CHINA  LABOUR  BULLETIN  No.  50  (Sept.-Oct.  1999),  available at
http://www.china-labour.org.hk/iso/article.adp?article-id=1652  (last visited Nov. 4, 2003).2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
invested  enterprises  and  14  percent  in  private  Chinese-owned  companies.
These statistics represent the continuation of a spectacular increase  in disputes
that began in the early 1990s.100
Of course, the vast majority of such disputes are reported only as "solved" with few
details available  on the facts. There  are serious procedural  obstacles  to bringing these
conflicts before  the dispute resolution bodies, so it is unknown how many on the job
grievances go unreported. 101 In fact, the worst fears of critics of the PetroChina IPO and
restructuring process came true in the spring of 2002, when massive demonstrations by
laid off workers took place in the Daqing oilfields owned by CNPC and PetroChina.102
These were soon followed by large protests by unemployed  workers in several parts of
China, including an unusual demonstration by workers in Beijing itself. Arrests of protest
leaders, two of whom were charged with "sedition"  and were initially charged with the
death penalty  in a secret trial, were paired with  modest economic  concessions by the
regime,  thus  ending  this particular  wave  of unrest.103  However, one  sociologist calls
these demonstrations evidence of a "veritable labor insurgency" underway in China.104
All  of China's industrial  workers  are  members  of the  only  "trade  union"  body
allowed to exist-the All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU). The ACFTU is a
constituent body of the Chinese State and thus is controlled by Communist Party cadre.
As in the former Soviet Union and its Eastern European satellites, this is a "trade union"
in name only. It is, in fact, in the Chinese regime's own words, "a mass organization of
the working class" and it serves as a transmission belt for the party and state leadership.
The Communist Party appoints all of its officials. As the ACFTU itself stated in 1990:
[T]he administration of union cadres by the Party is an unchangeable principle.
The ACFTU should work together with the Organisation Department of the
Central  Committee  of  the  [Chinese  Communist  Party]  in  laying  down
regulations concerning cadre management  and in monitoring the nomination,
investigation, election, approval and allocation of union leaders.105
The same document goes on to state that:
[T]rade  unions  must  resolutely  oppose  any  organisation  or  individual
expressing political views countering those of the Party...  On discovering the
formation  of  workers'  organizations  which  oppose  the  Four  Cardinal
Principles106  and  endanger  the  national  regime,  the  trade  union  must
100.  Tim Pringle, Industrial Unrest in China-A Labour Movement in the Making?, CHINA LABOUR BULL.
(Jan. 30, 2002), available at http://www.china-labour.org.hk/iso/article.adp?articleid=1956  (last visited Nov.
16, 2003).
101.  Id. (noting that "although the figures [for labour disputes] reflect widespread dissatisfaction and an
increase in rights awareness among workers, they do not tell the whole story").
102.  Daqing Oilfield Workers' Struggle (Chinese Labour Bulletin radio broadcast, Mar. 5, 2002).
103.  The death penalty was later withdrawn, but the two union activists are now serving four-year prison
terms.  Press  Release,  "Subversion"  Charges  Must  Not  Be Used  to  Imprison Rights  Activists,  Amnesty
International,  Jan. 14, 2003. See Stephen F. Diamond, The "Race to the Bottom " Returns: China's Challenge
to the InternationalL abor Movement, 10 U.C. DAVIS J. INT'L L. & POL'Y (forthcoming 2003).
104.  Lee, supra note 22.
105.  IUF Mission Report, supra note 49, at 17-18.
106.  The four cardinal principles  include:  1) To keep to the socialist road; 2) To uphold the people's
democratic dictatorship; 3) To uphold the leadership by the Communist Party; and 4) To uphold  Marxism-The Journal of CorporationL aw [Fall
immediately report to same-level party committees and senior-level unions, and
must resolutely expose and dissolve them. When necessary, the union should
demand the dissolution of such organisations by the government in accordance
with  the  law.  Concerning  organisations  initiated  by  workers  out  of their
specific  economic  interests,  the  union  should  advise  them to  dissolve  and
terminate their activities through persuasion and counseling. 107
Thus, the ACFTU serves as the "eyes and ears" of the state inside every workplace.
Far from supporting democratic and free trade unionism, the ACFTU's central purpose is
to carry  out  State and Party  directives  and to  do  everything  it can to  insure that  all
workers fall into line as well. It is no surprise to find out, therefore, that the ACFTU is
viewed by the State as a vehicle for encouraging worker support for the very economic
reform process that  is devastating the social conditions of tens of millions of workers.
Those  who  do  not  conform  to  the  new  economic  order  are  subject  to  ACFTU
"mobilizations."  The Chinese political police (Public  Security Bureau  or "PSB") have
issued "guidelines" that state that:
[T]he union[s] must..,  co-ordinate with the PSB, organise "public order and
prevention teams" to protect the internal security and order of the enterprises,
as  well  as  social order.  Staff and workers  should  be mobilized  to  struggle
against all forms of criminal and illegal behaviour. The union must also assist
the relevant authorities to deal adequately with the education and employment
of dismissed employees, workers who have committed errors and those have
completed sentences and been released. 108
This kind of directive can only be characterized as chilling.
In addition to the dramatic human rights picture and the suppression of basic trade
union  freedoms,  the  general  situation  of  workers  present  particular  problems.
Unemployment and forced  migration have  already  been mentioned.  Further  problems
include the widespread use of under-employment, short-term work and contract labor, the
continued control of labor mobility by the State,  and massive violations of basic health
and  safety  precautions.  Official  statistics  report nearly  7  million  unemployed  urban
workers, but the China Labour Bulletin estimates that the total is closer to 21 million.109
And even  official  statistics admit  to 30 million "more  [workers]  than  needed"  in the
urban areas. These are now supplemented by some 80 to  100 million "floating people"
who have left their villages looking for work in other areas of the country. 110
Despite the need for a massive shift in employment to new entities, the State fears
that uncontrolled mobility could  open the door to organized opposition to the regime.
Thus, it has largely kept in place a decades-old system of labor registration-the hukou
Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought. See CONST. OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA (CPC) (amended and
adopted at the 16th CPC National Congress on Nov. 14, 2002) (on file with author).
107.  IUF Mission Report, supra note 49, at 18.
108.  Id.
109.  The official figures can be found in Fei-Ling Wang, Labor Issues and Foreign Direct Investment in
the PRC 112, in 6 ADVANCES IN CHINESE INDUSTRIAL STUDIES-THE MANAGERIAL PROCESS AND IMPACT OF
FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN GREATER CHINA 177 (C. Jayachandran et al. eds., 1999). The China Labour Bulletin
estimates are described in their study feature: Unemployment, supra note 99.
110.  See Wang, supra note 109.2003] The PetroChina Syndrome
system. I I I Under hukou every Chinese citizen is required to "have a registration with the
hukou authority or hukou police  at birth."'112 In theory,  no Chinese  may work or live
outside of the area where they were registered at birth. To accommodate some economic
pressures,  the  regime  has  instituted  a  system  for providing  workers  with  temporary
residence permits. Punishment of both employers and employees is meted out if workers
are hired without a permit.
The PetroChina IPO emerged within this matrix of workforce issues. It was seen by
the regime as  part of a long-range plan of the State to  dismiss the one  million or so
workers of CNPC. The precise plans  were, and remain, unclear. The sketchy offering
documents provided to investors indicated that the new entity would send a portion of the
proceeds from the IPO up to the parent CNPC to make severance payments to the laid off
workers.113 Severance varies from region to region in China, but was expected to be one
year's average  salary,  or $1200  per worker.  PetroChina and CNPC  tried to reassure
investors that  these obligations would  not absorb  the  lion's share of the new  entity's
profits, but doubts persisted. 114 Further, any such reassurances  meant appearing to leave
the problem of severance unsolved. In fact, the Daqing protests in 2002 were in reaction
to  an attempt to cut back on the severance package  awarded to dismissed CNPC  and
PetroChina workers.115 Since collective bargaining does not exist in China, the CNPC
workforce has no voice in any of the discussions about these issues now underway among
CNPC executives, State and Communist Party representatives, and the legions of foreign
investment  bankers,  lawyers,  accountants,  and  consultants  periodically  employed  to
advise the company and regime. Thus, foreign investors-many of them institutions like
pension funds,  university endowments,  and mutual  funds  that now are  at the  core of
global  capital  markets-were  being  asked  to  participate  in  a  large  socio-economic
experiment masked as just another IPO. It was this unusual situation that would help give
rise to the unprecedented PetroChina Campaign.
D.  CorporateG  overnance
As is widely understood among the fund managers responsible for the assets of large
institutional  investors,  the  concept  of  "fiduciary  duty"  must  guide  all  investment
decisions.  This is a judicially-created  doctrine  that obligates the fiduciary  "to  act for
someone else's benefit, while subordinating one's personal interests to that of the other
person."116  It is considered  the "highest  standard  of duty  implied by law." 117 In the
memorable words of Justice Cardozo:
Many forms of conduct permissible in a workaday world for those acting at
11.  Id.at  178.
112.  Id.
113.  PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21, at 1-31.
114.  James Kynge, China Seeks to Ease Fears on CNPC Float, Oil Minister Says IPO Funds Will Not Go
on Redundancies, FIN. TIMES, Jan. 26, 2000, at 34; Nixon, supra note 62 ("[A] very large part of the monies
raised will not go into new technologies and equipment, but rather into paying off debts and compensating a
massively overstocked workforce, for it is a cardinal policy of the government that social stability must be
maintained.").
115.  Chinese Labour Bulletin, supra note 102.
116.  BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 625 (6th ed. 1990).
117.  Id.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
arm's length, are forbidden to those bound by fiduciary ties. A trustee is held to
something stricter than the morals of the market place. Not honesty alone, but
the punctilio of an honor the most sensitive, is then the standard of behavior.
As to  this there has developed  a tradition that is unbending  and inveterate.
Uncompromising  rigidity  has  been  the  attitude  of courts  of  equity  when
petitioned to undermine  the rule of undivided  loyalty by the "disintegrating
erosion" of particular exceptions ....  Only thus has the level of conduct for
fiduciaries been kept at a level higher than that trodden by the crowd. It will not
consciously be lowered by any judgment of this court. 118
In a financial context, such a duty requires the fiduciary to manage the assets under
his or her control as a prudent person would  manage  his or her own property.  In the
context of a decision to purchase equity in an unprecedented  structure and in a foreign
country that has little or no experience with private enterprise and capital markets, it can
only be considered prudent for an investment manager or trustee to consider a wide range
of issues that in an American or European context can be taken for granted. Whereas in
the United States, for example, it is at least plausible to rely on the price and volatility of
the  stock markets to provide investors with sufficient  information to make  investment
decisions. This was simply impossible in the case of the PetroChina offering.119
The PetroChina IPO raised a wide range of additional concerns. These included the
risks  associated  with  the  outmoded  physical  assets  of the  Chinese  oil  industry,  the
potential for continuing  state interference in the new entity's management, the influence
of the regime's broader policy concerns on the future  direction of the entity, and the
human and labor rights concerns that massive layoffs raise. However, an additional set of
issues that are traditional  areas of interest  for investment managers  were of particular
concern  in  the offering.  These  formed the backdrop  for the  eventual  success  of the
campaign against the IPO. In turn, these issues, together with the labor and human rights
concerns, have become a significant part of the content of changes to the capital markets
that are being raised in a variety of settings in the wake of the campaign, including the
issuance of the Unger Letter.120 These fiduciary-related questions, all of which are the
subject of disclosure  requirements under U.S. securities laws, included concerns about
118.  Meinhard v. Salmon, 249 N.Y. 458,464 (N.Y. 1928).
119.  For a discussion of the ability of investors in U.S. capital markets to be able to rely on "the integrity of
the market price," see Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U.S. 224, 247 (1988). A significant intellectual challenge to
the efficient markets hypothesis that underlies the Court's opinion has been mounted in the last decade by the
emergence  of increasing evidence  that even in developed economies  the stock market is not an  efficient
allocator of capital but, instead, responds to irrational human behavior. See Robert J. Shiller, From Efficient
Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance, 17 J. ECON. PERSP. 83,  102 (2003) ("[T]he recent worldwide stock
market boom, and then crash after 2000, had its origins in human foibles and arbitrary feedback relations and
must have generated a real and substantial misallocation of resources. The challenge for economists is to make
this reality a better part of their models."); ROBERT J. SHILLER, IRRATIONAL EXUBERANCE  (2000) (analyzing
the recent stock market boom); ANDREI SHLEIFER, INEFFICIENT MARKETS: AN INTRODUCTION TO BEHAVIORAL
FINANCE (2000) (using behavioral finance as a basis for critique of the efficient market hypothesis); and HERSH
SHEFRIN,  BEYOND GREED AND FEAR: UNDERSTANDING  BEHAVIORAL  FINANCE  AND THE PSYCHOLOGY  OF
INVESTING 4 (2002) (arguing that "psychological phenomena pervade the entire landscape of finance").
120.  Elizabeth Wine, Calpers Sticks to EthicalS tance, FIN. TIMES, Feb. 20, 2003, at 17 (explaining that the
"largest and most powerful  public pension fund in the US ...  signals ...  staunch support for its socially
responsible investing (SRI) policy").2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
the size and price  of the offering, the use of proceeds from the offering, the potential
difficulties  for the new entity in  an intensely  competitive  global market,  the lack of
modem forms of corporate governance in China, the absence of a market for corporate
control to enforce discipline on management, and several other risk factors.
1. The Size and Price of the Deal
Throughout the offering process, the deal team appeared to be uncertain about its
direction. Early reports indicated that PetroChina would sell as much as $10  billion worth
of common stock.121 That was then scaled back to as little as $5 billion in some reports,
though the consensus  figure was thought to be about $7 billion. This was then publicly
scaled back by the deal team to $5 billion-with a suggestion that that had been their goal
all along. However, when the $10 billion amount surfaced in the business press, the team
made no apparent effort to dissuade investors that that was their goal. As indicated, the
final amount was scaled back again to the end result of $2.9 billion. Only a last-minute
injection of cash from BP122 and several Beijing friendly Hong Kong financiers saved the
offering. 123
Deal size  often fluctuates prior  to the pricing of a deal, but  rarely in  such large
volumes.  In addition, the fluctuations  appeared  to reflect  great uncertainty  about the
potential success of the offering,  in light of the  failure of the October  1999  effort by
CNOOC and'the weakness of the Beijing Airport offering. This offering was part of a
larger plan to bring through several  additional deals in the oil sector and other major
industrial sectors. All told, China probably hoped to raise almost US $20 billion in the
year following this IPO. Even  at US $7  billion there was some doubt that the capital
markets would be willing to absorb the issue. "Oil  and gas is not exactly a hot spot for
IPOs right now," one portfolio manager said.124 "Technology has been and continues to
be the place to be."  While a leading oil industry source noted that "[i]t  was clear that
demand was weak for the IPO when lead underwriter Goldman Sachs slashed the size of
the  offering  in  mid-March." 125  In  addition  to  cutting  back  on  the  deal  size,  the
underwriters aimed for a conservative  price of 5.5 times 1999 EBITDA,126 below the
7.5x multiple that contributed to the CNOOC  disaster. But this priced PetroChina well
below the  8-10x  generally  found  in the  oil  industry.  Thus,  the  Wall Street Journal
concluded, "[i]nvestors are likely to get their low price because reformers believe that the
listing must succeed. But as an executive close to the company says:  'It's a story that
121.  Yasuhiro Goto, China Oil Firms Preparef or the Big Time, Massive Streamlining Underway to Help
Them Take on Foreign Giants, THE NIKKEI WKLY., May 29, 2000, at 24 (stating that the PetroChina "issue has
...  continued to flounder in both [Hong Kong and New York] markets, keeping...  funds actually raised below
one-third the original target of 10 billion"); Karol Nielsen, PetroChina Begins Trading; Sinopec Postpones,
Reduces IPO, CHEM. WK.,  Apr. 19, 2000, at 25 (describing how PetroChina's weak  reception by investors
caused PRC to delay entry of other planned IPOs).
122.  BP is the new corporate name for British Petroleum.
123.  Jim Lobe, Activists Win on Petrochina, Target BP-Amoco, INTER PRESS SERV., Apr. 5, 2000 ("[T]he
only major buyers  [of PetroChina stock]  to  date,  in addition  to BP Amoco, are four Hong Kong-based
companies" considered "under Beijing's influence.").
124.  Paul Merolli, PetroChinaI PO Garners Tepid Response, OIL DAILY, Apr. 3, 2000.
125.  Id.
126.  "EBITDA"  is a widely used financial  metric that gives  a measure of the cash flow earned by a
corporation. It stands for "earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization."The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
takes some explanation."' 127 Once again, the  larger political  context of the offering is
crucial to understanding its dynamic.
2. The Use of Proceedsf rom the Offering
There  was  serious  dispute  about  the  proposed  use  of  proceeds.  The  public
controversy centered on the investment by CNPC in an oil exploration  venture in the
Sudan. Feeling the political heat, PetroChina and its underwriter Goldman Sachs altered
the text of its first draft of the preliminary prospectus and alleged in an amendment that
the Sudan project would stay at the parent level and not be managed by PetroChina.128
Potential investors also expressed concern about suggestions that PetroChina had agreed
to dividend  earnings  up to  CNPC for the  retirement  of corporate  debt  and to make
severance payments to laid-off workers. Such payments would consume half the proceeds
of the  offering,  leaving  investors  wondering  what  they  were  really  buying:  social
protection for the threatened management of an obsolete company or the shining "crown
jewels" of a new global player in the energy business? The remaining proceeds were not
felt to be
[E]nough to invest in exploration or infrastructure projects, let alone expanding
its petrochemical  and  retail network  of petrol  stations ....W hat CNPC  is
saying  is:  "We  are  big  and we are  lousy but  we will  get better  with your
money," said one banker. That is not the way to enter the international markets.
Investors are not a bunch of simpletons. 129
3. Competitiveness of the New Entity
It is unclear whether or not PetroChina would be a profitable firm if it were truly to
stand  on  its  own  and  compete  with  foreign  oil  companies.  CNPC  remained  the
beneficiary of substantial government protection. Much of the Chinese oil sector receives
price  protection  on the  domestic  market  and  benefits  from  restrictions  on  imported
product.  The  Financial Times  reported  that  CNPC  "must  persuade  investors  it  can
compete  in  the absence  of government  protection.  Its  profits ...  have  been  virtually
guaranteed by the state."'130 When this concern was placed next to the issue of repaying
CNPC's remaining indebtedness,  approximately US $14  billion at the time the offering
was announced,131 investors clearly had reason to worry about where their money would
be going. PetroChina would take over the key productive assets of CNPC and the parent
was to be left with one million redundant workers. How would those debts be repaid and
the pension obligations for the redundant workers be met? The need to fend off social
unrest with a severance package is apparently the motivation behind a requirement that
half of PetroChina's earnings be earmarked as dividends for CNPC. Yet this has clearly
127.  Peter Wonacott & Ian Johnson, PetroChina Prepares to Go Public: Changes Fail to Break its State
Ties, WALL ST. J. INTERACTIVE EDITION, Jan. 14, 2000, at A13.
128.  "Use of Proceeds Verification," PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21, at 119-20.
129.  Ho Swee Lin, Investors to Tread Warily in China Oitfields, FIN. TIMES, Dec. 23, 1999, at 8.
130.  Id.
131.  Id. ("To top it all, CNPC has a lot of debts to repay: more than Rmb 115.3bn at the end of' 1998).2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
not worked.132 Since CNPC remains in control of eighty-five percent of the company's
stock, enforcing that requirement will not be a problem-but any expectation that outside
shareholders will share equally in the rewards is called into question.
4. Parenta nd Party Control
CNPC, of course, controls both the board of directors and shareholders'  meetings.
Some smaller CNPC subsidiaries had shares listed in Hong Kong in the past and in no
instance have outside shareholders been given any management or board-level role in the
company.  This past history  led one oil industry analysis to suggest that "[b]y  offering
corporate  shares without allowing  any participation  in the  corporate management,  the
Chinese state oil companies will have to prove to the potential foreign investors that their
business  operations  are  competitive,  transparent  and  well-managed." 133 Of course,  it
should also be asked precisely how an investor is to exercise "shareholder democracy"-
which lies at the heart of capitalism's investment philosophy-in a country where the
most basic democratic rights are violated on a daily basis. Will shareholders  be free to
speak at shareholder meetings?  Will they be granted the right of assembly, free speech,
and the ability to present grievances to management  that are denied PetroChina's  own
workers?  For  that  matter,  can  the  new  management  team  at  PetroChina-to  be
compensated via an unprecedented incentive scheme tied to company performance134 -
be counted on to speak freely about the company's problems?
Chinese law makes it illegal for the shares held directly by the state or state-owned
enterprises  in  an  SOE  to  be  traded  on  a  secondary  market.135  Thus,  mergers  and
acquisitions are practically impossible. PetroChina management will be free of one of the
basic  sources  of competitive pressure  on  the  modem  corporation:  the  fear that poor
performance  will  result  in  the  sale  of the  company  and  the  dismissal  of current
management. In the words of one observer,
even after converting a state enterprise into  a joint stock company under the
Company Law and publicly offering its stocks for trading under the securities
laws, the pressure on the state enterprise's manager to perform well remains
minimal.  The  state  still  maintains  effective  public  ownership,  and  private
investors have very limited influence on management.136
As noted above, all top Company officers are cadre of the Chinese Communist Party and
thus never face the prospect of real unemployment.
While  share  offerings  by  Chinese  companies  are  the  exception,  some  prior
experience is available. A review of the risks that these companies face, taken from their
132.  Lee, supra note 22.
133.  Restructuring of China 's Oil Industry Continues as Doubts Regarding its Success Loom, OIL & GAS
J., Jan. 3, 2000, at 19.
134.  Ho Swee Lin, Western Wiles to Woo the Market, FIN. TIMES, Mar. 14, 2000, at 18.
135.  K. Matthew Wong, Securities Regulations in China and Their Corporate Finance Implications on
State EnterpriseR eform, 65 FORDHAM L. REv.  1221,  1242 (1996);  William H. Simon, The Legal Structure of
the Chinese "Socialist Market" Enterprise, 21 J. CORP. L. 267 (1996); see also Celia Lam & Wei Jie, China's
State-Owned  Share  Dilemma,  available  at  http://www.financeasia.com/articles/9A05131D-D655-11D6-
81E60090277E174B.cfm (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
136.  Wong, supra note 135, at 1242.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
filings  with the  SEC,  indicate  the following  common concerns:  the value  of China's
currency, the renminbi, is subject to change based on government policy and should be
considered potentially volatile; the Chinese government controls the convertibility of the
renminbi into foreign exchange and this could be used to hinder payouts to shareholders;
companies  may  not  be  able  to  secure  sufficient  foreign  exchange  to  carry  out
restructuring;  China's  legal  system  is  not  complete  and,  therefore,  enforcement  of
existing laws or contracts based on existing law may be uncertain and sporadic,  and it
may  be  difficult to  obtain  timely  and equitable  enforcement  of those  contracts  and
laws.137 All of these issues have a common root: the continued role of an undemocratic
regime in its nation's core economic entities. These would all fuel the concerns that led to
the PetroChina Campaign.
III. THE PETROCHINA CAMPAIGN
As word of the proposed initial public offering of PetroChina began to spread in late
1999, a loosely formed coalition of groups emerged to oppose it. This was an exceptional
event in the capital markets. Boycotts of economic activity have been used by political
groups  for many years,  most notably the  divestment campaign  aimed at breaking the
apartheid regime  of South Africa.138 Opposition to a particular offering by a specific
company, however, was then and remains exceptional.139 In the end, though, it was the
structure  and then the success  of this coalition that was the true exception. It was this
exceptional quality, I will argue below, that signaled the larger political, social, and legal
significance of the Campaign.
137.  See, e.g., PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21, at 30-47.
138.  A recent example included efforts to delay bond offerings by Russian and Chinese corporations in the
U.S. in 1997. See Bruce Clark, Move to Curb Chinese Access to US Capital, FIN. TIMES, Nov. 6, 1997, at 4;
Betsy McKay, Russian Bond Offerings Delayed Due to Turmoil, WALL ST. J., Nov. 7,  1997, at A16. These
moves were linked to elements within the conservative wing of the Republican  Party, and appeared to have
been motivated by national security concerns, and included proposals by Republican congressmen to establish
an Office of National Security within the Securities and Exchange Commission to review planned offerings for
national security implications. See WILLIAM J. CASEY INSTITUTE, Russian Bonds Rocked by Second Hearingi n
a Week Focusing on Undesirable Foreign Penetration of U.S. Markets, Perspective, No. 97-C 169 (Nov. 10,
1997),  available at http://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/index.jsp?section=papers&code=97-C_169  (last
visited Sept. 18, 2003). Such a national security-related effort may have more traction in a post-September 11 th
world.
139.  Claims that corporations violate an array of human rights appear to be on the rise. Notable examples
include the ongoing litigation against the Unocal Corporation for its role in Burma and the recently settled
claims of WWII Holocaust victims against Swiss banks. See Doe v. Unocal, 248 F.3d 915 (9th Cir. 2001). See
generally Terry Collingsworth, ILRF Cases to Enforce Labor, Human Rights Under Alien Tort Claims Act,
WORKER RIGHTS NEWS, Vol. 5 No. 1, Spring 2002, at 3, available at http://www.laborrights.org (last visited
Sept.  18, 2003); Beth Stephens, The Amorality of Profit: Transnational Corporations and Human Rights, 20
BERKELEY J. INT'L. L. 45,  46 (2002) (stating that "[m]orally defensible or not, business as usual or not, if
corporations  are  complicit  in  human  rights  violations,  the  victims  of the  abuses  have  a  legal  right  to
compensation from those corporations"); Cynthia A. Williams, The Securities and Exchange Commission and
CorporateS ocial Transparency, 112 HARV. L. REV. 1197, 1201 (1999)  (evaluating "whether the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) has the power to require social as well as financial disclosure by public reporting
companies  to  promote  social  transparency");  Note,  Should  the  SEC Expand Nonfinancial Disclosure
Requirements?, 115 HARV.  L. REV. 1433, 1435 (2002) [hereinafter Should the SEC Expand] (arguing "for a
mandate bounded by considerations of investor welfare and underpinned  by the same economic logic that
supports mandatory financial disclosure").2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
Opposition emerged, initially, from anti-slavery, religious, and conservative national
security groups who focused on the operations of PetroChina parent CNPC in the oil-rich
African nation of Sudan. The Sudanese-based Greater Nile Oil Project, a joint venture in
which CNPC held a minority position, was accused of human rights violations including
the use of forced labor.140 In fact, the Chinese originally intended to bring CNPC itself
public directly but backed  off when it realized that  the parent company's  role in the
Sudan  would  trigger  political  opposition.  The  decision  was  then  made  to  set  up
PetroChina as a subsidiary of CNPC, leaving the Sudanese operations at the parent level.
In its prospectus prepared for investors with the assistance of Goldman Sachs, PetroChina
explained that it received "most of the assets, liabilities and interests of CNPC relating to
CNPC's domestic exploration and  production,  refining and  marketing,  chemicals  and
natural  gas  businesses,"  while  "CNPC  retained..,  assets  and  liabilities  relating  to
international crude  oil and  natural gas  exploration  and  production  and  refining  and
pipeline operations." 141 In addition, CNPC and PetroChina pledged to "establish separate
accounts into which their respective proceeds" from the IPO would be deposited. CNPC
asserted that it would use its income from the sale of its shares in the IPO only to repay
debt  and  fund  employee  retraining  and  severance,  and  not  for  its  Sudanese  joint
venture. 142
This  structural  arrangement,  known in financial  circles, perhaps regrettably,  as  a
"Chinese  Wall,"  was  insufficient  to  quell  these  early  critics.  A  largely,  though  not
exclusively, conservative group of some 200 people led by former Republican Secretary
of the Treasury William E. Simon and former Nicaraguan  contra backer and Assistant
Secretary of State Elliott Abrams signed an open letter to President Clinton on December
9,  1999, soon after the first draft of the PetroChina registration statement had been filed
with the SEC. They argued that:
CNPC  and its investment  banker, \Goldman  Sachs, will shortly seek to avoid
the  Executive  Order143  [blocking  U.S.  funds  from  the  Sudan]  and  public
censure by a "restructuring"  scheme purporting to withhold IPO  funds from
CNPC's commitments in Sudan, Iraq and other terrorist states. The fungibility
of money and the scale of CNPC's activities in Sudan thoroughly undermine
the  credibility  of the  contrivance.  No  such  arrangement  would  have  been
140.  CNPC's  partners included Talisman  Energy, Inc.,  a Canadian concern that faced  similar political
pressure. In late 2002, in another sign of the significance of the new movement sparked by the PetroChina
Campaign,  Talisman  announced  the planned sale of its  stake  in the Sudan.  Talisman  CEO Jim Bucklee
expressly acknowledged the impact of the protests  over the human  rights abuses when he  announced his
company's exit from the region: "Talisman shares have continued to be discounted based on perceived political
risk  in-country  and  in  North  America  to  a  degree  that  was  unacceptable  for  12%  of our  production.
Shareholders have told me they were tired of continually having to monitor and analyze events relating to
Sudan." Press Release, Talisman Energy, Inc., Talisman to Sell Sudan Assets for C$1.2 Billion (Oct. 30, 2002),
available  at  http://www2.ccnmatthews.com/scripts/ccn-release.pl?2002/10/30/1030131n.html?cp=tlm  (last
visited Sept. 18, 2003). The sale was finally completed only in March of 2003 when Talisman announced at the
signing ceremony of the sale to a state-owned Indian company that it was done "under US pressures." Talisman
Transfers Sudan Stake to Indian Company "Under US Pressure," AGENCE FRANCE PRESSE, Mar. 9, 2003.
141.  PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21, at 4 (emphasis added).
142.  Id. at 119-20.
143.  In late  1997, President Clinton invoked his emergency economic  powers to impose sanctions on the
Government of Sudan. Exec. Order No. 13,067, 62 Fed. Reg. 59,989 (Nov. 3, 1997).The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
permitted to evade America's  successful assault on South African apartheid,
and it must not be permitted to do so in the service of Sudanese genocide.144
These  objections  began  to  register  politically.  President  Clinton's  Treasury
Department expanded the list of prohibited companies in the Sudan to include the Greater
Nile Petroleum Operating Co., Ltd.145 A group of largely conservative religious leaders
sent a similar letter to large institutional investors, including major pension funds. 146
Nonetheless, PetroChina and Goldman Sachs continued to plunge ahead with their
preparations  for the offering. An upbeat account of the proposed new offering appeared
in Business  Week  in  late  January  2000,  with  only  scant  reference  to  the  Sudanese
connection.147 Even this was swatted away with nary a second thought by Goldman's
leading international spokesman, Robert Hormats: Sudan is "not an issue because of the
extraordinary  steps  the  company  is  taking  to  ensure  IPO  proceeds  are  only  used
domestically," he argued.148 At this point it was not clear that the emerging PetroChina
coalition would have the weight to stop the offering. The largest  and most politically-
sensitive pension funds, the giant college  teacher based TIAA-Cref and the California
Public Employees  Retirement  System (CalPERS),  together  managing more than $400
billion in assets, refused to commit one way or the other.149
At  this  point,  the  new  coalition  received  an  exceptional  boost. The  AFL-CIO
publicly  announced  its opposition to the IPO with the publication of a detailed report
echoing the  concerns  of the religious, human rights,  and anti-slavery groups but also
discussing the kinds of corporate governance, legal, and labor concerns described in Part
I of this Article. 150 Pointedly, the AFL-CIO report ignored the national security concerns
raised by the conservative elements in the informal coalition. The labor federation held a
conference call  with  Wall Street  investment  managers  to announce the release of the
report and it was widely reported in the financial press.151 The federation's new Office of
Investment,  headed  by experienced  shareholder  and labor activist William  Patterson,
began a systematic effort to discuss the problems with the offering with fund managers
144.  An Open Letter to President William Jefferson Clinton (Dec. 9, 1999),
available at http://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/index.jsp?section=papers&code=99-R_143at  (last  visited
Sept. 22, 2003).
145.  Press Release, Office of Public Affairs, Treasury Department, Treasury Applies Sudan Sanctions to
Joint Oil Venture No. LS-393 (Feb.  16, 2000), available at http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/ls393.htm
(last visited Sept. 21, 2003).
146.  Letter to James Burton, CEO of CalPERS (Jan. 24, 2000),
available at http://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/index.jsp?section=papers&code=00-C_09at  (last  visited
Sept. 22, 2003).
147.  Can This Giant Fly, supra note  28, at  94B (the  PetroChina offering "will  provide an  important
blueprint for overhauling state enterprises ...  [that] could mark the emergence of China's new corporate giants
on the world scene").
148.  Id.
149.  David Ottaway, Chinese Fought on NYSE Listing; Groups Cite Oil Firm's Role in Sudan, WASH.
POST, Jan. 27, 2000, at EOI.
150.  The author prepared the initial draft of the AFL-CIO report.
151.  Stephen Fidler & John Labate, Left and Right Unite in Protest over PetroChina Offering: Concern
Over Chinese Group has Brought Seattle-Style Activism to FinancialM  arkets, FIN. TIMES, Mar. 21, 2000, at 6
(stating "an  extraordinary  ad hoc  coalition  ...  has united  left-leaning  protest  groups,  trade  unions  and
conservative national security types against the offering"); James Cox, AFL-CIO Flexes Muscle Against China
IPO, USA TODAY, Mar. 10-12, 2000, at B3.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
and pension fund trustees.
The AFL-CIO was able to bring considerable  weight to the discussions. The labor
federation has thirteen million members in the United States. Labor union trustees sit on
the boards of union-sponsored pension funds that manage approximately $400 billion in
financial assets. They also sit on the boards of major public pension funds that manage an
additional $1 trillion in assets. These funds, in turn, hire fund managers that were part of
the same investment  banks conducting  the PetroChina IPO and planning  several other
Chinese IPO's. With tens of millions of dollars of fees at stake, there was little doubt that
Wall Street would be forced to listen to this new voice in the capital markets. Within a
few days of the AFL-CIO  intervention, both TIAA-Cref and CalPERS announced their
intention not to purchase shares in the IPO.152 Over the next several weeks the Campaign
snowballed as more funds agreed not to purchase shares in the offering.
Some on Wall Street seemed to get the message. Mark Melcher, a leading analyst at
Prudential  Securities, and his colleague  Stephen  Soukup, issued a report assessing the
impact of the Campaign. Responding to some who called the IPO's opponents "economic
Luddites" who would have a "temporary" impact, they said that such a view was:
[D]ead  wrong..,  this is,  as the  song goes,  the  start  of something big ....
[W]hen the dust settles on this dispute, the gurus of international investment
banking will find that their jobs have been made permanently more difficult by
the appearance  of a new  social  investment category  that has been  declared
taboo  by some of their largest  customers, and by the addition of a new and
highly complicated variable to their already crowded due-diligence agendas. 153
The high point of this Campaign, or perhaps the low point from the perspective of
PetroChina and Goldman Sachs, was a near physical confrontation between the bankers
and their oil company clients, on the one hand, and, on the other, the protestors at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York City in late March 2000. As part of its "road show," a standard
means of bringing company executives together with potential investors in advance of a
securities offering, Goldman had scheduled a luncheon at the hotel for potential investors
in the IPO. The AFL-CIO scheduled what it called a "counter road show" in the same
hotel.  Richard  Trumka, as its Secretary-Treasurer  the number two  leader of the  labor
federation, and a former head of the militant United Mine Workers Union, led the union
delegation. The trade unionists brought with them a Tibetan monk to talk about the oil
company's  impact  in  Tibet  and Harry  Wu,  the  well-known  survivor  of the  Laogai,
China's prison labor camps. The morning of the road show Goldman Sachs decided to
avoid the confrontation  and cancelled their luncheon at the St. Regis, setting up shop
instead a few blocks away at the Four Seasons.154 The labor-led force, meanwhile, held
their very visible press conference at the St. Regis.
152.  Telephone  interview with William  Patterson,  Director,  Office  of Investment,  AFL-CIO (Feb.  28,
2003); see also John Labate & Ho Swee Lin, China Oil IPO Fires Up Union Campaign, FIN. TIMES, Mar. 10,
2000, at 6.
153.  MARK L. MELCHER & STEPHEN R. SOUKUP, PETROCHINA DUSTUP: THE START OF SOMETHING BIG,
POTOMAC  GLOBAL EQUITY RESEARCH PERSPECTIVE,  PRUDENTIAL  SECURITIES  (Mar. 22, 2000), available at
http://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/index.jsp?section=papers&code=00-C_30at  (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
154.  Adam Shell, Goldman Moves Pitch for 1PO to Avoid  Clash, AFL-CIO Urges Investors to Avoid
PetroChina Stock, USA TODAY,  Mar. 23, 2000, at 2B; Michael M. Phillips, PetroChina' s IPO Roadshow
Opens, While Opposition Forces Rally Nearby, WALL ST. J., Mar. 23, 2000, at A14.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
A week after the near confrontation in New York, a Congressional group including
Republican Spencer Bachus, Democrat Dennis Kucinich, and Socialist Bernard Sanders,
addressed a letter to President Clinton echoing the Campaign's concern that the company
would use proceeds from the IPO to support environmentally-damaging  projects in Tibet
and the joint venture in  Sudan.155  These events took their toll. The company  and  its
bankers were forced to rethink the deal. The launch date was pushed back and, as reports
of investor disinterest or opposition came in, they scaled back the size of the offering,
from an initial goal of raising $10  billion to the final figure of $2.9 billion.156
IV. THE UNGER LETTER
The  impact  of  the  Campaign,  however,  did  not  stop  with  the  actual  IPO.
PetroChina's stock price sank below the stated offering price upon its  debut and took
months to recover.157 A headline in The New York Times said it all: "China's No. 1 Oil
Company Goes  Public  With Whimper."158  The  Chinese  government  absorbed  their
experience with this flagship offering and announced it would be delaying or shelving
altogether the planned offering of several other industrial companies.159 Meanwhile the
emboldened participants in the PetroChina Campaign tumed their attention to potential
regulatory and institutional reform.
Responding to complaints from fund managers at major investment banks, the AFL-
CIO began an effort to establish investment screens at the pension funds on whose boards
they  sat.160 The fund managers claimed they had been "blindsided"  by the Campaign
and, fearing the loss of management  fees, said they would be happy to implement the
approach  of the Campaign if given  clear guidance by pension  fund trustees. The most
significant and successful effort came at CalPERS, the giant public employee retirement
fund  for California  state employees.  After months of research and lobbying,  the labor
trustees on the CalPERS board led by Sean Harrigan, a vice president of the United Food
and  Commercial  Workers  union  and  now  president  of  CalPERS,  and  joined  by
sympathetic  public  officials  such  as  Phil Angelides,  California's  state  treasurer,  and
Willie Brown, San Francisco mayor and a gubernatorial appointee to the board, proposed
and won the adoption of a new policy governing the fund's equity investments in the so-
called "emerging market" countries, including China.
155.  Letter to President Clinton (Mar. 31, 2000),
available at http://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/index.jsp?section=papers&code=00-C_33at  (last  visited
Sept. 17, 2003).
156.  See supra text accompanying notes 121-123.
157.  Ho Swee Lin, PetroChinaS hares PlungeA fter Float, FIN. TIMES, Apr. 8, 2000, at 8.
158.  Mark Landler, China's No. 1 Oil Company Goes Public With Whimper, N.Y. TIMES, Apr. 8, 2000, at
C2.
159.  Ho Swee Lin, Poor Investor Response Forces China to Delay Two Listings, FIN. TIMES, Apr. 1, 2000,
at 17. In late 2000, an offering of stock by a second Chinese oil company, Sinopec, was made and ran into
similar political opposition. Its shares trade down significantly from their offering price. Roger W. Robinson,
International Security Dimension of Portfolio Management,  Remarks at the Investor Responsibility Research
Center, Inc. Conference (Oct. 26, 2001). One report suggested that China had planned an additional 120 stock
offerings  on the international capital  markets.  Those ambitious plans, if genuinely  intended, were quietly
withdrawn. Mark Landler, Stakes in China Suddenly Seem Less Appealing,N  .Y. TIMES, Mar. 31, 2000, at Cl.
160.  The discussion that follows is based on contemporary interviews with William Patterson, Director of
the Office of Investment at the AFL-CIO, a leading participant in the PetroChina Campaign.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
The new CalPERS  policy required the  $147  billion  fund's staff to  begin active
management of its "emerging market" equity investments and to hire new fund managers
with an active, as opposed to passive or indexed, investment approach. The trustees also
approved  a list  of "investibility  screens"  aimed at shaping the Fund's investments  in
emerging markets. According to CalPERS,
the screens outline financial and economic factors, and three additional factors
that include transparency,  political stability and prohibitions on abusive labor
practices. Managers  will [now] be selected based on their ability to invest in
emerging markets  and adherence  to  the Global  Sullivan  Principles  and the
International  Labor Organization's Declaration on Fundamental Principles and
Rights at Work.161
The  substance  of the  new  CalPERS  policy reflected  the  same  issues  raised  by the
PetroChina Campaign and,  in fact,  many of the individuals involved in the Campaign
took part in the effort to shape and implement the new CalPERS policy.
The impact of the new policy was soon felt when CalPERS announced that it would
suspend future equity investments  in several  countries,  including Indonesia, Thailand,
Malaysia, and the Philippines. At the same time the fund announced it would open the
door  to  new  investment  in  Poland  and  Hungary  due  to  improvements  in  those
countries.162 The announcement sent share prices in several Asian markets tumbling and
set off an intense round of negotiations as those countries attempted to make changes in
domestic policy in order to win back CalPERS investments.163 Months  of lobbying by
the  Philippine  government  convinced  CalPERS  to  reverse  its  position  against  equity
investments there. The fund agreed to back a new investment fund in Thailand sponsored
by a private investment group and the International Finance Corporation (IFC), an arm of
the World Bank, but, so far, none of the committed capital has been invested. The fund
will  "only make  investments  in companies  that agree to  comply with Government of
Thailand  and  IFC  environmental  and  social  policies,  including  high  standards  of
corporate  governance  and transparency."'164 A dialogue between CalPERS and  senior
Thai government officials is underway, and the implementation of domestic reforms there
may open the door to future investment. 165 A similar policy is being considered by the
New York City retirement system and the State of Connecticut public employees fund. 166
161.  Press Release, CalPERS, CaIPERS Board Takes Action on Investment and Other Measures (Nov. 15,
2000), available at http://www.calpers.org/whatsnew/press/2000/1115a.htm  (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
162.  Press Release, CalPERS, CalPERS Adopts New Model for Investing in Emerging Markets (Feb. 20,
2002), availablea t http://www.calpers.org/whatsnew/press/2002/0220a.htm  (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
163.  Bruce  Einhorn,  Will CaIPERS Kill Asia's Rally, Bus.  WK.,  Feb. 25,  2002  ("Thailand's  market
dropped  6.7%... after  the  CalPERS  news  hit.  The  Philippines  and  Malaysia  fell  3.9%  and  1.7%,
respectively...."); Carolina Braunschweig, LPs Carry Their Weight Beyond Venture Capital, BUYOUTS,  Sept.
9, 2002 (Philippines and Thailand "sent high-level delegations to Sacramento to ask CalPERS to reconsider its
decision.").
164.  Press Release, CalPERS,  CalPERS Invests  $75 million in Thailand Equity Fund (Oct. 29,  2001),
availablea t http://www.calpers.org/whatsnew/press/2001/1029a.htm  (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
165.  William Barnes, Can Thailand Win Back Calpers?,F IN. TIMES, June 11, 2002, at 46.
166.  Robert Collier, State Employees' Pension Fund Flexes Its Muscle Around the World, SAN FRANCISCO
CHRON., July 21,  2002, at A12. CalPERS recently reaffirmed their approach to the EMC screens. Telephone
Interview with William Patterson, Director of Office of Investment, AFL-CIO (Feb. 28,  2003) (on file with
author).The Journal of CorporationL aw [Fall
A broader political campaign was underway as well. The AFL-CIO and others in the
loosely  organized  "PetroChina  Coalition"  argued  that  disclosure  documents  filed  by
PetroChina and Goldman Sachs with the SEC all but ignored the risks highlighted by the
Campaign.  Responding  to  these  concerns,  a  Congressionally-created  United  States
Commission  on International  Religious Freedom  issued  a report  in May  of 2000 that
called for greater disclosure by PetroChina, especially with respect to the use of proceeds
from the IPO to pay off parent company CNPC debt. "[M]illions  of those dollars from
CNPC's  sale  of PetroChina  shares  may  well  end up benefiting"  the joint venture  in
Sudan. 167 The Commission called on the SEC to "be especially careful to investigate the
adequacy and reliability of representations made in any filings related to the recent sale
by CNPC and PetroChina of PetroChina shares."168
This  discussion  led, in turn, to pressure  for legislative  or other regulatory reform
with respect to disclosure by foreign corporations  that attempt to issue securities in the
U.S.  capital  markets.  In  March  of 2001,  Republican  Congressman  Frank  Wolf, of
Virginia, addressed a letter to Laura Unger, who was then serving as Acting Chairman of
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  following  the  departure  of longtime  SEC
Chairman Arthur Levitt.169 Congressman Wolf noted the role that PetroChina's parent
company  CNPC  played  "in providing  the  Government  of Sudan  with  unprecedented
resources  to  carry  out  its  war and  atrocities  against  Southern  Sudan"  and contended
"more  people  are  suffering  and have  died  because  of the PetroChina  listing."170  He
argued that the purchase of shares in the offering might have violated a 1997 Executive
Order  that  imposed  "comprehensive  economic  sanctions  on  Sudan."171  He  urged
Chairman Unger "to vigorously investigate this matter and take appropriate action"  and
argued that the apparent violation of the Executive Order "offers grounds for de-listing
PetroChina from the NYSE [the New York Stock Exchange].' 172 He sent nearly identical
letters to Secretary of the Treasury Paul O'Neil and Chairman of the New York Stock
Exchange Richard Grasso.  He followed up the  letter with a direct meeting with Unger
and a second letter on April 2, 2001.
Chairman Unger replied  to the Wolf letters and  meeting on May  8, 2001  with a
detailed five-page letter and the  submission of a memorandum by David B.H. Martin,
then Director of the  Division of Corporate  Finance of the SEC.173  The Division has
major responsibility  for reviewing  and assessing  the disclosure  provided by issuers of
securities on a U.S. securities exchange, including the New York Stock Exchange where
PetroChina had listed its securities. 174 The Unger Letter detailed the actions that the SEC
167.  Report of the United States Comm. on InternationalR eligious Freedom, May 1,2 000, at 3.
168.  Id. at5.
169.  Letter to Ms.  Laura Unger, Acting Chairman of Securities and  Exchange Commission, from Frank
Wolf, Member of Congress (Mar. 8, 2001),
available at http://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/index.jsp?section=papers&code=01-F_20  (last visited Sept.
17, 2003).
170.  Id.
171.  Id.
172.  Id.
173.  See id.; Memorandum from  David B.H.  Martin to Acting Chairman  Laura Unger (May  8,  2001)
[hereinafter Martin Memorandum].
174.  American  investors  in  PetroChina  would  purchase  "American  depositary  shares,"  or  ADS's,
"[s]ecurities  representing an ownership interest in a foreign company's common stock." MODERN DICTIONARY2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
had taken in response to the Wolf inquiries and outlined several initiatives it planned to
undertake  in the near  future.  The  Chairman  and  staff of the  SEC met or spoke  with
representatives of several of the organizations included in the PetroChina Campaign or
knowledgeable  about  the  offering,  including the  Center  for Security  Policy,  the U.S.
Commission  on International  Religious  Freedom,  the U.S.  State Department,  and the
Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).175 In the discussions
with other federal agencies, the SEC "raised the possibility of interagency cooperation on
176
Sudan."
The Chairman  met with Directors  of each  of the  SEC's major divisions  and she
stated that "[t]hey  are sensitized to this issue and will be looking for creative ways to
enhance investors' access to material information about foreign investment in Sudan and
its impact on the human rights situation there."'177 As suggested in the next section, this
commitment  is the  crucial  step  taken by the  Unger  Letter, reinforced  by the  several
initiatives promised by the Chairman. These include:  a proposed  rulemaking to require
electronic filing by foreign companies who register their securities with the SEC; a new
requirement that the SEC will end selective review of filings by certain foreign issuers
and instead "review all registration statements  filed by foreign companies which reflect
material  business  dealings  with  governments  or  countries  subject  to  U.S.  economic
sanctions"; a requirement of "enhanced disclosure" in securities filings by foreign issuers
doing business in sanctioned countries; a commitment to bring to the attention of OFAC
any  disclosure  in  registration  statements  filed  by  foreign  companies  which  "reflect
material dealings" with countries subject to sanctions; and support for the "formation of
an interagency working group on Sudan."178
V. SOME INITIAL ARGUMENTS
Whether  or  not  the  Unger  Letter  was  a  "bombshell,"  as  the  Financial Times
suggested, its release nonetheless certainly hit a nerve. It seemed to confirm the worst
fears of leading financial figures like Federal  Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, who
quickly denounced efforts to attach political criteria to disclosure when given a chance in
testimony  to  the  Senate  Banking  Committee  a  few  weeks  after  the  release  of the
Letter.179 His opportunity to begin a counter-attack on the PetroChina Campaign came
when asked a very friendly question by then Chairman of the Committee, Senator Phil
Gramm,  Republican  of Texas,  in  reference  to  proposed  legislation  that  would  limit
China's ability to raise capital in the U.S. capital markets. Gramm noted:
Mr. Chairman  [referring to Greenspan], as you're aware, we have spent years
battling the  effort  by  [the]  American  government  to  use trade as a tool  of
foreign policy ....  And except for those pariah states, where we have virtually
FOR THE LEGAL PROFESSION (3d ed. 2001), available at http://www.lexis.com (last modified Nov. 2, 2003). In
the case of the PetroChina IPO, the Bank of New York would act as the depositary for the ADS's, each of
which would represent 100 underlying shares in PetroChina. PetroChina Prospectus, supra note 21,  at 5, 19.
175.  OFAC is responsible for administering the sanctions on Sudan. See supra note 123.
176.  Unger Letter, supra note 2, at 1-2.
177.  Id. at 2 (emphasis added).
178.  Id. at 2-4.
179.  Greenspan, supra note 3.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
a state of war...  we have gotten away from using economic trade as a tool of
foreign policy. We now have a new proposal ...  that seeks for the first time to
use  access  to  our  banking  system  as  an  instrument  of American  foreign
policy ....  [These]  tools that are being used represent,  in my opinion, a very
real threat to our prosperity ....  180
The  Chairman  of the  Federal  Reserve  embraced  the  concerns  of  Senator  Gramm
wholeheartedly:
Mr.  Chairman,  I certainly agree  with the  comments  you  have  made,  and I
clearly understand the motives underlying Senator [Fred] Thompson's bringing
this  amendment  forward ....  [I]t's  the  openness  and  the  lack  of political
pressures within the [American  financial]  system which has made  it such an
effective  component  of our  economy  and,  indeed,  has  drawn  foreigners
generally to the American  markets  for financing as being the most efficient
place where they can in many cases raise funds ....  [T]o the extent that we
block foreigners from investing, from raising funds in the United  States, we
probably undercut the viability of our own system ....  I am not even sure how
such a law would be effectively implemented ....  [I]f we were to block China
or anybody else for that matter from borrowing in the United States, they could
very  readily  borrow  in  London  and  be  financed  [there]  by  American
investors ....  And therefore I must say, Mr. Chairman, I join in your concerns
about that amendment and I trust it would not move forward ....  181
Chairman Greenspan's comments pose a serious challenge for proponents of human
rights and other related "social"  or "political" disclosure through the capital markets. Is
there really a debilitating paradox at work here,  as Greenspan suggests? Do  efforts to
advance the international human rights agenda through the capital markets have the effect
of destroying the very functioning of those capital  markets? Traditional approaches  to
securities  regulation  provide  a  useful  but,  in the  end,  only  partial  response  to  this
question. A closer look at recent changes in the structure of the global capital markets,
and in the political responses to the globalization process that underlies those structural
changes,  provides a useful supplement to our understanding.  This Part reviews each of
these three in turn and suggests both their value and their limitations.
A.  The TraditionalS ecurities Law Approach
The core principle behind capital market regulation in the United States, and many
other leading  economies, particularly the  United Kingdom, is quite straightforward.182
No security can be offered or sold in the United States, unless the transaction is registered
with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  or  an  exemption  to  that registration
180.  The Federal Reserve's Second Monetary Policy Report for 2000: Hearing Before the Senate Comm. on
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, 106TH CONG. 12 (2000) (statement of Sen. Phil Gramm, Chairman (R-
TX)).
181.  Greenspan, supra note 3. Senator Gramm was so pleased with the response of Chairman Greenspan
that he released a press release the same day headed "Gramm, Greenspan Share Concerns About Limits on
China's Access to U.S. Capital."  Press Release, Senate Banking Committee, Jul. 20, 2000.
182.  See Securities Act  of 1933  (codified  as amended  at  15 U.S.C.S.  § 77a  (2003));  and  Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C.S. § 78a (2003)).2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
requirement is available.  If a transaction is to be registered, then the seller of the security
must provide  adequate  disclosure of all material  information  about the issuer and the
security  to potential purchasers. Even in transactions  where the seller has an available
exemption, disclosure that is almost the equivalent of that provided in registered offerings
will  occur  because  of demand  from  potential  buyers.  It  is  thought  disclosure,  like
sunshine,  is "the best of disinfectants." 183 The basic disclosure obligations were put in
place in the 1930s in response to a major capital shock that brought the U.S. economy to
a standstill.  Rampant  conflicts  of interest  and obscure  and  overly complex  financial
schemes  were  found to  pervade  the  securities  industry.184  While  the New  Deal Era
architects of the new regime had much more ambitious plans for restructuring of the U.S.
financial and corporate system, the disclosure requirements were their longest lasting and
perhaps most significant reform. 185
A key word in this basic disclosure framework  is the concept of materiality, which
has been the subject of agency interpretation and judicial pronouncement ever since the
passage of the original securities acts. And at one level the entire debate about whether or
not human rights concerns belong inside the capital markets can be explored within the
framework of the concept of materiality. Understandably, given the mandate of the SEC,
that is the way in which the Unger Letter frames the question. Unger notes that as a result
of the campaign against the PetroChina IPO, the SEC had become "sensitized"  to issues
involving human rights and the capital markets. She stated that the Commission and its
staff would  be  "looking  for  creative  ways  to  enhance  investors'  access  to  material
information" about issuers who access the U.S. capital markets and have investments in
countries  like  the  Sudan-where  PetroChina's  parent  company  had  significant
operations-and the impact of such investments on human rights. 186
A focus  on  materiality  originally  arose  in the  securities  law regime  because  of
important structural changes that were taking place in the forms of corporate organization
and in the financial markets. 187 As economic activity became more complex and grew in
183.  Louis D. BRANDEIS, OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY AND How BANKERS USE IT 62 (1933).  Although this
requirement is simple enough, the content of that disclosure is outlined in a complex set of rules and regulations
issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
184.  See JOEL SELIGMAN,  THE TRANSFORMATION  OF WALL  STREET 29 (1982)  (citing  1933 inaugural
address of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt that Senate investigation of Wall Street led to the conclusion
that the "[p]ractices  of the unscrupulous money changers stand indicted in the court of public opinion, rejected
by the hearts and minds of men").
185.  Id. Under the leadership of SEC Chairman William 0. Douglas, significant changes in bankruptcy law
(the Chapman Act of 1938) and the structure of the utility industry (the Public Utility Holding Company Act of
1940) were made. Douglas and other members of Roosevelt's "Brain Trust," actually hoped to make more far-
reaching changes that ran into resistance from Wall Street and the more limited vision of FDR himself. Id. at
40-41. At one point, for example, Justice Douglas had been in favor of "public" directors serving on the boards
of major corporations, a move he believed the SEC had the power to impose. See Roberta S. Karmel,  The
Future of Corporate Governance Listing Requirements, 54 SMU L. REV. 325 (2001).  However, as Karmel
concludes, "[t]he views of Justice Douglas remain controversial. The more common view is that the Securities
Act is a full disclosure, rather than a merit, statute and the SEC does not have the power to regulate corporate
governance." Id. at 337. In the wake of the Sarbanes-Oxley reforms put in place in the post-Enron era, that
widely accepted conclusion is undergoing some, though not major, erosion.
186.  See supra text and accompanying notes 157-178.
187.  There exists important literature on industrial organization that receives too little attention in legal
scholarship on corporations. See SCOTT R. BOWMAN, THE MODERN CORPORATION AND AMERICAN POLITICALThe Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
scale and scope in the early part of the twentieth century, entrepreneurs were increasingly
forced to widen their search for capital beyond family structures. The corporate form of
economic organization became dominant along with its central structural characteristic-
the separation of ownership and control-which was described so vividly in the landmark
study by Berle and Means, written in the wake of the 1929 Crash.188 Berle  and Means
were  in a sense  frightened by the emergence  of a separation between  ownership and
control  of  the  modem  corporation,  between  a  dispersed  shareholder  base  and  a
centralized  managerial  group,  because  of  the  implications  that  a  concentration  of
economic power in small groups of insiders had for a democracy. This structure was both
a solution to an emerging problem-the increasing complexity of modem industry-and
a  cause  of a new  set  of problems,  namely problems  of governance  within  the new
framework and between this new corporate world and the surrounding polity. 189
Modem  securities  regulation  helped  to  solve  the  new  problems  by providing
shareholders  a  consistent  and  reliable  information  package  in  the  form  of regular
disclosure by publicly traded corporations and disclosure about securities offerings made
by corporations. The concept of materiality-understood to mean all the information that
a reasonable  investor requires to make an informed investment decision 90--lies at the
heart of this disclosure regime. It is widely believed that the requirement that companies
provide material information  on a regular basis to shareholders and potential  investors
helps to close the gap between owners and managers,  or, in the language of "law  and
economics," helps lower the costs associated with the principal-agent problem created by
the separation of ownership and control.191
It should not seem like too big a step for the SEC to take when it acknowledges that
disclosure about potential human rights violations by a corporation, or associated with a
THOUGHT: LAW, POWER, AND IDEOLOGY (1996); WILLIAM G. ROY, SOCIALIZING CAPITAL: THE RISE OF THE
LARGE INDUSTRIAL CORPORATION IN AMERICA (1997); MARTIN J. SKLAR, THE CORPORATE RECONSTRUCTION
OF AMERICAN CAPITALISM,  1890-1916: THE MARKET, THE LAW AND POLITICS (1988); and MAURICE ZEITLIN,
THE LARGE CORPORATION  AND CONTEMPORARY CLASSES (1989). An important exception to my contention
that this literature  remains largely outside of legal scholarship  is OLIVER E. WILLIAMSON, THE ECONOMIC
INSTITUTIONS OF CAPITALISM: FIRMS, MARKETS, RELATIONAL CONTRACTING (1985), who relied heavily in his
transaction cost theory of the corporation and its governance on the work of ALFRED CHANDLER, THE VISIBLE
HAND: THE MANAGERIAL REVOLUTION IN AMERICAN BUSINESS (1977).
188.  ADOLF A. BERLE & GARDINER C. MEANS, THE MODERN CORPORATION AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
(1932) [hereinafter BERLE & MEANS].
189.  The Berle-Means thesis has been viewed as a foundation for both what might be called the "social
protection" framework (probably most important to Berle and Means themselves) that animated securities law
analysis in the New Deal, and much of the Keynesian era, but also for the "agency cost" perspectives of law and
economics thinking that has dominated the securities law field for the past two decades. Whereas Berle and
Means saw the problem as one of using law to shape the behavior of managers now in "control" of the new
powerful monopolistic, post-private property industrial groups to enhance the larger "community" interest, the
"law and economics"  school attempted to use the concept of "agency" costs to mount a market driven counter-
revolution against what they see as the potential for opportunistic managerial behavior in firms that are still
living in a world of private property. See BERLE & MEANS, supra note 188, at 351, 356; Adolf A. Berle, High
Finance: Master or Servant, 23 YALE L.J. 43 (1933), cited in SELIGMAN, supra note 184; Michael C. Jensen &
William H. Meckling, The Theory of the Firm: ManagerialB ehavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure, 3
J. FIN. ECON. 305 (1986). A recent appraisal of both approaches is considered in William W. Bratton, Berle and
Means Reconsidered at the Century's Turn, 26 J. CORP. L. 737 (2001).
190.  TSC Indus. v. Northway, Inc., 426 U.S. 438, 449 (1976); see infra text accompanying note 198.
191.  Jensen & Meckling, supra note 189.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
corporation's operations, could be considered material  to a potential investor. The SEC
already  requires  companies  to  disclose  details  about  their  environmental  liabilities,
potential problems related to intellectual property, and relationships with employees. The
SEC long ago  agreed to  increase  disclosure  of so-called  "soft"  information,  such  as
projections  about  the  future  course  of a  company's  business  model,  even  making
available  a safe  harbor for forward-looking  statements. 192  In fact, the  triumph of the
"efficient  market  hypothesis"'193  would  appear  to  reinforce  the  requirement  that
progressive effort be made to expand the reach of disclosure requirements. Because the
hypothesis mandates that past, or hard, information is of little use to the evaluation of a
company's future prospects, the door was opened to the requirement that soft information
about the impact of future events be disclosed to the markets. 194 More recently, the SEC
signaled its interest in increasing the level of disclosure by companies of what are called
"intangibles,"  such  as  human capital  and intellectual property.195 The mandate of the
Unger Letter is entirely consistent with this approach.
Nonetheless,  in  addition  to  the  competitive  and other  concerns  raised  by  Alan
Greenspan,  some  commentators  worry  that  Chairman  Unger  opened  up  a  kind  of
Pandora's box. A recent Note in the HarvardL aw Review commented:
One observer has suggested that the Unger Letter will  'lead  to lobbying for
further measures by the SEC to demand additional disclosure on environmental
or broader human rights grounds.'  Indeed. Not to mention equal employment
opportunity, workplace and consumer safety, and any other political or social
concern implicated by  corporate behavior. If the  SEC  has  concluded  that
information  unrelated  to a firm's financial  performance  may nonetheless  be
material, then it has opened a door to all types of mandated disclosure.196
This  comment  reflects  a  disconcerting  misreading  of  current  securities  law
requirements  which,  as  noted  above,  mandate  a  wealth  of  complex  disclosure
requirements  that  already can or do include  much of what  the Note's  author worries
about.197 In addition, the comment seems to have been made in ignorance of the origins
192.  Safe Harbor Rule for Projections, Securities Act Release No. 6084, [1979 Transfer Binder] Fed. Sec.
L. Rep. (CCH) P82,117 (July 2,  1979) (adopting Exchange Act Rule 3b-6, 17 C.F.R. § 240.3b-6 (1986),  and
Securities Act Rule 175,  17 C.F.R. § 230.175 (1986)).
193.  See discussion supra note 121.
194.  See William J. Carney, Defining a Security: The Addition of a Market-OrientedC  ontextual Approach
to Investment Contract Analysis, 33  EMORY  L.J.  311,  340 (1984)  ("[I]nvestors  are only concerned  with
expected future earnings, inspection of information about future prospects might loom large as a major feature
of investor protection. It is in the nature of such statements that they are not fully verifiable.").
195.  SEC Chairman Harvey L. Pitt, Remarks Before the AICPA Governing Council (Oct. 22, 2001). Such
an effort has a good deal of support among business managers.  See Three Fourths of Portfolio Managers
Surveyed Find Pro Forma Reporting Useful, PR NEWSWIRE, Nov. 7, 2001 ("Sixty percent of managers want
more information about intangible assets, and six out of 10 want more detailed disclosures about internally
generated intangibles, such as the value of brand names, customer lists, among other items.").
196.  Should the SEC Expand, supra note 139, at 1434-35 (emphasis added).
197.  Imagine Johns Manville not disclosing the risks associated with asbestos litigation, or the Denny's
restaurant chain not disclosing to investors the progress of litigation related to charges of racial discrimination
in its restaurants. More recently, American multinational corporations have been found to be potentially liable
in American courts  for human  rights violations committed  in association with  their operations in  foreign
countries, thus highlighting the need recognized by the Unger Letter to enhance corporate disclosure related toThe Journalo  f CorporationL aw [Fall
of the Unger Letter in the PetroChina Campaign where, as this Article demonstrates, it
was not whether to disclose certain non-traditional risk factors (since PetroChina made
extensive  disclosures  of non-traditional  information)  but  how  to  disclose  them  in a
manner that  investors  found  meaningful.  As  the  Martin Memorandum  transmitted  to
Congressman  Wolf by  Chairman  Unger  notes,  "the  Supreme  Court  has  held  that
information  is material  if 'there  is substantial likelihood  that a reasonable  shareholder
would  consider  it important  in making  an  investment  decision.'  TSC Indus.  Inc.  v.
Northway,  Inc.,  426  U.S.  438,  449  (1976)."198  That  disclosure  about  human rights
violations or violations of U.S. economic sanctions are unusual or non-traditional is not
to be doubted. There  is little  basis, however,  to suggest that  that alone renders  such
disclosure non-material,e ven if one takes the traditional approach to materiality adopted
by the  SEC which "generally  focuses  on matters that  have affected,  or will  affect, a
company's profitability and financial outlook."199 Indeed, that is the grounding provided
by the SEC in the Martin Memorandum. Equally important in securities law, however, is
the meaningful nature of disclosure, something that is just as much, if not more, at issue
in securities law  since  the PetroChina Campaign. One court stated,  "[t]he  registration
process established under the [Securities] Act [of 1933] is designed to require disclosure
to investors in a meaningful manner of the material facts concerning securities which are
offered to members of the public."200
The fact that the HarvardL aw Review Note is grounded in a "law  and economics"
analysis may explain its limitations.201 The standard set of law and economics objections
to the established securities law regime include concern about federal as opposed to state
regulation of the financial markets, and stronger objections to the once widely accepted
norm that the market itself is not likely to  mandate such disclosure  if left to  its own
devices. These federalist and private ordering objections to the securities law regime do
raise important concerns and often highlight flaws in regulatory practice.202 Nonetheless,
such developments to investors. See discussion supra note 139.
198.  Martin Memorandum, supra note 173, at 2.
199.  Williams, supra note 139, at 1251 n.280, stating:
[R]ecognizing that investors invest primarily to obtain an economic return is not fundamentally
inconsistent with requiring expanded environmental disclosure, civil rights disclosure, and other
sorts of social  disclosure. Expanded  social disclosure is extremely useful for the investor qua
economic investor, because the information disclosed may portend future economic  conditions,
even if it is not 'economically material' at the time of disclosure.
SEC rules provide a catch-all that provides the Commission a great deal of flexibility in setting disclosure
requirements.  See  Rule 408,  Securities Act,  17 C.F.R.  § 230.408 (1988)  ("In  addition to the information
expressly required  to be included  in a  registration  statement, there  shall be  added  such further material
information, if any, as may be necessary to make the required statements, in the light of the circumstances under
which they are made, not misleading.").
200.  Sec. and Exch. Comm'n. v. Great Western Land & Dev., Inc., et al., 1965 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 9834 (D.
Ct. Ariz.) (emphasis added).  For a persuasive argument that expanded social disclosure can be mandated by the
SEC under proxy rules of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "1934 Act"), the companion statute to the
Securities  Act  of 1933, see Williams,  supra note  139, at 1207 ("[T]he  SEC has the authority to  require
expanded social disclosure under section 14(a)" of the 1934 Act.).
201.  On law and economics generally, see RICHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF THE LAW (1998);
in the context of corporate  finance, see FRANK H. EASTERBROOK  & DANIEL  R. FISCHEL,  THE ECONOMIC
STRUCTURE OF CORPORATE LAW (1991).
202.  On federalism, see EASTERBROOK  & FISCHEL, supra note  201; on private ordering, see DAVID D.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
these issues are not triggered in particular by the efforts to add human rights disclosure to
the regime. The decision about whether or not human rights disclosure is a good thing or
not seems a priori to the  discussion of what  institutional means  should be adopted  to
make  sure  the  goals  agreed  upon  are  reached.  Furthermore,  the  emergence  of the
PetroChina  Syndrome  reflects  a  change  in  the  nature  of the  global  economy.  The
institutions that have traditionally regulated economic activity must adapt to reflect those
changes. Traditional law and economics analysis provides only a partial explanation for
the  PetroChina  Syndrome,  and  thus  will  be  inadequate  to  the task  of mapping  an
institutional future for the global economy.
There is a further potential objection from law and economics, however, that might
be more appropriately raised by the evolution  in the disclosure regime indicated by the
Unger Letter. Opponents  of this  kind of disclosure  could  conceivably  argue  that the
requirements of the Letter amount to a regulatory taking203 if it were found that the new
disclosure regime was strict enough that it might either prevent companies from raising
capital  in the U.S. securities  markets-as  suggested  is indeed possible by the Lukoil
example2 4--or because  it might  force  companies  to  restructure  their  operations  in
significant ways in order to provide the markets with positive sounding disclosure. The
latter possibility assumes, of course, that companies will be reluctant to affirm that they
do  indeed  violate  international  human  rights  or  progressive  corporate  governance
standards. For example, one of the arguments raised by the oil industry is that it is forced
to operate in parts of the world where there are all sorts of bad actors. They have to go
where the oil is and deal with whomever controls it, thus some level of association with
human rights violations  seems almost inevitable.  There are problems with this view of
international  business activity and with the way  that oil companies use this argument.
There is, for example, an extensive and rapidly growing literature on socially responsible
business activity that undermines the cogency of this position from within the business
community itself.205 Nonetheless, one could imagine the development of a counter-attack
to the Unger Letter logic from business along these lines.206
FRIEDMAN, LAW'S ORDER: WHAT ECONOMICS HAS TO Do WITH LAW AND WHY IT MATTERS (2001).
203.  The core support for a doctrine that a regulation can be a "taking" is found in the U.S. Constitution:
"Nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation." U.S. CONST.  amend. V. The
Rosetta stone for strong versions of the principle of a regulatory taking is found in Justice Holmes' opinion for
the Court in Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon, 260 U.S. 393, 415 (1927)  ("The general rule at least is, that
while property may be regulated to a certain  extent, if regulation goes too far it will be  recognized as a
taking."); Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n. v. DeBenedictis, 480 U.S. 470, 502-03 (1987)  (Rehnquist, C.J.,
dissenting) (stating  "the  holding  in Pennsylvania  Coal...  has  for 65  years been the  foundation  of our
,regulatory takings' jurisprudence").
204.  See supra text accompanying notes 3-9.
205.  See Press  Release,  United Nations  Global  Compact, Global  Compact and  World  Bank Institute
Cooperate on CSR Program (Mar. 6, 2003), available at http://www.unglobalcompact.org/portal/Default.asp
(last visited Nov. 10, 2003) (describing corporate social responsibility program).
206.  Business groups  have made some headway  in extending the "regulatory takings"  concept to the
international  economic  arena under the protections offered by the North American  Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA). Article 1110, Chapter 11, of NAFTA states that:
No party may  directly or indirectly nationalize  or expropriate  an investment  of an investor of
another Party in its territory or take a measure tantamount to nationalization or expropriation of
such an investment ("expropriation"), except: (a) for a public purpose; (b) on a non-discriminatory
basis; (c) in accordance  with due process of law  and Article  1105(1);  and (d) on payment ofThe Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
There is a natural response to the potential takings complaint based in the analysis
suggested above regarding the expansion of the disclosure regime mandated by the Unger
Letter.207 I argued there that the commitment by Chairman Unger to look for "creative
ways to enhance investors'  access to material information" about human rights violations
was consistent with the general principles articulated for many years by the SEC with
respect to disclosure.208 There is, therefore, in the SEC's approach to disclosure, the kind
of "structural  habit"  that Holmes  suggested  placed  a limit  on  the application  of the
takings argument.209 As Robert Brauneis has written:
Holmes thought that the positive law of a jurisdiction could be described, not
just as an accidental aggregation of specific, unrelated rules, but as a body of
compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 through 6.
Canada-Mexico-United States: North American Free Trade Agreement, 32 I.L.M. 289 (1993); 32 I.L.M. 605,
641 (1993)  (emphasis added). Several companies have argued that environmental and other regulations amount
to "expropriation"  and on two occasions have been able to win either money damages through the dispute
resolution process established in NAFTA or force a favorable settlement on a member state. See Chart of
Chapter II Cases, Global Trade Watch, Public Citizen, available at http://www.citizen.org (last visited Nov. 2,
2003) (U.S. chemical company wins $13 million in dispute over Canadian regulation on gasoline additive; U.S.
firm wins $15.6  million in dispute over construction permit for toxic waste dump in Mexico). See also William
Greider, The Right and US Trade Law: Invalidating the  'h Century, THE NATION, Oct. 15, 2001, available at
20
http://www.thenation.com  (last  visited Nov. 2,  2003) ("Under  Chapter  11,  foreign  investors from  Canada,
Mexico, and the United States can sue a national government if their company's property assets, including the
intangible property of expected profits,  are damaged  by laws or regulations of virtually any kind.")  In a
situation similar to the discussion about disclosure here, in 1994 the cigarette manufacturer Philip Morris was
able to beat back efforts by the Canadian govemment to impose a "plain packaging" requirement for cigarettes
which would have removed terms like "light," "low tar" and "mild" from packaging. The company claimed the
measure  would have been tantamount to an expropriation  of its trademarks in violation of Art.  1110. The
Canadian government recently renewed its effort to impose "plain packaging" requirements and, once again,
Philip  Morris  is  opposing  them and  threatening  action  under  NAFTA.  Ronald  J.T.  Corbett,  Comment:
Protecting and Enforcing Intellectual Property Rights in Developing Countries, 35 INT'L. LAW.  1083 (2001);
Public Citizen, Philip Morris Warns Canadian Public Health Proposal Violates NAFTA, 2 Harmonization Alert
1 (Mar.-Apr. 2002).
207.  See supra text accompanying note 1.
208.  Unger Letter, supra note 2, at 2.
209.  In a late  19th century takings case, Holmes defended  half price fares on a privately run streetcar
system for children traveling to school against a charge of a "taking" by the streetcar company on the grounds
that to do otherwise would be to violate the deep "structural habit" represented by public support for education.
Holmes wrote:
[C]onstitutional  rights  like other  [sic],  are matters  of degree  and ... the great  constitutional
provisions for the protection of property are not to be pushed to a logical extreme, but must be
taken to permit the infliction of some fractional and relatively small losses without compensation,
for some at least of the purposes of wholesome legislation ....  Education is one of the purposes for
which what is called the police power may be exercised ....  Structural habits count for as much as
logic in drawing the line. And, to return to the taking of property, the aspect in which I am
considering the case, general taxation to maintain public schools is an appropriation of property to
a use in which the taxpayer may have no private interest, and, it may be, against his will. It has
been condemned by some theorists on that ground. Yet no one denies its constitutionality. People
are accustomed  to it and accept it without doubt.  The present requirement  is not different in
fundamental principle, although the tax is paid in kind and falls only on the class capable of paying
that kind of tax-a class of quasi public corporations specially subject to legislative control.
Interstate Consol. St. Ry. Co. v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 207 U.S. 79, 86-87 (1907)  (emphasis added;
citations omitted).2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
law that exhibited an internal structure, organized around a variety of principles
or paradigm cases. Those "structural habits" provided a basis for assessing how
much change in positive law a particular piece of legislation caused ....  The
"property" protected by the Constitution is not a theorist's ideal, but the actual,
established  practice  of a  particular  legal  tradition ....  [The  regulation  in
question]  must be evaluated in terms of how different  it is from established
practice ....  [Where] it "is not different in fundamental principle"-it does not
amount to so drastic a change as to require compensation.210
Brauneis argues that Holmes'  view was that only "radical,  discontinuous alterations" in
one's  property  rights  where  "change  was  measured  as  deviation  from  fundamental
principles, or structural habits, embedded in the organized body of standing positive law"
were deserving of constitutional protection.211
There is another deeper dimension to this argument that must be considered. The flip
side of a regulatory taking, particularly in a world of global capital flows, is "regulatory
arbitrage."212  This  occurs  where  corporations  take  advantage  of the  flexibility  and
liquidity of global capital markets to run around efforts by states to regulate  corporate
activity  in  the  public  interest.213  When  this  occurs  it  can  be  assumed  to  offend  a
particularly deep "structural habit." Normally this is thought of as a "race to the bottom"
as opposed to a "race to the top."214 Typically, those who normatively favor government
regulation  argue  that  issuers  will  try  to  lower  their  costs  by  issuing  securities,  or
chartering their corporation, in a jurisdiction with the  least onerous, and perhaps  least
socially  protective,  regulatory  schema. Thus  an overarching  regulatory  framework  is
210.  Brauneis, supra note 18, at 642-43 (citing Interstate Consol., 207 U.S. at 79).
211.  Id. at 701.
212.  John C. Coffee,  Jr., The Future as History: The Prospects for Global Convergence in Corporate
Governance and Its Implications, 93 Nw. U. L. REv. 641, 697 (1999)  (arguing that "accepting any significant
disparity in disclosure standards for one market creates an unstable environment in which political pressures are
likely to produce regulatory arbitrage-and the proverbial 'race to the bottom"').
213.  See Kellye Y. Testy, Comity and Cooperation: Securities Regulation in a Global Marketplace, 45
ALA.  L.  REv. 927,  929 (1994)  ("[C]onflicts  among national regulatory regimes may encourage  regulatory
arbitrage as well as ill will among and between nations."); see also Amir N. Licht, Regulatory Arbitrage for
Real: InternationalS ecurities Regulation in a World of InteractingS ecurities Markets, 38 VA. J. INT'L L. 563,
633 (1998)  ("[F]oreign listing becomes a medium through which undesired effects can be exported from one
country to another."); Roberta Romano, Empowering Investors: A Market Approach to Securities Regulation,
107 YALE L.J. 2359  (1998)  (advocating regulatory competition).  Licht argues  that financial arbitrage can
ameliorate the impact of regulatory arbitrage, because in an efficient market the price of the company's stock
will reflect the value that investors place on the company's choice or, in the case of a dual listing, its mix, of
regulatory regimes. In some sense, that is precisely what happened when PetroChina attempted its IPO. The
PetroChina Campaign was part of the process by which information about the company was integrated into the
market price-a price, as indicated, that the underwriters adjusted downward as poor investor reaction during
the road show accumulated.
214.  See Licht, supra note 213, at 635.
Virtually all the existing literature on international securities regulation is preoccupied with two
basic issues: the question of regulatory competition among national regulatory regimes, and the
related problem of extraterritorial application of such regimes (extraterritorial jurisdiction). At the
heart of the debate stands the likelihood of detrimental regulatory arbitrage-the so called 'race to
the bottom'-if issuers migrated to markets with lower-quality regulation. The alternatives to this
scenario are a beneficial 'race to the top' or to some middle-range  'optimum'. From these scenarios
different conclusions may be drawn about the need for regulatory intervention.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
necessary to prevent issuer arbitrage that slowly but surely eats away at socially desirable
standards. Meanwhile,  those who are more skeptical about the efficacy of government
intervention argue that, in a competitive market, prices will accurately reflect investors'
preferences  for a particular  regulatory  regime,  and  thus  an  efficient  market  for the
securities of a company can help police the regime choice. Thus, Amir Licht argues that
financial arbitrage  can  ameliorate  the  impact  of regulatory arbitrage  because  in  an
efficient market the  price of the company's  stock will reflect the value that investors
place  on the company's choice or, in the case of a dual listing, its mix, of regulatory
regimes.215 In some sense that is precisely what happened when PetroChina attempted its
IPO.  The PetroChina Campaign was part of the process by which information about the
company was integrated into the market price-a price, as indicated, that the underwriters
adjusted downward as poor investor reaction during the road show accumulated. Far from
undermining the argument  here about an expansion of the concept of materiality,  this
reinforces it.  Thus, the market has signaled the importance of the issues raised in the
PetroChina IPO and the Unger Letter reflects that signal.
But I am suggesting a different kind of problem. Issuers who wish to raise capital
may not  be  able to  assure  investors  of a high  enough return  on their  investment  to
overcome  the  concerns  raised  in  their  home  market,  where  the  normal  protections
available  to investors do  not exist. In such  a case, the issuer may attempt to partially
"expropriate"  the reputation value possessed by a highly regulated and efficient market,
such  as that of the United States, in order to raise capital at a lower price than would
otherwise be possible. Another way of stating the problem is to suggest that insiders may
be able to obscure informational  asymmetries that give them an advantage over outside
potential purchasers of the company's securities by hiding behind the positive veil that
listing in a well-established and highly-regulated market may offer. Some scholars appear
to address this problem by identifying a subset of issues associated with the general set of
issues called "international regulatory competition."216 The subset looks at the possibility
of "piggybacking" where issuers, as Licht points out, "may want to list their stocks on
foreign  markets  with a view  to improve their corporate  governance,  thereby  creating
shareholder value."217 Licht argues that while most commentators  conclude that this is
evidence of a "race to the top" with the consequence  of increases in shareholder value,
his own research  on Israeli  companies that list extraterritorially  in  the United States
provides evidence of a "race to the bottom," as  managers take advantage of a weaker
corporate governance regime in the United States.218
An issuer of securities in a wholly state-owned enterprise, however, could engage in
an  exceptional  form  of "managerial  opportunism"  in  order to  appropriate  the  value
215.  Id. at 633.
216.  Id.
217.  Amir N. Licht, Managerial Opportunism and Foreign Listing: Some Direct Evidence, 22 U. PA. J.
INT'L ECON. L. 325, 326 (2001).
218.  Id. at 326 (stating that "piggybacking  may also have a dark side in the sense that foreign  listing
transactions could be guided, inter alia, by managerial opportunism"); but see Roberta Romano, The Need for
Competition in International Securities Regulation, 2  THEORETICAL INQ.  L., Article  1, at para. 2 (2001),
available at http://www.bepress.com (last visited Nov. 20, 2003) ("[T]here is no evidence supporting the claim
that competition would result in a race to the bottom, with issuers choosing the lowest level of disclosure
possible.").2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
associated  with the  extraterritorial  listing.  This  risk of opportunism  seems  likely  to
increase when one considers an SOE in an undemocratic society. The clash of competing
interests of the multiple constituencies  found in the SOE's of post World War II  social
democratic Europe, for example, would help mitigate the risk of managerial opportunism
by greatly increasing the transparency and accountability of the offering process. But that
is  precisely  what  is  absent  in  countries  like  China  where  the regime  has  delayed
democratization  while attempting to undertake market reforms. The legitimating impact
of interest group pluralism, central to the structure of the post World War II democratic
states, is entirely absent in the Stalinist form of state ownership.219 Thus, what seems like
a "regulatory taking"-the imposition of a particular disclosure regime regarding human
rights-may be more properly understood as the only available  corrective for this new
form of regulatory arbitrage  and, therefore,  consistent with our established Holmesian
"structural habits."
PetroChina knew that it had no chance to raise billions of dollars on its domestic
Shanghai stock exchange.  The Chinese government places far greater limits on capital
liquidity than the United States or Europe, and institutional investors consider the level of
corruption  there  to be  intolerably  high.220  Thus,  not  surprisingly, the  quality  of the
corporations  that offer their shares only domestically in China is considered far worse
than those that are able to make international offerings. Hence, Chinese issuers suffer a
reputation  effect  or, rather,  they add,  perhaps  inappropriately,  to the  value  of their
reputations if they can figure out a way to list successfully overseas, ideally in New York
or London but  at least  in Hong Kong.  For years,  Chinese  mainland  companies  have
understood this problem and when seeking to raise their profile, and to raise significant
amounts of new capital, have listed shares on the Honk Kong exchange.
PetroChina was not only formed to step around its parent company's operations in
Sudan, but to attempt to sidestep  the very serious issues that undermine  the ability of
China's own domestic stock exchanges to attract significant capital investment. China's
new form of regulatory arbitrage was the equivalent  of a kind of "social dumping"221
when it attempted to  foist the securities  of its reorganized  SOEs on unwitting  foreign
investors,  who  would  otherwise  never  invest  directly  through  a  domestic  Chinese
exchange in the  same  company. As  discussed above, little reassurance  was offered to
U.S. investors that somehow the listing requirements of the New York Stock Exchange or
the rules and regulations that govem corporate behavior generally in the United States
219.  A substitute form of legitimization does take place in such regimes, as suggested at the outset of this
Article, but it is largely driven by ideology and the arbitrary use of power rather than the checks and balances of
an accountable institutional structure.
220.  Rahul Jacob, Graft in Asia on Rise, Says Business, FIN. TIMES, Mar. 13, 2003, at 9 (stating that "Graft
is endemic in China: according to the most conservative estimates, the magnitude of corruption ranges from 3 to
5 percent of GDP").
221.  See generally Catherine Barnard, Social Dumping and the Race to the Bottom: Some Lessons for the
European Union from Delaware?, 25  EUR.  L.  REV. 57 (2000)  (demonstrating  how competition  between
jurisdictions in a deregulated internal market lowers standards, inducing market participants to flock to the state
with the lowest social standards, thus leading to a race to the bottom); Mark Barenberg, Law and Labor in the
New Global Economy: Through the Lens of United States Federalism, 33 COLUM.  J.  TRANSNAT'L  L. 445
(1995)  ("The substantive legal standards implemented by federal authorities may permit social dumping in the
form of movements of capital either across the borders of geographic,  public institutions..,  or across the
boundaries of functional, private institutions ...".).The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
could actually be enforced against a company whose management would remain firmly in
the hands of the Chinese Communist Party.222
B. A Structural Approach
At the core of the transition to a world of global capital markets is a shift away from
commercial  banks  as the  most important  financial  intermediaries  to  a range  of new
financial institutions, including pension funds, mutual funds, university endowments, and
a new world of wealthy and sophisticated individual investors who provide funding for
the private equity world  of hedge  funds,  buyout groups, and venture capital. A  1996
study  published  by  the  American  Enterprise  Institute  documented  this  significant
development.223 As the study noted:
For  more  than  two  centuries  banks  in  the  United  States  were  the  main
repository  of  households  savings  and  the  primary  source  of  credit  for
businesses. They occupied the central role in the intermediation of credit. In the
1980s  and  1990s all that..,  changed.  Innovations  in financial  markets...
allowed  many  borrowers  to  bypass  banks  entirely,  and  newly  developed
nonbank  financial intermediaries..,  invaded  the traditional turf of banks by
taking  their customers  and undercutting  their profitability. During those two
decades banks [saw]  their share of traditional financial intermediation  steadily
eroded as non-bank financial intermediaries ...  provided better substitutes for
traditional  banking  services and  as innovations  in the  financial markets...
enabled business borrowers to directly access credit markets for their funds.224
This  is further evidenced by changes  in the macro-economy.  As  a percentage  of
personal  disposable  income,  U.S. savings  have dropped  steadily over  the last  twenty
years, from a post World War II high of 10.9%  in 1982 to a post-WW II low of 2.3% in
2001.225  Meanwhile  during  the  same  time  period  there  has  been  an  explosion  of
borrowing through  the capital markets. Credit market  borrowing by the domestic non-
financial sector of the economy grew explosively in the last twenty-five years from $194
billion per year in  1975  to  $2  trillion  in 2001.226  Growth of total credit market  debt
outstanding for the domestic  non-financial  sector mirrored  this expansion, rising from
approximately $2.3 billion in  1975 to nearly $20 trillion in 2001.227 This borrowing, of
course,  points  to  the  new  intermediaries,  the  financial  players  who  are  engaged  in
purchasing these debt instruments on behalf of the new creditors, namely pension funds
and investment companies. As Edwards notes, "[t]heir share of intermediary assets grew
from 20 percent in 1980 to almost 40 percent in 1994, and that growth shows no sign of
222.  See supra text accompanying notes 133-137.
223.  FRANKLIN R. EDWARDS, THE NEW FINANCE: REGULATION & FINANCIAL STABILITY (1996).
224.  Id. at 10.
225.  National Accounts Data, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, availablea t
http://www.bea.gov/bea/dnl .htm( last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
226.  Flow  of  Funds  Accounts  of the  United  States,  The  Federal  Reserve  Board,  available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/Z1/Current/annuals/al975-1984.pdf,  Release  date:  Sept.  9,  2003
[hereinafter Flow of Funds 09/09/03], and at http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/Z 1/Current/annuals/a1995-
2001.pdf, Release date: Dec. 5, 2002 [hereinafter Flow of Funds 12/05/02] (last visited Nov. 10, 2003).
227.  Flow of Funds 09/09/03, supra note 226, at 51; Flow of Funds 12/05/02, supra note 226, at 5 1.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
abating."228 Pension funds alone owned more than 32% of the outstanding value of U.S.
equities held by households in 2000.229
If pension funds and mutual funds, among others, are the key new financial players,
this fact has not been lost upon those who manage such  funds nor those who are  the
beneficiaries  of such  funds. Most importantly, one  of the central  institutions  of what
could be called  the  older, and perhaps now exhausted,  "Industrial Relations"  era, the
trade union movement, also plays a key role in this new "Capital Markets" era.230 Thus,
as noted above,  the AFL-CIO's affiliates  directly control pension funds with  financial
assets currently  valued  at some  $400  billion.  Indirectly,  as trustees  of plans jointly
sponsored with employers or the public sector, the labor movement oversees funds with
assets valued at approximately  $5 trillion. Under the new leadership of the AFL-CIO,
which took office in 1995, the labor movement has established, in its Washington, D.C.
headquarters,  a Department of Corporate Affairs and an Office of Investment, and has
sponsored the establishment of a non-profit entity called the Center for Working Capital.
These new organizations attempt to mobilize the financial resources found in the pension
fund  assets  of union  workforces  in  support  of the  labor  movement's  broad  goals,
including international labor standards and human rights, progressive forms of corporate
governance  and democratic  political change  in emerging  markets,  and other  forms  of
socially responsible investment, while maintaining the long term returns to the funds. In
addition the AFL-CIO is working on an international effort to promote a similar approach
by labor movements in other countries. The major international labor umbrella group, the
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions based in Brussels, is the sponsor of a
Global Task Force that coordinates cross-border campaigns in the capital markets.
While the PetroChina Campaign became the signature event of this new movement,
it is not the only example. Just prior to its intervention  in that effort-in late  1999 and
early 2000-the AFL-CIO responded to a call for assistance by the German trade union
movement in the battle which erupted  after a hostile takeover  bid was announced  by
Vodafone,  the  upstart  British  mobile  phone  company,  for  Mannesmann,  the  giant
century-old  German  industrial  concern.  In this Campaign,  a further  dimension of the
labor movement's leverage in the financial markets became clear. While union pension
funds owned only a small percentage of the shares of Mannesmann and, thus, could not
likely have a significant effect on the outcome  of the tender offer, the fund managers
hired by pension funds to manage their investments controlled on behalf of their various
clients some thirteen percent of the shares of Mannesmann.
In what has become the standard approach of the AFL-CIO in such campaigns, they
issued a report to managers of pension funds that argued against the takeover bid, linking
traditional  union  concerns  with  the  fiduciary  duty  of fund managers  and  trustees  to
protect the asset value of their beneficiaries.231 The report  was released publicly  and
228.  EDWARDS, supra note 223, at 16.
229.  Flow  of  Funds  Accounts  of the  United  States,  The  Federal  Reserve  Board,  available  at
http://www.federalreserve.gov//Pubs/Bulletin/2001/0701lead.pdf  (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).
230.  On this division of history between an Industrial Relations era and a Capital Markets era, see infra text
accompanying notes 267-275.
231.  OFFICE OF INVESTMENT,  AFL-CIO, THE VODAFONE HOSTILE BID FOR MANNESMANN:  THE WRONG
TRANSACTION FOR LONG-TERM INVESTORS, Nov. 22, 1999. The author drafted the initial version of this report.
See also Press Release, AFL-CIO, Statement by AFL-CIO President John Sweeney on Mannesmann TakeoverThe Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
brought to the attention of Wall Street analysts, many of whom, of course, work for the
same financial institutions as the fund managers of the major pension funds. The threat of
opposition to the bid was taken seriously enough by the Vodafone team that Vodafone
CEO Chris Gent made a strenuous effort to engage AFL-CIO President John Sweeney in
discussions about the bid. When Sweeney refused to engage in such discussions without
the participation of German union leaders, Gent made several written public statements
reassuring the German work force that the takeover bid would not disturb existing labor-
management relations. In the final days of the acquisition, Gent finally entered into face-
to-face  negotiations with the German union leadership-something he had thought  he
could  avoid  and  that  is  indeed  relatively  rare  in  the  mergers  and  acquisitions
environment.
A more recent  and ongoing  example  is  the  international  campaign  by the labor
movement  to support efforts to restore democracy in Burma, which has been ruled by a
brutal military dictatorship for several decades.  Labor has joined with a wide range  of
non-governmental  organizations  to oppose companies that continue to invest in Burma.
Initially these efforts focused on Unocal, the California-based oil company, which built a
natural gas pipeline across Burma in a joint venture with the military. Widespread human
rights abuses are known to have accompanied this project, including forced labor to build
the project, forced relocations of villagers; and killings, beatings, and rapes of villagers
who resisted the project. The AFL-CIO introduced a shareholder resolution  calling on
Unocal to  respond to these  charges and to  set aside  a portion of its profits from the
pipeline in a trust fund for the future economic development of a democratic Burma.232
More  recently, as noted  above, the  AFL-CIO joined with British unions  to pressure
Premier Oil, a British company, which continues to operate  in Burma. In particular, the
AFL-CIO asked the American oil company, Amerada Hess, to either use its twenty-five
percent stake in Premier to pressure Premier to withdraw or else to sell all of its stake in
233
the company.
While many of these capital market campaigns  focus on intervening in the capital
markets  to  stop  a transaction  when  organized  labor believes  its  core  principles  are
implicated, the trade union movement is also developing a framework  for changing the
way  that Wall  Street and  corporations  think  about  investment  decisions.  It wants to
broaden  the  core  concepts  that  motivate  basic  investment  decisions-in  a sense,  to
endogenize human rights, democratic politics, and progressive corporate governance into
the concept of materiality, on the investor side, and into the concept of valuation on the
company side. An important example of this approach was the decision by CalPERS to
put in place  an "investment  screen"  to  control  the  way its fund  managers invest  its
members' assets in the equity markets of the so-called "emerging market countries." Now
those  investment  decisions  must  include  weighting  for  the  core  labor  standards
established by the International Labor Organization, which include the right to freedom
of association, the right to engage in collective bargaining, prohibitions against the use of
forced labor and abusive child labor, and against discrimination in employment. Thus, the
(Nov. 22, 1999). The following discussion is based on personal observations of the author
232.  Press  Release, AFL-CIO, Worker Shareholders Challenge Unocal's Plans For New Investment  in
Burma and Ask For Commitment to Global Labor Standards (May 20, 2002) (on file with author).
233.  Press Release, AFL-CIO Calls for Shareholder Vote on Amerada Hess' Acquisition of Triton (Aug. 2,
2001).2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
PetroChina  Campaign reflects  in part  a structural  shift  to  a new  environment  where
capital markets have important social and political effects. But that has not meant that the
older institutional players, such as organized labor, have been left behind.
C. A PoliticalA pproach
Because organized labor has lost the most as a result of the end of the Industrial
Relations era, it is particularly motivated to develop its role as an institutional investor in
the new  Capital Markets  era. But it is not just the labor movement that has begun to
notice the potential for advancing a political agenda through the capital markets. In that
earlier era, collective bargaining and union activity was understood to be a complement
to  traditional  parallel  political  institutions.  "Industrial  democracy"  on  the  shop  floor
stimulated workers'  interest in and understanding of broader democratic processes.234 In
addition, the exercise of freedom of speech and association in the workplace, once fought
for and won, was not  likely to be given up lightly in society at large.235  Thus, labor
unions have been seen as a key force in civil society that serve as a counterweight to the
concentration  of power in financial,  corporate, or government bodies.  Some used this
perspective  to  argue  that  unions  are  a  natural  component  of U.S.  politics  and  the
American  model  of  industrial  capitalism.  It  was  this  kind  of  approach  to  labor-
management  relations  that  made  industrial  relations  ideology  a  central  part  of U.S.
foreign  policy in the Cold War. There  is more than coincidence  in the fact that "Wild
Bill" Donovan, the founder of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the forerunner of
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), practiced labor law and that William Colby, head
of the Phoenix counterinsurgency program in Vietnam and later a Director of the CIA,
began his career after wartime service with the OSS as a labor lawyer first for Donovan's
own  Wall  Street  law  firm  and  then  for  the  National  Labor  Relations  Board  in
Washington, D.C.236 The OSS itself had a very active labor braich during World War II,
"created to work with Socialist trade union groups in the European underground. '237 The
CIA played a central role in attempting to use the American Industrial Relations system
and ideology as part of a wider effort to combat the success of Stalinism during the Cold
War. Colby, for example,  was directly involved  in such efforts in post-World War II
Italy.238  Other  leading  figures  of the  post-war  era  who  came  out  of the  Industrial
Relations era included:  Clark Kerr, President of the University of California during its
Free  Speech  Movement;  economists  John  Dunlop  and  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  at
Harvard; and George Schultz, first at the University of Chicago, and then Stanford, and
later the holder of four Cabinet level positions, including Secretary of Labor, State, and
Treasury.  These are  only intriguing  bits of anecdotal evidence,  of course, but there is
little  doubt  that  for  most of the Cold  War,  the United  States  professed  to  support
234.  See infra text accompanying notes 276-286.
235.  This can be thought of as analogous to the influence of World War II on the post war civil rights
movement. Having fought, yet again, on behalf of the United States in the war, black Americans came home to
the world of Jim Crow. This time, however, they joined with many in the labor movement that had been
established in the 1930s to break this country's system of de jure racism.
236.  WILLIAM COLBY & PETER FORBATH, HONORABLE MEN: MY LIFE IN THE CIA 62, 74-75 (1978).
237.  R.  HARRIS  SMITH,  OSS:  THE  SECRET  HISTORY  OF AMERICA'S  FIRST  CENTRAL  INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY 12 (1972).
238.  COLBY & FORBATH, HONORABLE MEN, supra note 236, at 108-40.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
collective bargaining and unionization as a vital bulwark against "totalitarianism."239
In the post-Cold War era of globalized capital markets, this particular dimension of
U.S. foreign policy and domestic legitimation has been undermined. Certainly this is one
of the factors that motivate labor's interest in advancing a capital markets strategy. The
Cold War era  foreign policy establishment,  however, has not simply disappeared  into
investment banks, business schools, or early retirement. While adherents of a neo-liberal
free trade ideology have been the dominant force in American foreign policy over the last
two decades or so, a group of "neo-conservatives" emerged from a pro-labor wing of the
Cold War to fight what was often, until September  11, a rear guard battle to promote a
foreign policy that  it viewed as vital to the narrower  national interests of the United
States.240 The idea of joining multilateral missions to stop "ethnic cleansing" in obscure
European  countries,  like  the  newly  recognized  states  of the  former  Yugoslavia,  or
genocide in Rwanda was not high on their list of priorities. In the first few months of the
Bush  Administration  it  looked as  if  this perspective  on foreign  policy was,  in fact,
gaining the  upper hand. The appointment of a foreign policy team linked to the Ford
Administration and the Cold War era (not to the era of globalization), the withdrawal of
the United States from the Kyoto environmental treaty, and the confrontation with China
over a downed spy plane, all hinted at the return of unilateralism defined by a vaguely
defined "national  interest" in contradistinction to the pure  globalization, market  ueber
alles view of many in the Clinton era.
Some  in  this  national  interest  layer  in  American  politics  saw  the  PetroChina
Campaign as a way to put itself back on the political map at a turning point in American
politics. Though  of secondary  importance relative  to the weight on the  AFL-CIO and
large institutional investors, an important force in the campaign against the IPO was led
by the  Center  for  Security  Policy,  a  Washington  think  tank  with  links  to  the  neo-
conservative  William  Casey  Institute,  headed  by  former  investment  banker  Roger
Robinson. This Center  forms the core  of a somewhat  broader political group that has
supported  some of the  Congressional  activism that  led to  the issuance  of the Unger
Letter,  including  ties  to  Congressman  Wolf and  Senator Brownback,  Republican  of
Kansas, and then Senator Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee, who have all been
active on religious freedom, China, and human rights issues.
Of course, the  literature  issued  by this wing of the PetroChina Campaign  rarely
mentioned  the  layoffs  of nearly  a  million  workers  that  would  follow  a  successful
restructuring  of PetroChina,  nor  the  absence  in China  of free  and independent  trade
unions to provide workers a voice in the shock therapy now being implemented by that
regime to its domestic economy. Instead their concern--one  that was indeed shared by
the labor movement-focused  on the denial of religious freedom and the use of forced
labor by the Chinese oil industry in Sudan.
Ironically,  while  the  national  interest  perspective  appears  to  have  made  some
headway in the Bush Administration, that national interest is, of course, in the process of
being radically redefined. And, ironically, one of the first beneficiaries of the new post-
239.  Today a dim echo of this approach lives on in the activities of the Congressionally-funded  National
Endowment for Democracy and the State Department's Advisory Committee on Labor Diplomacy.
240.  Since  9/11, the ascendancy  of the national interest/neo-conservative  wing  of the  foreign policy
establishment has been marked with the appointment of figures like Paul Wolfowitz, Elliott Abrams, Otto
Reich, and John Poindexter to key administration positions.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
9/11  war against  terrorism  was Sudan.  One  of the  promises  dangled  in front of the
Sudanese regime  in return  for some  kind of support for the anti-terror effort  was the
possibility  of lifting  the  sanctions  in  place  against  that  regime  for  its  human  rights
violations. Some in  the neo-conservative  national  interest camp are calling  foul. "The
Bush administration risks appearing craven where they too pretend that Sudan warrants a
clean  bill  of  political  health  based  on  Khartoum's  assistance  to  fight  terrorism,"
according to the Casey Institute's Roger Robinson.241
There  is,  of course, some reflection  of national interest  politics  in today's  labor
movement. Its heaviest concentration remains in parts of the international affairs wings of
the AFL-CIO.  But,  in  general,  the  Cold War  anti-communist  character  of the  labor
movement has disappeared. The effort of the Sweeney administration to establish a "new
internationalism"  as  the  basis  of an  independent  foreign  policy  for the  global  labor
movement has been successful within much of labor. This is the approach that animates
labor's campaigns on international  trade and finance  as seen in labor's presence at the
Seattle  WTO demonstrations  in  1999, and at  the annual  meetings of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank. While this movement waned somewhat in reaction
to  the  terrorist  attacks  on  September  11,  it  is  likely  to  be  a permanent  feature  of
international  politics.  The  recent  massive  demonstrations  against  the war  with  Iraq
indicate the persistent significance of an emerging independent world public opinion.242
In  addition  to  these  neo-liberal, national interest and  new  internationalist
perspectives,  there  is  also a mirror  image  to  the national  interest  approach  found  in
developing,  or so-called  "emerging  market"  countries.  While  having  obtained  some
additional  leverage  over  the  world  system because  of their  newfound  "comparative
advantage" (i.e., their ability to offer global corporations cheap labor),243 many of these
countries still find themselves locked out of key markets in the advanced countries and
far behind in key areas of economic growth, like high technology. In response, there has
emerged  in many  of these countries  what might be called a neo-mercantilism as they
negotiate  their way around the new institutions of the global economy.244 Examples of
this dynamic include the debates underway over the value of capital controls245 or the
right to produce cheaply drugs to fight AIDS in the developing world.246 The politics of
neo-mercantilism  is likely to be  a  source  of resistance  to  efforts  like the  PetroChina
Campaign, though domestic labor movements in some of these countries have welcomed
241.  Manimoli  Dinesh, Sudan Sanctions Renewal Draws Focus to Cooperation in US's Terrorism War,
OIL DAILY, Nov. 6, 2001, at 8.
242.  Patrick E. Tyler, A New Power in the Streets, N.Y. TIMES, Feb. 16, 2003, at AL
243.  Diamond, Bridging the Divide, supra note 10.
244.  See Marshall Auerback, Korea's Election Results: Another Decisive Turn Against Washington, INT'L
PERSP., available at http://www.PrudentBear.com (Dec.  24, 2002); Marshall Auerback, Cognitive Dissonance
and the  Washington Consensus, INT'L  PERSP.,  available at http://www.PrudentBear.com  (Jan.  8,  2002);
Marshall Auerback, Thailand's Election: More Signs Of Backlash Against The West, INT'L PERSP., availablea t
http://www.PrudentBear.com (Jan. 16, 2001).
245.  See Marshall Auerback, Capital Controls: The Counterattack Has Begun, INT'L PERSP., available at
http://www.PrudentBear.com  (Jan.  21,  2003) [hereinafter Auerback,  Capital Controls]; Marshall  Auerback,
Capital Controls: Malaysia Ends A Successful Experiment With No Fanfare, INT'L  PERSP.,  available at
http://www.PrudentBear.com (May 8, 2001).
246.  Mukdawan Sakboon, Aids Activists Step Up Drug-access Drive, THE NATION (THAILAND),  Mar. 7,
2003.The Journal of CorporationL aw [Fall
the new internationalist approach  of the AFL-CIO,  which represents a significant shift
from the Cold War era links to official U.S. foreign policy.
One can  delineate,  therefore,  four different political  camps in the post-Cold War
period:  neo-liberalism,  neo-mercantilism,  the  national  interest  grouping,  and  new
internationalism.  The  neo-liberal model  has  animated  the  core  of U.S.  international
economic policy in the Capital Markets  era and is the source of the strongest opposition
to  the  use of the  capital  markets  as an arena  to advance  human  rights.247 The neo-
mercantilists of the Third World are also likely to oppose such efforts though for their
own narrower interests, particularly  as a bargaining  chip to use inside the new global
institutions  like  the  WTO.  Many,  though  not  all,  in  the  national interest or  neo-
conservative  camp inside the United States welcomes the capital markets initiatives, but
have  a more  limited  agenda  defined  by  their real  focus  on  advancing  a particularly
hawkish  approach to U.S. foreign policy. Finally, there is what I believe is the central
motivating force behind the anti-globalization movement and the kind of capital markets
initiative  evidenced  in  the  PetroChina  Campaign-the  new  internationalism actively
promoted by the AFL-CIO and its sister organizations in the global labor movement, and
among its friends in environmental and human rights organizations.
VI. THE NEW ERA: FROM KEYNES TO FRIEDMAN
As I have suggested here, one could consider the recent turn in the SEC's behavior
towards  concern  about human  rights within  the  context  of theoretical  debates  about
materiality and the nature of our disclosure regime. Further, discussions of the new role
of capital markets, institutional  investors,  and of the different political camps that have
emerged  in  response  to  globalization  add  to  our  understanding  of the  PetroChina
Syndrome. But there is another theoretical framework that is perhaps even more helpful
in understanding  its potential long-term significance.  While the debate about corporate
governance  and  the  securities  law  regime  is  responsive  to  the  issues raised  by  the
separation of ownership and control, the same development in economic history-the rise
of the  large  vertically-integrated  multinational  corporation-created  another problem,
one  that  is analyzed  by Massimo  De Angelis  in his recently  published book entitled
Keynesianism, Social Conflict and PoliticalE conomy.248
De Angelis  describes a problem with which both John  Maynard Keynes  and the
Polish economist, Michal  Kalecki, Keynes'  contemporary, grappled. The emergence  of
the large  industrial manufacturing  concern required  the  creation  of a  large industrial
working  class, both to work in the new  factories, such as Henry Ford's massive River
Rouge complex which employed 120,000 workers in a single site, and to consume  the
products of this new industrial economy, such as the Model A cars that started rolling off
the Rouge assembly  line in the late  1920s. De Angelis  suggests Keynes  and Kalecki
understood that with this massive concentrated employment of industrial workers came a
new confidence among those workers that employers needed them. They could no longer
be pushed so easily into unemployment to serve as a "reserve army of labor" which had
undermined, for many  decades,  efforts to  form stable and effective  trade unions. This
247.  Alan Greenspan can be seen as a key representative of this perspective.
248.  MASsIMo  DE  ANGELIS,  KEYNESIANiSM,  SOCIAL  CONFLICT  AND  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  (2000)
[hereinafter DE ANGELIS].20031 The PetroChinaS yndrome
new awareness emboldened workers to push for wage increases and improved working
conditions, and was reflected in the strike waves that hit the American economy  in the
mid-1930s  and  throughout  World  War  II,  even  in  the  face  of difficult  economic
conditions. Thus, De Angelis notes "the  organizational and confrontational  maturity of
what was, following the Soviet revolution, Fordism and the Great Depression, a new kind
249
of working class."
Keynes and Kalecki, as economists, argued that this new era of social conflict gave
rise to a phenomenon  known  as "wage  stickiness"  or "wage  rigidity": the prospect  of
unemployment,  even  in  the  depths  of  the  Great  Depression,  no  longer  frightened
employees with jobs into lowering wage demands, thus interfering with the alleged self-
correcting role of markets.  De Angelis  stated that  "[a]ccording  to Keynes'  biographer
Skidelsky...  'the incomplete British recovery from the depression of 1920-1922 started
Keynes on the road to the Keynesian Revolution.'  This incomplete recovery had revealed
the persistence of unemployment and at the same time the rigidity of real wages."250 This
forced economists to grapple with a new world. The heritage of "Say's Law"--the world
of the nineteenth century where "market  forces" (i.e.  the reserve army of labor) would
drive down the price of labor until it was once again profitable for capitalists to re-hire
unemployed workers and hence end the Depression-had apparently been surpassed.251
As De Angelis argues,  "the  recognition  of unemployment  as a problem by  economic
theory (namely Keynesianism) originated out of the failure of downward movements of
the business cycle to provide the traditional  disciplinary device for both the employed
and unemployed labor force."252 Unemployment ceased to play its counter-cyclical  role
in lowering wages to allow employers to once again begin expanding investment.
A new institutional structure had to be built to deal with this problem. Without new
institutions, employers would lose control over the system of production and their motive
for investing in new production.253 This was not an idle threat. It had indeed happened in
one extreme instance. In 1917, the working class of Russia overthrew a weak capitalist
regime that only several months before had assumed power reluctantly after the ouster of
the Russian monarchy by a broad revolutionary movement. While that workers'  regime
was  later  itself  crushed  in  a  brutal  civil  war  as  a  new  bureaucratic  authoritarian
government rose to power under Stalin, the risk of Conceding to workers'  power was
clear to capitalist theoreticians  like Keynes:
Keynes'  revolution in economics can be understood as a reaction to working-
class struggles in Europe and general insurgency in other parts of the world. It
is the product of the change in the balance of forces between classes during the
struggles of the 1920s and 1930s and during the Second World War.254
Keynes,  in  fact,  personally  witnessed  a  dramatic  version  of these  events  when
249.  Id. at 6-7 (emphasis added).
250.  Id. at 17 (emphasis in original).
251.  Id. at 30.
252.  Id. at 6.
253.  Michal  Kalecki,  Political Aspects  of Full Employment,  in  1 COLLECTED  WORKS  OF  MICHAL
KALECKI--CAPITALISM: BusINESS CYCLES AND FULL EMPLOYMENT 351 (Jerzy Osiatyfiski ed., 1990), cited in
DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 4.
254.  DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 13-14.The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
Britain's government was nearly toppled by the General Strike of 1926. On the eve of the
Strike, Keynes admitted that "[t]he trade unions are strong enough to interfere  with the
free play of the forces of supply and demand, and public opinion...  supports the trade
unions  in their  main contention  that  coal-miners ought  not to be the victims  of cruel
economic  forces  which  they  never  put  in  motion."255  The  events  of  1926  had  a
particularly deep impact on Keynes'  re-thinking of the role of class power in economic
theory:
Repressive policies had been called [for by some] on the basis of the fact that
the strikers had broken  the law. "To  those who clamoured that  the General
Strike  was  illegal  and  stepped  outside  the  limits  of constitutional  action,
Keynes gave a short reply: 'That  may be so, but so what?."' The balance  of
forces has changed and [Keynes understood that] "legality must be adjusted to
256
fit the new situation."
Without  a  new  institutional  arrangement,  the  only  alternative  would  be  the kind  of
repression that was indeed taking place in the emerging Stalinist and fascist countries. As
Keynes admitted, "[i]t is only in a highly authoritarian society, where sudden, substantial,
all-round  changes  could  be  decreed  that  a flexible  wage-policy  could  function  with
success.  One can imagine it in operation in Italy, Germany or Russia, but not in France,
the United States or Great Britain."257
Thus,  a  central  institutional  outcome  of the  "Keynesian  Revolution"  was  the
emergence  of  the  industrial relations system  that  dominated  economic  life  in  the
advanced economies of the post-war world well into the late 1970s.258 At the heart of this
new structure  was what many  stylized as a "social  contract"  between employers  and
workers under government supervision (or even at times control) where wage increases
were granted over time in exchange  for productivity  increases. In some countries these
deals were, and remain, explicit (as in European and Japanese corporatism) or exalted (as
in the Stalinist regimes), while they remained only implicit in others (as in the collective
bargaining  systems  in  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom).  This  industrial
relations  system  promised  a relatively  equitable  distribution  of income,  stability  in
economic growth, and only moderate divergence  in growth patterns between countries.
De Angelis terms this solution to the "wage rigidity" problem identified by Keynes and
Kalecki as "the social microfoundations of Keynesianism."259
However, the system could not last forever. As early as the 1960s, it became clear
that firms were living on borrowed time, as De Angelis describes:
From the mid-1960s many basic economic indicators showed a turning point.
Investments  that were  flourishing  in  the  1950s  and  1960s turned  sour and
255.  JOHN MAYNARD  KEYNES,  Am I a Liberal?, in  IX THE  COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN MAYNARD
KEYNES, ESSAYS IN PERSUASION 305 (1972), cited in DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 20.
256.  Antonio Negri, Keynes and the Capitalist Theory of the State post-1929, in REVOLUTION RETRIEVED:
WRITINGS ON MARX, KEYNES,  CAPITALIST CRISIS AND NEW SOCIAL SUBJECTS 1967-83  19-20 (1988), cited in
DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 21.
257.  JOHN  MAYNARD  KEYNES,  THE GENERAL  THEORY  OF EMPLOYMENT  INTEREST AND  MONEY  269
(1936), cited in DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 29.
258.  DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 83.
259.  Id. at 6.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
worsened  after  the  1974  oil crisis.  Business  and manufacturing  investment
collapsed ....  Industrial  profit  rates  began  their  downturn  in  the  mid-
1960s ....  Inflation began to approach double  digits by the  late  1960s.  The
welfare  state  appeared  to  crumble  under weight  of increasing  deficits  and
exponential increase of the public debt. All these trends could be translated into
DM  [Deutschemarks],  lire, or pounds because the turning point was more or
less evident in all major capitalist countries ....  260
At the center of this crisis were the institutions,  such as collective bargaining, that
regulated labor-management relations. What had once been a boon to capitalist success,
the use of the industrial relations framework to regulate wages and productivity, became
an albatross. The industrial  relations system tended to lock in older technology due to
management's  attempts  to constrain  worker power  on the  shop floor  or management
reluctance to confront that power. This was linked to a second problem: the collective
bargaining  system was imposed from above to try and break the back of the idea that
workers had independent  power in a "full employment"  economy.261 Thus, the social
microfoundations  were political  too, and  the  imposition  of a political  system,  while
offering some newly found stability or equity to workers, also chafed at the level of the
rank and file worker. Productivity was thus under attack.
[I]f the "golden age" had seen an impressive increase in productivity growth,
the  subsequent  period  suffered  what  numerous  observers  have  called  the
"productivity slowdown." What is more important, productivity in most OECD
countries grew less than money wages, thus leading to inflationary pressures as
business tried to restore profit margins.262
Senator Edward Kennedy, a leading pro-labor Democrat, noted at the time:
[T]he  effect  that  worker  discontent  has  on  productivity.  The  National
Commission  on  Productivity  states  that  in  at  least  one  major  industry,
absenteeism increased by 50%, worker turnover by 70%, worker grievances by
38%...  and disciplinary lay-offs by 44% in a period of 5 years. How much
does that cost the economy in terms of low productivity?263
The  answer  appeared  to be  significant.  One contemporaneous  follower of the events
noted:
Absenteeism has important effects  on production  ....  The cost of all this to
management is enormous. For example in 1971, in the Oldsmobile Division of
GM alone, the cost of absenteeism (considering only fringe benefits) was about
$50 million. Turnover costs were another $29 million  ....  GM's labour costs
rose from 29.5%  of sales in 1962 to 33%  in 1972 ....  The firm's investment
260.  Id. at 143.
261.  Id. at 90 (noting that "the single most important achievement of the [collective bargaining] contract
from business' perspective was the establishment of a mechanism that took the control of production away from
workers").
262.  Id. at 143.
263.  Minutes of Senate Subcommittee on Employment, Manpower and Poverty (July 25,  1972), cited in
KEN WELLER, THE LORDSTOWN  STRUGGLE AND THE REAL CRISIS IN PRODUCTION  3-4 (1973)  [hereinafter
WELLER], available at http://www.geocities.com/cordobakaf/weller.html  (last visited Sept. 17, 2003).The Journal of CorporationL aw [Fall
per  worker  rose  from  $5,000  in  1950  to  $24,000  in  1969.  James  Roche,
Chairman of GM, commenting  on these  figures, said:  "tools  and technology
mean nothing if the worker is absent from his job" and went on to stress the
domino effect of absenteeism on co-workers, on quality and efficiency, and on
other GM plants with related production. "We must receive a fair day's work
for which we pay a fair day's pay ....2 64
As productivity  and profitability slowed in the late  1960s, employers began to use
the same institutional structure to ratchet up the pressure on workers. Bargaining became
tougher  and the  resolution  of grievances  through  negotiations  and arbitration  slower.
Some  employers  began  to  break  away  from  the  institutional  structure  to  engage  in
aggressive  union  busting  or  runaway  shops.  In  the  newly  formed  General  Motors
Assembly Division (GMAD), for example, management became particularly aggressive.
United  Auto Workers Union President  Leonard Woodcock called it "the roughest and
toughest in GM."265 At the Lordstown,  Ohio GMAD plant, there were  100 unresolved
grievances when the Division took over. That soon skyrocketed to 1400. Workers began
to  react.  Sabotage  of cars  became  frequent,  absenteeism  exploded,  and  informally
workers  began to leave  a certain percentage  of cars unfinished as they sped along the
assembly line. The workers'  protests became so apparent that they even caught the eye of
the national media when Time Magazine noted that at Lordstown, "autos regularly roll off
the line with slit upholstery,  scratched paint, dented bodies, bent gear-shift levers, cut
ignition wires, and loose or missing bolts. In some cars the trunk key is broken off right
in the lock, thereby jamming it."'266 The number of cars needing repairs before they left
the plant ran so high the plant was often forced to close for lack of space. A mini strike
wave occurred in the United  States, including a strike at  Lordstown267 and numerous
other auto plants and a wave of wildcat, or unofficial,  strikes in several industries. An
even more intense  strike wave hit much of Western and Eastern Europe. France nearly
descended  into civil  war  in  1968,  as  factory  occupations  spread  across  the country.
Meanwhile, to the south, Italy experienced its "Hot Autumn" led by rank and file workers
in 1969.  These battles were echoed in the Eastern Bloc where  only Soviet tanks could
suppress the Prague Spring of 1968, and in Poland where major strike waves took place
in  1970 and  1976  in the run-up to the emergence  of the Solidarity  Movement  in late
1980.
Partially in response to this unrest in the 1970s, De Angelis argues, the advanced
economies shifted gears and gutted the decades old Industrial Relations system. For De
Angelis, the archetypal figure of the twenty-five year period following World War II was
Keynes, but for the new era, Milton Friedman emerged  as the archetype.268 Friedman
promoted the idea of liberalized exchange  rates and, of course,  the expansion of free
market institutions. These ideas began to take hold, first in the Nixon Administration and
264.  WELLER, supra note 263, at 3 (citations omitted).
265.  Id. at 11.
266.  Id. at 12.
267.  See EMMA ROTHSCHILD,  PARADISE LOST: THE DECLINE OF THE AUTO-INDUSTRIAL  AGE  17 (1973)
(referring to the Lordstown strike as "the most famous contemporary example of worker alienation").
268.  DE ANGELIS,  supra note  248, at  144 ("Friedman's (1968)  presidential  address  to the American
Economic  Association...  represented the ...  undermining  of theoretical  support for demand  management
policies.").2003] The PetroChina Syndrome
later  more  aggressively  under  Presidents  Carter  and  Reagan.  The  U.S.  decision  to
suspend convertibility  of the dollar into gold in  1971  signaled  a break with  the older
institutional  framework.  Now,  increasingly,  employers  could  expand  their  operations
internationally  as market  institutions  were  spread  to  more  and  more  countries,  and
deregulation  of currency  trading  increased their operational  flexibility.269 These  steps
were  crucial  building  blocks  of the  phenomenon  now  called  "globalization."  They
heralded the arrival of a new disciplining force that could replace the Industrial Relations
system, and perhaps  solve the problem of declining  productivity  and profitability. No
longer did employers have to engage in collective deals or social contracts with workers
in order to trade wage  gains for productivity increases, nor did they have to engage in
pitched battles  at the factory  gates  and on  the  shop floor to raise  productivity.  Now
employers could rely on the entrance into the labor market, a new global labor market, of
hundreds of millions  of previously unavailable workers. After all, if Mexico instituted
genuine contract and property rights and a liberalized exchange regime, and also offered
cheap labor, it would become far more attractive to auto industry executives to break up
their troublesome, aging, and expensive workforces  in places  like Flint, Michigan and
move operations to the new non-union maquiladora zone in northern Mexico. This would
replicate the runaway shop policy that the textile industry had put to such good use in
moving to  the  southern United  States to avoid  Northern  unions in the middle  of the
twentieth century.270
Note here the important role that the capital markets can play. Now that more than a
trillion dollars are traded back and forth every day in the currency markets alone, those
markets provide a kind of daily vote by key financial institutions on the attractiveness for
investors of every country in the world. Social welfare spending, union influence over
business decision making,  and other dimensions of the Keynesian era are now seen by
many participants in these markets as introducing inefficiency and rigidity into economic
development. Sovereign debt instruments and domestic currencies are ripe for speculative
attack as a form of political pressure. As De Angelis notes: "In a context of open capital
markets, the simple announcement of a government's Keynesian intentions may well be
sufficient to bring the government to its knees via a massive capital outflow."271
In the run-up to the Brazilian elections, for example, global speculators began a sell-
off of  Brazilian  debt  instruments  and  the  Brazilian  currency.272  This  forced  the
269.  This explains in part the fierce opposition that emerges whenever economically-troubled developing
countries attempt to implement protective measures like currency controls. See Auerback,  Capital Controls,
supra note 245 (noting "that US trade negotiators are working proactively to ensure that any incipient resort to
[capital controls] is to be eliminated as ... future trade deals are pursued).
270.  See generally HARLEY SHAIKEN, MEXICO IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY: HIGH TECHNOLOGY AND WORK
ORGANIZATION  IN EXPORT  INDUSTRIES (1990)  (discussing advanced manufacturing systems in Mexico).  Of
course, those textile mills have now, for the most part, moved on to places like Mexico and China as well.
271.  DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 157.
272.  Ian Campbell, Analysis: Brazil's Hopeless Defense, UPI, Oct.  17,  2002 (noting Brazilian "growth
has... been modest because of the constant need to keep interest rates high in order to sell debt, attract foreign
portfolio capital inflows and curb growth in imports and in the external deficit"); Simon Romero, Brazil Raises
a Key Rate By 3 Points, N.Y. TIMES, Oct. 15, 2002, at CI (describing "an unexpected move in the middle of the
standoff between Brazil's  government and financial institutions  speculating about the direction of the real
[Brazilian currency]"); Jonathan Wheatley, Brazil: Business Likes Lula - But Wall Street Doesn't, Bus. WK.,
Oct. 14, 2002, at 35; Soros Slams Antsy Markets Facing Brazil's Leftist Candidate, AFX EUR. FOCUs, Oct. 8,The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
government  to  raise  interest  rates  on  financial  assets  denominated  in  the  domestic
currency to try and stop the sell-off.273 That, in turn, only made the domestic economic
situation worse as the  cost of financing the  government budget increased dramatically.
The prospect of the election of leftist former labor leader, Luis Inacio da Silva, known
popularly as "Lula,"  "ha[d]  Wall Street freaked. Ever since  last spring,  when the first
polls  showed Lula with the lead, credit agencies and New York investment banks...
issued dire warnings and downgraded Brazil's [credit] ratings, causing Brazil's currency
to plummet and helping to precipitate" an IMF bailout.274 The government was forced to
negotiate a stringent agreement with the International Monetary Fund that placed a severe
restriction on government spending. In a highly unusual development,  candidates in the
ongoing presidential campaign were forced to sign on to a commitment to abide by the
IMF restrictions if they were elected. In the new era, the post-Keynesian era, the global
capital  markets provide  capitalism  with the essential  disciplinary  device  necessary to
275
assure profitability.
In  this  environment,  industrial  relations,  collective  bargaining,  even  unions
themselves, are not just out-gunned, they at first glance appear to be truly irrelevant. As
De  Angelis noted, "[f]inancial  integration  and liberalization  allows capital  mobility to
serve  as  a  disciplinary  device  to  limit  the  scope  of any  concessions  by  individual
governments  that  could harm  national competitiveness  and to present  'adjustment'  in
terms  of cuts  in  welfare  spending  and  entitlements  as  a necessity  posited  from  the
276
outside."
VII. CONFRONTING THE LEGITIMATION DEFICIT
As powerful as this argument is in explaining the new era, however, it leaves out a
second concern  triggered  by globalization, a concern  that  is at the  heart of our legal
system, a concern about legal process, secured in part by the institutions of labor law.
Only an understanding of this dimension of the Industrial Relations era allows us to see
the potential for a progressive, labor-led response to the issues posed by the new Capital
Markets era. While De Angelis emphasizes in his assessment of the Keynesian era the
economic effects of a particular institutional arrangement, he fails to recognize an equally
important aspect of the industrial relations system, namely, its ability to put in place a
workplace  rule  of law  that  helped  to  legitimate the  outcome  of wage-productivity
bargaining.  What some have called  "American  approach to industrial relations"277 was
2002, at 35.
273.  In late 2002, benchmark Brazilian  interest rates stood at 25%. John Barham, Heading Out of the
Storm, LATIN FIN., Feb. 2003, at 16; Interest Rate is IncreasedA fter All; New Signal to the Markets Gets Poor
Response, LATIN AM. WKLY. REP., Jan. 28, 2003, at 41.
274.  Franklin Foer, Radical Solution, NEW REPUBLIC, Sept. 23, 2002, at 15.
275.  Id.
276.  DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 151.
277.  See Stephen F. Diamond, Labor Rights in the Global Economy: A Case Study of the North American
Free Trade Agreement, in HUMAN RIGHTS, LABOR RIGHTS AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE 218 (Lance A. Compa
& Stephen F. Diamond eds., 1996, 2003) [hereinafter Diamond, Labor Rights]; for a sophisticated critique, see
Katherine Van Wezel Stone, The Post-War Paradigm in American Labor Law, 90 YALE L.J. 1509, 1566 (1981)
[hereinafter  Stone, Post-War Paradigm] (stating "the  industrial pluralist metaphor of the plant as  a mini-
democracy...  [is] mere illusion"). Note that my argument comes at this question from a slightly different angle2003]  The PetroChinaS yndrome  97
based  on  the  promotion  of a  common  law  of the shop  floor  that  developed  out  of
organizing campaigns, grievance  processing, and contract negotiations.  This system was
created by a series of statutes, beginning with the National Labor Relations Act of 1935
(often  referred  to  as  the  "Wagner  Act"  after  its  chief  legislative  author,  Senator
Wagner),278 and later institutionalized  by several  important  Supreme  Court decisions,
notably the famous Steelworkers Trilogy cases of the early 1960s.279 As Justice Douglas
said in one of those crucial opinions:
The collective bargaining agreement states the rights and duties of the parties.
It is more than a contract; it is a generalized code to govern a myriad of cases
which the draftsmen cannot wholly anticipate ....  The collective agreement
covers  the  whole  employment  relationship ...  . It  calls  into  being  a  new
common  law-the common  law  of a particular  industry  or  of a particular
plant ....  A collective bargaining agreement  is an effort to erect a system of
280
industrials elf-government.
This new approach  was  as much a result  of popular protest through  widespread
strikes in the  1930s, including three general strikes in San Francisco,  Minneapolis, and
Toledo, as it was a product of legislative and judicial effort. The centerpiece of the new
industrial relations system was the National Labor Relations  Board, established by the
1935  Act. Its  role in  monitoring  and  adjudicating  labor-management  conflict was an
attempt to  take the emerging  class warfare  then breaking out on  the  streets of major
American  cities  back  to  the  negotiating  table,  by  setting  up  a  process  for  union
recognition  while  limiting  the  ability  of workers to  continue  more  radical  efforts  to
control the production process. As a 1961 study cited by labor law scholar Katherine Van
Wezel  Stone  concluded:  "The  gains  from  this  system  [of  industrial  relations]  are
especially  noteworthy  because  of their  effect  on the  recognition  and dignity  of the
individual worker ....  Wildcat strikes and other disorderly means of protest have been
curtailed and an  effective  work discipline  generally established.''281 The Wagner Act,
therefore, can be seen as a "double-edged sword"-a legal instrument that cut both ways,
in  favor initially, it  seemed,  of workers,  but over time  providing  the  framework  for
severely curtailing worker power. As labor law historian Karl Klare noted, "the liberal
model of industrial democracy  simultaneously invites and limits employee participation
in workplace  govemance."282 The fact that  it provided procedures  such  as mandatory
than Professor Stone, suggesting that it is internal workplace conflict that pushes its way outward to a battle
over broader democratic principles, while at the same time generating periodic compromises that are seen as
legitimate  stalemates  or  cease-fires  between  employer  and employee.  For  further  discussion  of  inward
legitimation effects of the Wagner Act, see Katherine Stone, The Structure of Post-War Labor Relations, 11
N.Y.U. REV.  L.  & SOC.  CHANGE  125 (1982-83)  and Craig Becker, Democracy in the Workplace: Union
Representation Elections and FederalL abor Law, 77 MINN. L. REV. 495 (1993).
278.  29 U.S.C. §§ 151-69 (1935).
279.  United Steelworkers v. Enter. Wheel & Car Corp., 363  U.S. 593 (1960);  United  Steelworkers v.
Warrior & Gulf Navigation Co.,  363 U.S. 574 (1960);  United Steelworkers v. Am. Mfg. Co, 363 U.S. 564
(1960).
280.  Warrior, 363 U.S. at 578-80 (emphasis added).
281.  INDEPENDENT STUDY  GROUP FOR  THE COMMITTEE  FOR  ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT,  THE PUBLIC
INTEREST IN NATIONAL LABOR POLICY 32 (1961), cited in ARCHIBALD COX ET AL., LABOR LAW 571 (8th ed.
1977), cited in Stone, Post-W  ar Paradigm,s upra note 277, at 1576.
282.  Karl E. Klare, Critical Theory and Labor Relations Law, in THE POLITICS OF LAW: A PROGRESSIVEThe Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
bargaining  and  grievance  procedures  for  workers  to  attempt  to  secure  basic
improvements in their lives helped cement acceptance of the compromise.283
A broader claim was also made for the industrial relations system. Figures like John
Dunlop, George Schultz, and Clark Kerr argued more or less explicitly that it provided a
base for the vision of liberal pluralism they felt was essential to govern industrial society.
In the view of these "strong IR" figures, modem industrial capitalism was a world where
competing  centers of power-labor, government,  and business--each  had a  legitimate
role in broader political and social life. Thus, a more formalized  tripartite relationship
was the  stabilizing core  of a system that allowed  the rapid  change and development,
inherent in capitalism's waves of "creative destruction," to take place without triggering
radical or destructive reactions. Clark Kerr, for example, wrote of
the contribution of the unions to a sense of consensus in industrial society, to
the sense that the rules and rewards are just and acceptable,  and to how they
thus lead to  social  tranquility .... [T]he  overall impact of unionization  has
been  to  contribute  to  a  sense  of fair  play,  a  sense  of acceptance  of the
arrangements of industrial society.284
This is not just a matter of appearances. The basic building blocks of an active and
democratic labor movement are the right to organize,  the right to bargain collectively,
and the right to strike. These rights run parallel  to basic political rights found in general
social life-the right to assembly, the right to freedom of speech, and the right to petition
the government for the redress of grievances. Thus, the "common law of the shop floor"
runs parallel to democratic governance in society at large.285 Just as the common law that
emerges inside the workplace guarantees that there is some check against arbitrary power
in economic  life,  federal  and  constitutional  structures  provide a countervailing  force
against abuse of power in the polity as a whole, whether as checks on the assumption of
power by a single individual or unrestricted abuse of majoritarianism. In fact, there is an
essential link between  these two parallel processes  that explains the  fact that with the
exception of authoritarian or totalitarian  societies,  labor movements  inevitably become
involved in political activity. There is a reciprocal relationship between the expression of
civil liberties inside a workplace  and in society at large. A vibrant and effective trade
union is impossible to sustain as an island of freedom in a sea of authoritarianism. The
right  to  organize,  for  example,  depends  vitally on  the  freedom  of speech.  Thus,  to
preserve their successes at the workplace, labor unions must also continually defend civil
liberties in the outside political  realm. Conversely, those in society at large who value
civil liberties recognize their importance inside the workplace as well. Thus, in recent
years, human rights organizations like Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch
have paid increasing  attention to labor rights  issues. The existence  of a vibrant trade
CRITIQUE 539, 561 (David Kairys ed., 1998); Karl E. Klare, Judicial Deradicalizationo f the Wagner Act and
the Origins of Modern Legal Consciousness, 193 7-1941, 62 MINN. L. REv. 265 (1978).
283.  But see Stone, Post-War Paradigm,s upra note 277, at 1577 (Industrial relations system suffers from
an "antinomy" such that "the more successful the theory [of industrial pluralism] is as a tool of manipulation,
the less tenable it is as a mode of legitimation.").
284.  CLARK KERR,  MARSHALL,  MARX  AND  MODERN  TIMES:  THE  MULTI-DIMENSIONAL  SOCIETY  48
(1969).
285.  Diamond, Labor Rights, supra note 277.2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
union movement, then, is often a litmus test for a country's progress towards democracy
and freedom. This is the substance of the "pluralism" of the Industrial Relations era. The
value  we  place  on  a process of "deliberative  and  pluralistic  decision-making"286  is
central to the legitimation of the outcomes of that decision-making.
For De Angelis, this perspective  on the role of trade unions is  a difficult one  to
comprehend. He views the new trade union movement of the 1930s not as an adversarial
effort  to  represent  the  interests  of workers,  but as bodies  "institutionaliz[ed]  by the
state ...  to  control  the  grass-roots ....  287  Of  course,  if  this  were  an  accurate
description,  it would not have been possible  for the unions to play the role that Kerr
describes. Only an organization that has some legitimacy with its own membership could
have engaged in the compromises he describes and survive.288 Nor would an institution
whose only role was to impose  outcomes negotiated  in smoke filled back rooms on a
compliant rank and file be able to animate the wider activity of that same rank and file in
general political and social life, as the "strong IR" view suggests was the case. The labor
movement must inevitably wrestle with its need to confront employers and, on occasion,
the state, in order to win material improvements for its membership while simultaneously
remaining concerned  with survival in a persistently hostile environment. This  is not a
dynamic that De Angelis seems to understand. In one sense, Kerr and De Angelis are flip
sides of the same coin, with Kerr hoping for the integration  of the trade unions into  a
wider capitalist apparatus, and De Angelis thinking the deed has been done. De Angelis
mistakes the more conservative  pronouncements  of some trade union  officials  for the
actual labor movement itself.289 Kerr, at least, would acknowledge the existence of an
adversarial  relationship, while  De Angelis  at the  end of the  day cannot see this as  a
realistic phenomenon. That is why he cannot see any role for the adversarial process in
creating legitimacy in the Keynesian era.
If the transition from a collective bargaining dominated system to one where global
capital  markets play a central role preserves the disciplinary function still so crucial to
modem capitalism, it has left behind the central legitimating impact of the sophisticated
286.  Jonathan Turley, Dualistic Values in the Age of International Legisprudence, 44 HASTINGS L.J. 185,
186 (1993).
287.  DE ANGELIS, supra note 248, at 49. De Angelis is not alone in this view of the emergence of the
modem American labor movement in the 1930s. De Angelis' perspective is not simply that of an obscure Italian
commentator, though it echoes the views of figures like Antonio Negri who helped found the "autonomist"
tradition with which De Angelis is affiliated. An echo of this viewpoint is found in the United States in the work
of Staughton Lynd and others. See "WE ARE ALL LEADERS"-THE ALTERNATIVE UNIONISM OF THE EARLY
1930S (Staughton Lynd ed., 1996).
288.  It is true that Kerr's view is an exaggeration of trends.  Kerr always fancied himself a far-sighted
analyst of emerging tendencies in modem capitalism. The most insightful criticism of Clark Kerr can be found
in HAL DRAPER, THE MIND OF CLARK KERR (1964).  This short book grew out of a series of lectures by Hal
Draper, delivered to students at Kerr's own University of California at Berkeley just prior to the breakout there
of the Free Speech Movement that would end Kerr's career.
289.  A classic example is De Angelis' misreading of the labor movement's no strike pledge in World War
II. While made formally by labor officials, it was broken on a regular basis by many local unions in both the
AFL and CIO, most notably by the coal miners, the machinists in defense plants, and some autoworkers locals.
Despite the tension between these layers within the trade union movement itself, De Angelis sees the unions as
a monolith "subordinating the interests of the rank and file to those of 'the country."'  DE ANGELIS, supra note
248, at 58. This view is echoed in the work of Lynd, supra note 287. But see NELSON LICHTENSTEIN, LABOR'S
WAR AT HOME: THE CIO IN WORLD WAR II (1982) (discussing deep dissent in CIO over the pledge).The Journal of CorporationL aw [Fall
system  of process  generated  by industrial  relations.  The missing  element  in today's
environment is precisely what figures like Clark Kerr thought was so crucial about the
earlier  framework-the  institutions  that developed  "a  sense  of consensus."  Kerr went
even so far as to suggest that unions' ability to help generate this consensus "may well be
their one great justification. It is easier to get the appearance of economic justice than to
be certain about  its reality-and  the unions give the appearance."290  While many may
argue with Kerr's suggestion about the actual impact of unionization, there can be little
argument  that this  contribution  to  "consensus"  is  absent  in  the  era  of globalization.
Unions still exist, of course, but they have suffered significant losses in the face of rapid
technological change fed by the emergence of new global labor markets. No institutional
framework  remotely  comparable  to that  of the Keynesian  era exists to  mediate class
conflict over the process  of economic development. Instead, unforgiving global capital
markets force reluctant players into  line, but with little or no opportunity for impacted
social groups to debate or engage decision makers. Instead of constructive dialogue and
conscious planning of economic activity that  addresses the  entire social  cost of rapid
economic change, those most intimately impacted by such change are often left with only
violence or apathy as a way out. This takes a very mild form in the United States, for the
time being,291 but it is altogether different in many parts of the world.
Thus, there is no sense emerging that this is a system committed to what Kerr called
a "sense of fair play."  Quite the opposite, in fact, as a broad sector of the population in
both advanced  and developing countries have begun to express their view that the new
era is an intensely unfair one. This was manifested  most openly at the demonstrations
against the World Trade Organization in Seattle in 1999. The protests there ranged across
the  political  and social  spectrum,  including  both  middle  class environmentalists  and
working class trade unionists. Thus, this legitimation deficit suggests the emergence of a
vacuum in  social and political life. Whether  it will be filled  by regulation, or altered
private behavior, or open social conflict, or perhaps all three is not yet clear. But the anti-
globalization/pro-globalization  divide  is not  simply  about the  division  of spoils,  not
simply about the fights between winners and losers, it is also about power-power to
influence, power to participate, power to debate. This concern with power is the emerging
content of process in the anti-globalization  era. The possibility that this content will be
shaped by destructive conflict or even reactionary or fundamentalist movements  is what
leads me to suggest the possibility of an  emerging PetroChina Syndrome, where social
groups with significant  concerns  about  the impact  of the  new era  are  locked  out  of
decision-making processes and are forced to turn to more radical solutions. A legal order
that promises to protect the general interest but fails to provide accessible,  transparent,
and accountable  mechanisms  to generate  legitimate  outcomes can only  be said to be
290.  KERR, supra note 284, at 48.
291.  While memories of the  1992 riots by African American and Latino residents of south central Los
Angeles have begun to fade, the economic and social conditions that, in part, sparked this event have certainly
not.  See CALIFORNIA  LEGISLATURE  ASSEMBLY  SPECIAL  COMMITTEE  ON  THE Los  ANGELES  CRISIS,  To
REBUILD IS NOT ENOUGH: FINAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ASSEMBLY SPECIAL COMMITTEE
ON THE Los ANGELES CRISIS (1992), available at http://www-lib.usc.edu/-anthonya/la/reb/i.htm  (last visited
Nov. 4, 2003) (arguing that "like other urban conflagrations-from Watts to Miami-the 1992  Los Angeles
Crisis was sparked by a single incident, yet rooted in grievances and tensions which had accumulated for years"
and that "economic troubles only exacerbated the tensions tearing at the heart of Los Angeles").2003] The PetroChinaS yndrome
suffering a legal pathology.
VIII. CONCLUSION
The PetroChina Campaign represented an important and innovative first step in the
constructive forging of a genuinely legitimate new world order, and thus is evidence of
that pathology but  also points  to  its resolution.  By its  tactics, agenda,  and choice of
methods, it sent a strong signal about the inadequacies of the current neo-liberal regime.
It represented the emerging outline of a new model of global economic development. On
a  tactical  level,  it chose  to  bring  politics  into  the  capital  markets  where  they  are
manifestly  unwelcome.  Thus,  it  forced  the  recognition  of the  political  impact  and
relevance  of those  markets.  The  capital  markets  can  no  longer  be  seen,  as  Alan
Greenspan would prefer, as simply passive intermediaries betweens savers and investors.
They are inherently political because they impact social outcomes. But they violate the
fundamental  precepts  of  a  legitimate  political  order.  They  provide  no  institutional
mechanism to hold them accountable  for their impact. What the PetroChina Campaign
illustrated was that the normal mechanisms that are supposed to guarantee the so-called
"integrity"  of the markets  broke down  when they attempted  to digest  the mix of an
authoritarian  economy  with  a  democratic  one.  The  PetroChina  IPO  represented  an
attempt to impose a particular social and economic order that corresponds to the needs of
those few with the resources and ability to take advantage of those markets. The fact that
the Chinese  regime  was forced  to  bring an abrupt  halt  to its global  capital  markets
strategy indicates the effectiveness of the tactical choice to intervene in those markets
made by the Campaign.
The agenda of the Campaign grew largely out of the range of issues raised by the
"new internationalism"  fostered by the Sweeney Administration at the AFL-CIO, but it
was also reflective of the efforts of many NGO's in the human rights and environmental
activist communities.  In what are  likely to be only fortuitous  circumstances  linked to
China's  particular  political  history,  the  agenda  was  fortified  by  the  presence  of
conservative  religious  groups  concerned  about  religious  freedom.  But  even  among
conservatives there is a growing concern about the impact that neo-liberal globalization is
having on traditional ways of life.292 The agenda  expanded into arguments  about the
appropriate  forms  of  corporate  governance  in  the  new  era.  In  the  post-Enron
environment, such a concern looks remarkably prescient. Thus, it can be fairly said that
in  a  single  effort,  the  Campaign  raised  awareness  of some  of the most  significant
dimensions of the globalization process. In many ways, the Campaign is an echo of the
efforts  by organizers  like Walter Reuther  and A.J.  Muste  in the  early  1930s  to  call
attention to the social costs of the new-market driven industrial order. A similar effort
was made by figures like the future Justice Brandeis and labor activists Florence Kelley
and Rose Schneiderman  in the Progressive  movement of the early twentieth century  to
battle sweatshops and harsh conditions in the workplace.
Finally, in its choice of methods-addressing its concerns first to the stewards of the
retirement  assets managed by large institutional  investors, and then to regulators-the
292.  The most articulate and palatable of such perspectives is JOHN GRAY, FALSE DAWN: THE DELUSIONS
OF GLOBAL CAPITALISM (1998).The Journalo f CorporationL aw [Fall
Campaign  found a new way to press for progressive reform. Institutional investors are
significant new players in the global economy. They are becoming aware of the weight of
that  responsibility,  and cannot afford  to hide behind narrow  definitions  of "fiduciary
duty" while  their assets are manipulated  by Wall Street fund managers and investment
banks at significant  cost to the  values and goals  of the fund beneficiaries,  American
workers. Using the power and influence of these institutions to force the Securities and
Exchange  Commission to  acknowledge  the importance  of the Campaign's  agenda  to
investors, as the Commission did with the issuance of the Unger Letter, represents a small
but  notable  step  in  response  to  the  legitimation  deficit created  by the  globalization
process.
The  outcome  of this  process  cannot be predicted.  What  can  be  recognized  and
accepted, however, is that we are confronting an entirely new set of problems. In the past,
for example in the era of Holmes or Douglas, constructive and progressive responses to
such problems have emerged by first recognizing that a problem exists, and, second, by
asking, through research and argument, what the real dimensions of that problem are.
Only  then  can  we  move  to  constructive  institution  building  that  helps  resolve  the
problems. The emergence  of the PetroChina Syndrome can be seen as a social variant of
the miner's canary-warning us that there is, indeed, the possibility of an explosion.
IX. POSTSCRIPT
Late in the night on December 23, 2003,  a natural gas well owned by PetroChina
and  operated  by CNPC burst,  and  sent a cloud  of toxic gas over the  countryside  in
Chongqing in southwestern China.293 In what Chinese media called a "zone of death," at
least 243 people died while hundreds more suffered skin bums and poisoning.294 Within a
few  days,  the New  York Times  reported  that  the  Chinese  government  admitted  that
CNPC "cut comers" including not having the right safety equipment on site, improperly
dismantling equipment needed to prevent such a blowout and waiting hours to ignite the
gas in order to prevent its deadly spread to the surrounding area.295 The Times noted that
"China  also  forbids workers to organize  independent unions that might make safety a
higher priority. 296
293.  China Gas Blast Death Toll Rises (BBC News television broadcast, Jan 5, 2004).
294.  Id.
295.  Joseph Kahn, China Blames State-Owned Company in Gas Blast, N.Y. TIMES, Jan. 4, 2004, at 3.
296.  Id.