RUSSIA & LEGAL HARMONIZATION:  AN
HISTORICAL INQUIRY INTO IP REFORM AS
GLOBAL CONVERGENCE AND  RESISTANCE
BORIS N. MAMLYUK*
ABSTRACT
This  Article  examines  several waves  of intellectual property (1P)
regulation reform in Russia, startingw  ith an examination into early Soviet
attempts to regulate intellectualp roperty. Historical analysis is useful to
illustrate  areas of  theoretical convergence,  divergence,  and tension
between state ideology, positive law, and "law in action. " The relevance
of these  tensions for post-Soviet  legal reform  may  appear tenuous.
However, insofar as IP  enforcement has emerged as one of the largest
hurdlesf or Russia's prolonged accession to the World Trade Organization
(WTO),  these historicalp recedents may help explain Russia's apparent
theoretical  and  political  disconnect from  the  WTO.  If  Russian
policymakers and many Western analysts agree that Russia has complied
with  all necessary structural adjustment reforms for  WTO  accession
(including reforming its IP legislation), then deeper points of contention
between Russia and the West must be identified. One point of departure,
the Article posits, is Russia's lingering inability to convey adherence to
general internationall aw.
Thus,  this Article re-conceptualizes the link  between domestic and
internationall egal orders by connecting the IP debate to broader debates
over the nature of internationall aw in the Soviet and post-Soviet space.
Specifically, Part I examines how Soviet theorists attempted to reconcile
IP regulation with Marxist ideology and socialist internationall aw. Part
II surveys the main IP law reform projects in post-Soviet Russiaf rom 1992
*  Assistant Professor of Law, University of Memphis,  Cecil C. Humphreys School  of Law;
Visiting Assistant Professor, Ohio Northern University, Claude W. Pettit College of Law (2010-2011);
Visiting Scholar, Cornell Law School (2009  2010); Ph.D. in Law, Economics & Institutions (2011),
CLEI Centre, University of Torino, Faculty of Law; Fulbright Fellow, Institute of State  and Law,
Russian Academy of Sciences (2008-2009); J.D. (2005), University of California (Hastings). I would
like to thank the organizers and participants of the January 2010 Toronto Group conference and the
January 2010 LSE/SOAS international law colloquium for their insightful comments and criticism on
related presentations. In addition,  I would like to thank Gianmaria Ajani,  Michele Graziadei,  Mitch
Lasser, Chantal Thomas, Antony Anghie, John D. Haskell, Golnoosh Hakimdavar, John Barcelo, Ugo
Mattei, Nikolay Mamluke, and the participants of the Cornell Graduate Research Colloquium for their
support and valuable friendship.536  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
to  2006, with particular emphasis on harmonization with global legal
standards. The second part also provides a brief comparative analysis of
Russia's latest IP  law (effective 2008) and copyright protections in US.
law as well as the 1971 Berne Convention. The Article concludes with an
overview of doctrinal debates within Russia over harmonization, WTO
accession, and  international law.  These  debates  shed  light  on  the
development of local resistance to further legal harmonization efforts, an
issue  of immediate relevance not just for policymakers  working with
Russia, but for broaderl aw and development debates.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
IN TR O D UC TION ..............................................5.3.6........................................ 
I. EARLY SOVIET IP PROTECTION: THEORY AND PRACTICE ............5.3.8..... 
A.  Why Turn So Far to H istory? ........................5.3.8........................ 
B.  Lenin as IP Regulator-in-Chief. .....................53.8...................... 
1.  The Dilemma of Attracting Foreign Trade
(Pragmatism&   InternationalL aw) ................5.4.4............... 
2.  The Dilemma of Reconciling Communism, NEP & IP ...5.57 
C.  Late Soviet IP Protection:A  n Overview ................5.6.3............... 
II. RUSSIAN IP LAW (1992-2006): TRANSITION ..................5.6.6................. 
A.  Change, Transplants, and Harmonization. ..............5.66.............. 
B.  Policy-DrivenH  armonization (2000 Present). ...........57.1.......... 
1.  WTO, TRIPS & the American Lobby ...............5.7.2.............. 
2.  Russian Civil Code (PartI V) and Legal Licenses ......5.7.6... 
3.  Russian Legal Licenses v. US. "FairU  se" & Berne
Co nven tion.  .................................57.9.................................... 
C.  Policy Trade-Offs, Resistance, Values, and Interests. .......58.7..... 
C ON  CLU SIO N  ..........................................5.9 .1............................................. 
INTRODUCTION
Twenty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, has Russia finally ended
its  transition  and  completed  its  restoration/reintegration  into  the
international  legal order?  If so,  has  Russia developed  a novel theory  of
international law or has it fully subscribed to the liberal international legal
model?  In  his  2003  introduction to  the second  edition of G.I.  Tunkin's
Theory of InternationalL aw, William  E. Butler, the eminent legal  scholar
of  Soviet/Russian  law,  noted  that  "[t]here  is  no  'substitute'  or
'replacement'  theory, as yet, to  supersede the  insights  into  international2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
behaviour identified by Academician G.I. Tunkin."'  Taking as granted that
Russia  has  not  fully  adopted  a  liberal  theory  of state  and  law  along
Western lines, as most observers had hoped, it is worthwhile to reexamine
the countless continuities and discontinuities between the Soviet and post-
Soviet  Russian  experience  with  international  law  and  institutions.
Considering  Russia's  increasingly  aggressive  foreign  policy  posture  and
growing  uncertainty over the viability of domestic reforms,  it is  vitally
important  to take  stock of these  difficult-and  largely unquantifiable-
aspects  of  Russian  reforms,  from  the  enduring  legacy  of  great
power/socialist/bureaucratic  thinking still prevalent among Russia's policy
and  academic  elites,  to  more  concrete  issues  like  Russia's  attempt  to
project respect for property rights to potential investors.
The present Article explores these historical  breaks and continuities in
the context of Russia's intellectual property reforms.3 The analysis follows
two  parts.  Part  I  offers  a  brief  legal  history  of  Soviet  regulation  of
intellectual  property  ("IP")  rights,  starting  in  the early  1920s  when  the
Soviet state was first engineering  its socialist legal  system in an apparent
attempt to break away from the global  "bourgeois"  legal  order. The first
Part also provides an overview of the "mature" or classic Soviet IP regime.
Part II presents a synopsis of IP law reform projects in post-Soviet Russia
and  Russia's attempts  to  harmonize  its  IP  legislation  with  international
norms throughout the 1990s. Part II also compares Russia's subsequent IP
law  reforms  to  U.S.  copyright  law,  particularly  in  reference  to  legal
licenses  or "fair use," through a traditional functionalist comparative law
methodology.4  The  Article  concludes  with  a broader  discussion  on  the
effectiveness  of Russia's  attempts  to harmonize  its domestic  IP  system
with  international  norms,  including  a  study  of resistance.  This  in turn
allows an evaluation of alternative policy options or alternative normative
1. William  E.  Butler,  Introduction to G.I.  TUNKIN, THEORY  OF  INTERNATIONAL  LAW xiii
(William E. Butler trans., 2d ed. 2003).
2.  See  Dmitri  Trenin,  Russia Reborn: Reimagining Moscow's  Foreign Policy, FOREIGN
AFFAIRS, Nov.-Dec. 2009, at 64; see also Boris N. Mamlyuk, Book Review, 35 REV. CENT. & E. EUR.
L. 111 (2010) (reviewing INTERNATIONAL LAW  A RUSSIAN INTRODUCTION  (Valerti I. Kuznetsov,
Bakhtiar R. Tuzmukhamedov eds., 2009)).
3.  This Article is Chapter 6 of a larger dissertation on the development of international legal
theory in Russia during two moments of crisis, the Interwar period (1919  1939) and the post-Soviet
period (1989  2009).
4.  Michele  Graziadei,  The  Functionalist Heritage,  in  COMPARATIVE  LEGAL  STUDIES:
TRADITIONS AND TRANSITIONS  104 08 (Pierre Legrand & Roderick Munday eds., 2003); Mary Ann
Glendon, Michael W. Gordon & Christopher Osakwe, COMPARATIVE LEGAL TRADITIONS  11  12 (2d
ed.  West 1994). On functionalism more broadly, see the classic Robert K. Merton, SOCIAL THEORY
AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE 73 (1968 Enlarged Edition).538  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
approaches  to law reform  and law and  development  projects not just in
Russia, but in other transitioning states.
I. EARLY SOVIET IP PROTECTION: THEORY AND PRACTICE
A.  Why Turn So Far to History?
Most historical studies looking at IP reform in post-Soviet  Russia start
with the classic or late Soviet period (1960-1989)  as a point of departure.5
This  is  a  useful  starting  place.  However,  the  early  Soviet  period-the
interwar  years  of  1919-1939Ioffers  a  remarkably  sophisticated
complementary  analytical  frame  for considering  the  inner tensions  and
incongruities  of Soviet legal theory and practice. How the  Soviet Union
came to recognize  IP rights despite openly professing to oppose  "private
property" (and any laws that upheld the right of ownership to the means of
production) may shed further light on the ambiguous intellectual structures
of Soviet law, and by legacy, the post-Soviet legal system.
B. Lenin as IP Regulator-in-Chief?
A core  tenet of Marxism  and Leninism  was  the abolition  of private
property  over the means  of production and  a critique  of property  forms
generally.6  As such, it may come as a surprise that the early Soviet state
protected  IP rights. Yet the early  Soviet state was  an ardent defender  of
individual  and  commercial  right  holders'  claims  both  foreign  and
domestic,  and not merely under the New Economic Policy which briefly
liberalized the Soviet economy from  1922 to  1929.  Lenin himself issued
no  less  than  a  half  dozen  decrees  on  copyright  and  authors'  rights
protections between 1917 and 1922. What explains this apparent paradox?
Did not the very notion of owning an idea or a work of art contradict the
socialist  conception  of mass  production  and  commonality of title?  The
5.  See, e.g., WILLIAM E. BUTLER, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW IN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
xv (4th  revised ed. 2005).  The notable exception  in this regard is  Michiel Elst's  comprehensive
historical study. See MICHIEL ELST, COPYRIGHT, FREEDOM OF SPEECH, AND CULTURAL POLICY IN THE
RUSSIAN  FEDERATION  (Martinus  Nijhoff  2005);  see  also  SERGE  L.  LEVITSKY,  COPYRIGHT,
DEFAMATION,  AND PRIVACY IN SOVIET CIVIL LAW: DE LEGE  LATA Ac FERENDA (1979).  Elst and
Levitsky, however, do not connect the history of IP regulation in the USSR and post-Soviet Russia
with broader debates in Soviet/pre-Soviet international legal theory and practice, which is the goal of
the present analysis.
6.  See generally RUDOLF SCHLESINGER, SOVIET LEGAL THEORY (1945); EVGENY PASHUKANIS,
LAW AND  MARXISM:  A GENERAL THEORY (Barbara Einhom trans., Inklinks  1978); HANS KELSEN,
THE COMMUNIST THEORY OF LAW ch. 5 (1955); HUGH W. BABB, SOVIET LEGAL PHILOSOPHY (1951);
WILLIAM E. BUTLER, RUSSIAN LEGAL THEORY (1996).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
answer to this question goes to the heart of the early Soviet theory of state
and  law  and  invokes  fundamental  theoretical  debates  that  rocked  the
Soviet legal establishment throughout the interwar period. A quick survey
of these debates is useful to contextualize the discussion that follows.
One reason for the eruption of fierce debates regarding the nature and
function of law following the Bolshevik Revolution was that Marx did not
expressly formulate  the contours of post-revolutionary  law and the state.'
Had  Marx  theorized  law  as  he  had  intended,  it  is  likely  that  the
Bolsheviks'  piety to his teachings  would  have reduced  the ensuing legal
drama to a well-managed  bureaucratic transition.8 Absent that, it was  left
to  the Bolsheviks  to  navigate  the problems  of managing  a  failed  state
through  a series  of foreign and domestic  challenges  while attempting to
create consistent theoretical justification for their actions.
The most influential  application  of Marxist theory to the problem  of
political reorganization following the proletarian revolution was by Lenin
himself in his State and Revolution.9 Here, Lenin restated the main theses
of  Marx  and  Engels  on  the  state,  including  the  theory  of class  rule,
formulated the theory of a Marxist state ruled by the proletarian class, and
defended  his  conception  against  "opportunists,"  including  the  German
Social-Democrats  and  English  Fabians  from  the  Second  International.
Lenin outlined the class nature of governments, the origins and role of the
state, and bourgeois'  use of class antagonism in maintaining the state.'0 He
further critiqued what he described as a petit-bourgeois illusion of gradual
transformation of capitalism into socialism without revolution.
7.  Marx touches upon issues of law and economic relations as a basis for law in his Critique of
the Gotha Program.S ee KARL MARX, CRITIQUE OF THE GOTHA PROGRAM (Int'l Publ. Co., Inc. 1938)
(1875).  But he does not offer a theory of law, or a programmatic  analysis of the role of law in a
communist society.
8.  B.B.  JIAHAEBA,  BOnPOCbI  LIPABA  B  KAIIHTAJ1E  MAPKCA  5  6  (1Op.  JIIT.,  1982)
[VALENTINA VIKTORONA LAPAEVA, QUESTIONS OF LAW IN MARX'S CAPITAL,  5-6 (Jur. Lit. 1982)].
Lapaeva's succinct explanation of the doctrinal disagreements between eminent theorists P.I. Stuchka
and  E.B. Pashukanis,  on the one hand,  and I. Razumovsky,  on the other, provides  an  excellent
summary of the debates and is a good starting point for scholars interested in understanding the official
post-Stalin position  on Pashukanis. According to  Lapaeva,  Razumovsky was able to demonstrate,
unlike Pashukanis, that abstract and concrete conceptions of the legal form did not necessarily require
the abolition  of law, since law did not encompass all relations between property owners, but rather
represented only one aspect of economic relations. Id. at 7-9.
9.  See  JIEHHH,  FOCY)IAPCTBO  H PEBOJnOIfIH:  YUEHHE  MAPKCH3MA  o FOCY)JAPCTBE  H
3AAAqH  HPOJIETAPHATA  B PEBOJIOJHIIH  (1917)  (Ho§IHoe  co6paHHe  coq.,  5  H3,.  T 33 c.  1-120)
[VLADIMIR ILYICH LENIN, STATE AND REVOLUTION (Robert Service trans., Penguin 1992)].
10.  Lenin  theorized  that  despite  differences  in  form  between  modern  bourgeois  states
(parliamentary,  traditional  monarchic),  the dictatorship  of the capital  owning class (the bourgeois
class) over the proletarian united these diverse forms.540  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
According to Lenin, following a socialist revolution, the dictatorship of
the proletariat would develop into a strong, centralized  democratic base of
Soviets (or workers'  councils). The central communist party would play a
guiding  role  in  the  construction  of  this  socialist  state  by  ensuring
discipline,  organization,  and  redistribution  of material  resources.  Most
importantly, Lenin developed and theorized Marx/Engel's writings on the
dual  phases  of communism,  the  immediate  socialist  state  following  a
socialist  revolution,  and  a  higher  phase  of communism  which  would
finally see the withering away of the state. Contrary to Bukharinj  Lenin
claimed  that  the  transition  to  communism  could  only  come  after
strengthening  the state  administrative organs  and consolidating power in
the hands of the Soviets and the party. Furthermore, this consolidation of
power  would  coincide  with  the  development  of  other  proletarian
movements across  the world. Thus,  Lenin theorized the importance  and,
indeed,  inevitability  of the transition period as  a  political  and  strategic
necessity, but also as a forceful rhetorical  and argumentative tool. As we
shall see, this formulation would serve as the basis for Korovin's transition
theory  of  international  law  and  all  subsequent  Soviet  theories  of
international  law  until  the  development  of the  doctrine  of permanent
peaceful  coexistence  in  1963.  This transition theory would  also have  a
direct impact on the development of private law in the early Soviet state.
Per  Lenin,  until  the  "highest  form  of communism"  arose, the  party
would need to exercise strict control over society and the state to regulate
labor,  production,  and  consumption.12 This highest  form  of communism
would  occur  when  society  would  overcome  the  differences  between
physical and mental labor, divisions of standards of living between  urban
and rural workers, and as a result of the mixing of nations (ethnicities).13
In  State and Revolution, Lenin  did  not  specify  the  role  of law  in  the
transition from bourgeois order to socialism; indeed law is mentioned but
once in a discussion of the Anti-Socialist Law in Germany. 4 However, in
The ProletarianR evolution in Russia, a collection of articles and speeches
by  Lenin  and  Trotsky,  it  was  clear that  legal  control  was  meant  to be
11.  H. FyxapHH, K meopuu unwnepuaqucmuqecio'o -ocyoapcm6a, PEBOJ1tOILqT HPABA 5 (H3'a.
KOM.  AKaj.,  1925)  [Nikolai Bukharin, Towt'ards a Theory of the Imperialist State, in REVOLUTSIA
PRAVA  5 (Communist Acad.  1925)].  To Bukharin,  the post-revolutionary  state existed  only in a
transitory moment and could not be strengthened after the revolution. The state apparatus had to be
reduced  in direct correlation  with the elimination of classes.  Id. at 13.  This directly contradicted
Lenin's position on the need to strengthen the communist apparatus.
12.  LENIN, supra note 9, at 97.
13.  Id. at 93-97.
14.  Id.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
exercised  directly  by  the  Soviets  through  direct  democracy.15  But
immediately a theoretical crisis presented itself.
According  to  Marx,  the  state  and  the  law are  elements  of a  social
superstructure  determined  by the  economic  relations  and  activities  (the
base)  of the ruling  classes  of a  particular  society.  If the purpose  of the
Soviet  state  was  to  destroy  this  superstructure  and  replace  it  with  a
domestic  communist order, then law  should have had no function  in the
new  Soviet state. In  other words, because  law was the manifestation  of
class struggle and reinforced  class difference, the abolition of class would
require  the  simultaneous  abolition  of  law.  This  thesis  was  famously
theorized by the early Soviet legal philosopher Evgeny Pashukanis  (1891-
1937) in his 1924 General Theory of Law and Marxism.16 Pashukanis went
even further than merely exposing the logical inconsistency of maintaining
law in a classless society. He argued that since law arose as a consequence
of property  exchange,  it was  necessary to eliminate  law  in an effort to
disrupt  the cycle  of property  rights,  commodity  fetishism,  and  material
relations between individuals in the new Soviet state. 17 In short, law went
hand in hand with property and vice versa.  Only by abolishing both  law
and  property  could  individuals  rise  to  a  higher  form  of  social
consciousness and political awareness.18
Analogously, on the international plane, it was theoretically impossible
for the Soviet Union to exist in a world system of law which was built by
the  bourgeois  and  imperialist  ruling  class,  comprised  of the  powerful
imperial nations that reached their zenith in the nineteenth century. 19 These
differences  between  socialism  and capitalism were  deemed a priori to be
irreconcilable  by some jurists (like Stuchka and Pashukanis).2° Other early
Soviet  jurists,  like  A.G.  Goikhbarg,  however,  saw  the  potential  of
reinventing  law to serve the interest  of the proletarian  class through the
creation of the Bolshevik law that would administer the dictatorship of the
15.  VLADIMIR LENIN & LEON TROTSKY, THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA 83 (1918).
16.  PASHUKANIS, supra note 6.
17.  Id. at 109 33.
18.  Id.
19.  Id. at 6  (arguing that  a subject  under international  law  is  identical to  a subject under
municipal law).
20.  Id. at 52 ("CoBpeMeHHOe  MeWRyHapoRHoe ripaBo BKIIoqaeT B ce6A BeCbMa COJIH2JHY2LIOo3 y
camoynpaBcyBa (peTopcHH, penpeccalHH,  BOIHbl H T. J.)" ["Contemporary international law includes
a solid dose of contradictory  'self-regulation'  (retribution, repression, war, etc.)."]). Id. at 67 n.148
("[...]  B Me)KL1yHap0JHbIX  OTHOHeHHMX  rocy)IapCTBO  BicTyrIaeT  BOBCe  He  Kal  B0CHIOIIeIHHe
o6teKTHBHOI  HOpMbI,  HO  KaK  HOCHTeib  cy6,eKTHBHb[X  npaB,  T.  e.  Co  BCeMH  aTpH6yTaMIi
cy6cTaHHoHabHocTH  H 3FoHCTHqeCKo  3aHHTepecoBaHHocTH."  ["[... ] in international relations, the
state does not act as embodying objective norms, but acts as a holder of subjective rights, that is with
all of the attributes of substantive and egoistic self-interestedness."]).542  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
proletariat.21  In  international  law, this meant the creation  of a Bolshevik
legal  order  or a  socialist  international  law  governing  relations  between
Socialist-dominant states and capitalist states2.
Although  he  was  an  attorney  who  often  spoke  and  wrote  on  such
central  topics  as  self-determination,  sovereignty,  non-intervention,  and
international  economic  law,  Lenin  did  not  participate  in  these  core
theoretical debates 3 This occurred for at least three reasons. First, as the
chief executive of the Soviet state, Lenin was too preoccupied with more
urgent matters  of war and peace. During the  first two months of Soviet
Russia's  existence,  for  instance,  Lenin  issued  more  than  forty  decrees
concerning  foreign relations.24 In the first five years  (1917-1922),  more
than 270 legal acts were adopted concerning foreign relations. 25 Second, it
is well-known that Lenin preferred to write in populist form to emphasize
the relevance of his theories to the working masses .26 Therefore, it is not
surprising that he avoided the theoretical fights on the pages of Soviet law
21.  A.G. Goikhbarg was the first Director of the Institute of Soviet Law from 1922 to 1925. After
Pashukanis gained control over the Soviet legal academy  in 1932, he expelled Goikhbarg from his
teaching post for maintaining "bourgeois"  attachment to the notion of Soviet law. Goikhbarg  was
ultimately jailed, but rehabilitated after WWII.
22.  EBFEHHfi  A. KOPOBHH,  ME)K)IYHAPOHOE  HPABO HEPEXOWJHOFO  BPEMEHH  (M.,  1924)
[EVGENY A. KOROVIN, INTERNATIONAL LAW OF THE TRANSITION PERIOD (1924)].
23.  In fact,  his writings on  international  law  were  ultimately collected  and  published  as  a
standalone  volume by the Soviet Institute of International  Relations. JIEHHH  0 ME)K  YHAPOWHOfi
FIOJIHTHKE H ME,  LCYHAPOIHOM HPABE (H3A-BO  HH-Ta Me)K [yHapO2HbIX OTHOflieHHHi,  1958) [LENIN
ON  INTERNATIONAL  POLITICS  & INTERNATIONAL  LAW  (Moscow  State  Institute  of International
Relations  1958)]; see also V.I. LENIN, QUESTIONS OF NATIONAL POLICY (Foreign  Languages Pub].
House 1959) (devoted mainly to self-determination and related questions). In 1970, the Soviet Union
issued a volume of Lenin's  contributions to international law, edited by Tunkin and V.F. Fedorov.
F.H. TyHKIH, B.1i). ctejopoB, peO., B.H. J1EHHH H COBPEMEHHOE ME)K{YHAPOHOE FIPABO (MOCKBa,
3naine 1970) [V.I. LENIN AND CONTEMPORARY INTERNATIONAL LAW (G.I. Tunkin & V.F. Fedorov
eds., Znanie  1970)].  For a short overview  of Lenin's  contributions to international  law, see F.B.
HFHaTeHKO,  B. H. J1enun u  iedtcOyHapoOnoe npa6o, 2 HPABOBE)JEHHE 98-108 (1970), available at
http://www.law.edu.ru/article/article.asp?articleID-1133126  (Russian).
24.  H.B. MHPOHOB,  HPABOBOE PEVYJITPOBAHHE BHEIUJHX CHOIIIEH4I4  CCCP (1917-1970)  7
(HMO,  1971)  [N.V. MIRoNov, LEGAL REGULATION OF FOREIGN RELATIONS  OF THE USSR (1917-
1970) 7 (IMO 1971)] (providing an excellent anthology of legal reforms pertaining to foreign relations
bodies in the Soviet Union from 1917-1970).
25.  Id. Despite his weakened physical condition,  Lenin remained actively involved in executive
decisions on matters of war and the status of the USSR in foreign relations. Lenin's responses to
ongoing peace negotiations with the Central Powers, for instance, and exchanges between him, Stalin,
and  Trotsky regarding the Georgia  Affair and  legal  status of Transcaucasian  Socialist Federative
Soviet Republic showed that he was exceptionally sensitive to how the USSR was being perceived
abroad. ld.
26.  HI.H. CTyqKa, JIeuH  u Pe6onozuonnbdi OeKpem, PEBOJIIOIHAH  HPABA 32 (H3,J. KOM.  AKaa.,
1925) [P.I. Stuchka, Lenin and the Revolutionary Decree, REVOLUTSIA PRAVA 32 (1925)]  (telling the
anecdote that even Stuchka, despite being intimately familiar with Lenin's work, did not know that
Lenin was a lawyer until the two of them were buying a printing press in Spring  1917 and Lenin
presented his bar card to the seller).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
journals. Third, by 1922 (when these debates began in earnest) Lenin was
effectively incapacitated  by a stroke caused by an assassin's bullet. Lenin
died  in  January  1924 just as  Pashukanis'  and  Korovin's  main treatises
were being published.
For these reasons, modern historians  and especially legal  scholars do
not treat Lenin's writings on international  law seriously.  However, in the
context of a  Soviet conception  of international  law and property, Lenin's
writings  are  key  to  understanding  the  overarching  spirit  of
pragmatism/realism,  while staying  true to core Marxist  tenets.27  Lenin's
influence on Soviet international law remained profound in two respects.
First, Lenin explicitly sanctioned the idea of legal instrumentalism, or
the notion that law needed to serve  a particular  policy end. Though  law
was theoretically  indeterminate,  unnecessary, and  ultimately a bourgeois
fiction,28  law  and  legal  process  were  necessary  to  further the  cause  of
communism in the immediate transition period. This methodology directly
influenced  an entire generation  of pre-WWII  and post-war Soviet jurists.
Indeed,  legal  instrumentalism  (and  perhaps,  exceptionalism)  in
international  law  would  go  on  to  be  the  Soviets'  most  enduring
contribution  to mainstream  international  law.29  Second,  how early Soviet
jurists rationalized  and justified radical departures  from Marxist doctrine
to  carry  out  diametrically  opposed  policy  reforms  sheds  light  on  the
Soviets'  particular  sensibility,  or  mentaliti,  concerning  law.
Understanding  this intellectual dynamic can explain not just how Soviets
wanted to have their cake and eat it too, that is to say, how Soviet law on
the books differed from "law in action."  More importantly, by unpacking
why and how  Soviet Russia betrayed  its avowed  ideals in exchange  for
tangible  benefits  (recognition,  material  aid,  so  on),  we  can  better
27.  After WWII, scholars attempted to systematize Marx's and Lenin's writings on international
law. Notable among these was Tunkin's 1970 work. F.H. TyHKHH,  B.0. (DeJopoB, B.H. Jlenun u
coqpemvefn-oe AmedtcoynapoOinoe npa6o, 2 FOCYAAPCTBO H HPABO (1970)  [G.I. Tunkin, V.F. Fedorov,
VI. Lenin and Contemporary International Law, 2 STATE AND LAW  (1970)];  B.&D.  Fy6nH,  Kap-4
MapKc u  iebcynapo6noe npa~o, 2 FOCYAAPCTBO H FIPABO  (1969)  [V.F. Gubin, Karl Marx and
International Law, 2 STATE AND LAW (1969)]. These journals are not to be confused with the separate
periodical of the Institute of State and Law, Sovetskoe Gosudarstvo i Pravo.
28.  ROSCOE POUND, AN INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF LAW (Yale 1922). The parallel
between  Pound's  policy-oriented  sociological  jurisprudence  and  early  socialist  legal  theory
(representative  of early  Soviet  legal  realism  and  American  legal  realism,  respectively)  are
underresearched and deserve greater scrutiny. For one move in this direction, see generally MICHAEL
HEAD,  PASHUKANIS: A CRITICAL REAPPRAISAL (2004); Lon L.  Fuller, Pashukanis and Vyshinsky: A
Study in the Development ofJMarxian Legal Theory, 47 MICH. L. REv. 1157 (1949).
29.  Contemporary scholars  trace the theoretical roots  of exceptionalism to Carl  Schmitt, but
Evgeny Korovin's 1924 International Law of the Transition Period arguably influenced Schmitt to a
greater extent than has been previously understood. See KOROVIN, supra note 22.544  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
understand  how the  very  notions of law, legality,  and  socialist justice,
were co-opted,  made indeterminate,  and ultimately served as nothing but
rhetorical  gestures.30  Two  historical  moments  illustrate  how  the  early
Soviet  Union  came to  recognize  and  protect intellectual  property  rights
while  being  ostensibly  opposed  to  law,  property,  and  like  "bourgeois
notions."  First, there  was  the  need  to  attract  foreign  trade  and  project
respect  for  foreign  property  rights pursuant  to  international  obligations.
Second,  this  need  for  property  protection  was  internalized  into  the
domestic legal order.
1.  The Dilemma of Attracting Foreign Trade (Pragmatism& 
InternationalL aw)
Modern histories of early Soviet law neglect the economic constraints
that molded Soviet international  legal practice,  instead focusing on major
events such as Russia's negotiations of the many peace treaties with WWI
adversaries and later accession  into the League of Nations and subsequent
expulsion therefrom. Most scholars list historical and political reasons as
lying  at  the  root  of  Soviet  preference  for  a  classic  conception  of
international  law (strict sovereignty,  anti-monism, etc.).31 In international
relations,  the  early  years  of  the  Bolshevik  state  (1918-1920)  are
commonly  seen as when the Soviets developed a foreign policy based on
expediency  and an  ad hoc application  of Marxist  principles  in  relations
with imperialist states to gain recognition and political legitimacy.
But economic realities had  a more direct  influence  on the shaping  of
Soviet notions of international  law and the place  of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics ("USSR") vis-d-vis the capitalist states. Even hardline
Marxist  legal  theorists  like  Pashukanis  acknowledged  how  profoundly
material  conditions would  affect the development  of Soviet international
legal  doctrine.  As  Pashukanis  wrote  in  his  brief  entry  on  "peaceful
blockades,"  the Allies,  having realized that the Bolsheviks had  defeated
the  counter-revolutionaries,  lifted  their  blockade  of  Soviet  Russia  on
January  16,  1920 because  it was an  economic necessity for them to trade
30.  Following  Prof. Butler,  this mentalit,  in turn, may  bear directly  on how contemporary
Russian jurists approach law. See Butler, Introduction, supra note 1, at xiii.
31.  See, e.g., GEORGE GINSBURGS, FROM SOVIET To RUSSIAN INTERNATIONAL LAW: STUDIES IN
CONTINUITY  AND  CHANGE  (1998);  TARJA  LANGSTROM,  TRANSFORMATION  N  RUSSIA  AND
INTERNATIONAL  LAW (2003); Emanuel Margolis, Certain Aspects of the Impact of Communism on
International  Law  at  5 13  (Mar.  1951)  (unpublished  Ph.D.  dissertation,  Harvard  University,
Department of Government).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
with  Russia.32  Pashukanis  was not  unique  in  situating  core  theoretical
disagreements with bourgeois international lawyers in a broader context of
trade relations and material conditions, although his position is remarkable
in  that he framed the discourse  in  such a way that it appeared  the West
needed to compromise with the USSR, rather than vice versa.  However,
prior to any official  recognition  of the  USSR  under international  law,  it
was the Soviet Union rather than bourgeois states that was seeking foreign
trade. According to Korovin, "[b]y  1921,  after the final act of the foreign
intervention  in the Russian civil war, and the final  defeat of Wrangel in
1919-1920,  the  Soviet Union  shifted to negotiations  and began  seeking
compromises  and  business  relationships."33  This  is  not  splitting  hairs.
Since  as  both Korovin  and Pashukanis  claimed  that material  conditions
determined the substance of international law, it is important to understand
correctly the material conditions of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist
Republic ("RSFSR") and how this affected doctrinal developments.
In  fact, despite  the high-flying  rhetoric  of worker's  councils,  global
revolution, and the withering away of law, property, and state, by the early
1920s, the territory of the former  Russian empire lay  in economic ruin.34
By  1919, as a consequence of the Great War, the Revolution, the ensuing
Civil  War,  a  blockade,  the  armed  allied  intervention,  and  Bolshevik
agricultural  policies,  the Russian  economy  had  essentially  flatlined.35  In
32.  E. HaHyKaHHc,  Mupnax BRoKaOa,  DHIFKJIOHEIU4M FOCY)JAPCTBA H FIPABA, T. 2,  1002,
1003 (1925  1926) [Evgeny B. Pashukanis, Peaceful Blockade, in ENCYCLOPEDIA OF STATE AND LAW,
v. 2, 1002, 1003 (1925-1926)].
33.  KOROVIN, INTERNATIONAL LAW OF THE TRANSITION PERIOD, supra note 22, at 60.
34.  It is generally agreed that the material situation worsened precipitously from 1917 to 1922. In
Socialist and ImperialistD  iplomacy, Chicherin's report to the Fifth Congress in July 1918, he remarks
that the goal of Soviet foreign policy was staying on the "revolutionary offensive" while coping with
the "unbelievable deterioration" from the effects of the Great War and Tsarism. LENIN & TROTSKY,
THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA 409-10 (1918). Furthermore, this was a period of intense
violence and uncertainty in Russia, not only among the general population but also in the diplomatic
corps. The assassination of the German ambassador, Count Wilhelm von Mirbach, on April 23, 1918
shortly after his arrival in Moscow, presented a very real legitimacy challenge for the Soviet state. Id.
at 410. Economic historians, politicians and literary figures also paint a grim tale regarding Russia's
economy during this period. See AJ1EKCEHi TOJICTO71X,O XKCEHHE nO MYKAM (POMAH TPHlOFTET),
KHHIA 3: XMYPOE YTPO (1922  1941) [ALEKSEY TOLSTOY, THE ORDEAL (NOVEL TRILOGY), BOOK 3:
BLEAK  MORNING  (1922-1941)]  (describing the social conditions in Russia in the historical period
following the Soviet revolution). This image is strikingly similar to Josef Koudelka's famous photo of
Prague's Wenceslas  Square,  nearly empty  at noon on August 21,  1968, during the Warsaw Pact
invasion of Czechoslovakia.
35.  Nikolay Bukharin,  Economics of the Transition Period (1920),  in THE  POLITICS  AND
ECONOMICS OF THE TRANSITION PERIOD (K.J. Tarbuck ed., 1979); NIKOLAY BUKHARIN, IMPERIALISM
AND WORLD ECONOMY (Howard Fennig ed., 1966); Charles Noble Gregory, The InternationalL abor
Organization of the League ofNations, 15 AM. J. INT'L L. 42, 49 (1921)  ("The Soviet press shows
that, excluding railroad employees, workers in industry decreased 2,402,000 men up to January, 1919,546  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
addition,  as  a  result  of droughts  and  crop  failures  in  1920,  Russia
encountered a major famine in 1921.36
With  the  failure  of communist  revolutions  in  Europe,  by  1922  it
became  clear that  "the  building  of socialism  or  communism  involved
industrialization,"  or  a  surrender  to  the  hostile  capitalists  encircling
Russia.7  On  the  domestic  front,  Lenin  masterminded  the  famous  (and
domestically  controversial)38  New  Economic  Policy  ("NEP")  program,
issued by decree on March 21,  1921, to revive the economy. 9 Yet a lesser-
known  aspect  of NEP  was  its  focus  on  reviving  international  trade,
particularly with respect to exports of grain and raw materials and imports
of industrial  machinery.  Just as  international  trade  presented  a  strategic
dilemma-restarting  international trade meant cooperating  with the same
hostile  capitalists  the  Bolsheviks  had  so  fiercely  opposed-the
contradictions  between  NEP  and  Marxist  theory  could  not  have  been
greater.
As a further strain on the tensions between  Marxist theory and actual
Soviet  policies,  in  1921  the  Soviet  Union  began  praying  for  material
sustenance from the "capitalist"  West to relieve the effects of the famine.4°
Then, as now, the United States was one of the first states to respond. By
summer  1921,  the American Relief Administration ("ARA"), headed  by
Herbert Hoover,  began delivering medical  supplies and foodstuffs, along
and a report of the Supreme Council of Popular Economy of March, 1919, states that production in the
greater number of Russian industries has decreased 400 to 500 per cent.").
36.  FRANK ALFRED GOLDER & LINCOLN HUTCHINSON, ON THE TRAIL OF THE RUSSIAN FAMINE
(Stanford  1927);  see also WAR,  REVOLUTION,  AND PEACE  N RUSSIA: THE PASSAGES  OF FRANK
GOLDER,  1914  1927  89  (Terence  Emmons  & Bertrand  M.  Patenaude eds.,  Hoover Press  1992)
[hereinafter WAR, REVOLUTION,  AND PEACE N RUSSIA] (describing drought in 1920-1921 and the
major famine in Russia stretching from the Volga valley and into southern Ukraine).
37.  ALEC NOVE,  ECONOMIC  RATIONALITY  AND  SOVIET POLITICS;  OR,  WAS STALIN  REALLY
NECESSARY? 21 (1964).
38.  The NEP enveloped and called into question the core premises of the Bolshevik revolution,
including  the protection  of private  property,  land  reform,  and  accommodation  of the  bourgeois
merchant class.
39.  Some Russian sources place this event on March 23, 1921. The decree "On the Replacement
of Prodrazvyorstka [Foodstuffs Requisition] by Prodnalog [Foodstuffs Tax]" was issued on March 21,
1921. See  IeKpeT BIJHK, HpiHTnHf Ha OCHoBe pemeHnJA  X cie3ja PKHI(6) "0  3aMeHe pa3BePCTKH
HaTypaaJbHbiM HaJo0oM"  (21 mapTa 1921 F.)a,v ailable at http://www.hrono.info/dokum/prod  nal.html
(last accessed Oct. 25, 2011); see also Peqb Ba inMHpa HaIbHqa JIeHna <<O npRo[BoaLbCTBeHHoM
naJIore Hm 0 npo0naJIore H 0 CBO602JHOM  o6MeHe xiie6HbIx n3HnIiIKOB)) [V.I. Lenin, On Foodstuff
Tax and/or Free Exchange of Excess Wheat Production (Mar. 21,  1921), speech], available at http:/
upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/eb/Lenin_-_AboutNatural  Tax.ogg.
40.  In July 1921, writer Maxim Gorky (at the behest of Lenin) issued an appeal to "all honest
citizens" to send food and medical supplies to Soviet Russia.2011] RUSSIAN IP REFORM
with private  aid  from workers  unions and  individuals.41 On August  20,
1921,  in  response  to  Gorky's  call  for  aid,  the  ARA  and  the  Soviet
government  signed the  Riga Agreement,  which  stipulated that the ARA
had the "right to control its relief operations inside Russia in exchange for
a vow to not mix with Soviet politics. '42 Similar agreements  were signed
with  the  German  Red  Cross  organizations  and  other  states'  relief
organizations.43 But it was U.S. aid that attracted particular interest and ire
from the Soviets.
On the one hand, the ARA aid humiliated the Bolsheviks, who not only
resented  the notion of imperialists  "bailing out" socialists, but were also
uneasy about a foreign organization with  a sizeable local  staff operating
throughout much of the country.44 The suspicion was shared, though it was
ultimately  resolved to mutual  benefit.45 As a matter of international law,
Korovin was also alarmed by relief organizations'  claims to extraterritorial
41.  WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE IN RUSSIA, supra note 36. Golder, an archivist and Director
of the Hoover Library at Stanford University, travelled extensively throughout revolutionary Russia.
He also served on the American Relief Administration, formerly a government aid agency, but by that
time a private relief organization headed by then-Secretary of Commerce  Herbert Hoover. Id. at ix-
xxvi.
42.  Id. at  90 (citing HAROLD H.  FISHER, THE  FAMINE  IN SOVIET  RUSSIA,  1919-1923:  THE
OPERATIONS OF THE AMERICAN RELIEF ADMINISTRATION  (1927)).  Archival records reveal the vast
scope of the ARA operation:
The initial plan was for the ARA to feed two to three million children, but the mission rapidly
expanded to include adults and medical relief as well. The major leap forward  came on
December  22,  1921,  when  President  Warren  Harding  signed  into law  a congressional
appropriation of $20 million for the purchase of corn and seed grain from U.S. farmers for
Russian relief To this totalot her government and private U.S. contributions were added (as
well as a Soviet government expenditure of nearly $12 million from itsg old reserve); in the
end the two-year ARA program amounted to more than $60 million.
Id.
43.  TIMOTHY A. TARACOUZIO, THE SOVIET UNION AND INTERNATIONAL LAW 263 (Macmillan
1935).
44.  WAR,  REVOLUTION,  AND  PEACE IN RUSSIA,  supra note  36,  at  90; see also KOROVIN,
INTERNATIONAL  LAW OF THE TRANSITION  PERIOD, supra note 22, at 63 (recalling negotiations with
"representatives of the International  Red Cross, and with personal friends of the American president,
vacationing billionaires, and commercial groups"). This resentment echoes Russia's post-2000 turn
against the foreign aid establishment.
45.  WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE N RUSSIA, supra note 36, at 90.
The ARA mission was headed by a career army officer, Colonel William N. Haskell, most of
whose U.S. staff had served in the American Expeditionary Force. Many men had attended
some of the finest U.S. colleges and universities  and had had experience with the ARA in
Europe. They were eager to tackle the Russian job with trademark ARA drive and efficiency
and had little tolerance for Soviet inefficiency and suspicion; they especially resented the
netwvork of Red Army commissars and agents of the secret police set up to monitor their
activities. There were many ARA-Soviet confrontations over issues big and small, but each
was somehow  resolved  through  diplomacy.  In the  end the Soviet  government officially
acknowledged the ARA's contribution in checking the famine and saving millions of lives.
Id. (emphasis added).548  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
jurisdiction and wrote at length about the need to limit the legal status of
foreign charitable organizations operating in the Soviet Union. Writing in
the  first  volume  of the journal  Sovetskoe Pravo, for  instance,  Korovin
stressed  the  importance  of limiting the  rights  of foreign  organizations
operating  on  Soviet  soil, while  recognizing  the  need  to  set reasonable
permissions to aid famine relief efforts.46
On the other hand, NEP  and foreign aid programs in  the early  1920s
certainly worked,  as evidenced by the increase in international trade  and
betterment  of material  conditions in Russia during that period. Between
the  years  1921  and  1925,  for  instance,  trade  with  the  United  States
quadrupled.47 During this time, the USSR also entered into a large number
of bilateral treaties  with  European  states  to  normalize  trade relations.48
Each  of these agreements  stipulated that the USSR would honor foreign
investors'  property  rights  on  its  territory,  in  sharp  break  from  the
nationalization  decrees  issued  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the
Revolution.49 To facilitate this process, between  1922 and 1924, the Soviet
diplomatic  apparatus  was  restructured  to  avoid  conflicts  between  the
consular  representatives  abroad  and  the  foreign  trade  representatives
working  under  the  People's  Commissariat  of  Foreign  Trade
("NarKomVneshTorg").50  Ten years after the  Bolshevik Revolution, the
Soviet  agricultural  and  industrial  production  returned  to  pre-war  (pre-
46.  E.A. KopoBHH, MHocmpanatq cru ,amponuqeciast Oe31me,7bnocmb 6 PCCPu  ee npae6o6b
4Dop.14b1(l1,)  COBETCKOE IJPABO 108 (1922)  [Evgeny A. Korovin, Foreign PhilanthropicA ctivity in
the RSFSR and its Legal Forms, 1(1)  SOVIET LAW  108 (1922)].  In his International Lant, of the
Transition Period,h e was more direct: "A charitable organization-[such as the Red Cross]-claiming
universality  over territorial sovereignty  of nations is the same legal nonsense as  the attempt of a
corporation to claim rights under family law."  KOROVIN,  INTERNATIONAL LAW OF THE TRANSITION
PERIOD, supra note 22, at 35.
47.  The United States and Soviet Russia signed a "Memorandum on Trade" in January 1921. See
JOHN SPARGO, MEMORANDUM ON TRADE WITH SOVIET RUSSIA: SUBMITTED TO THE COMMITTEE ON
FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE UNITED STATES SENATE (1921).  These estimates are tentative because
significant  portions of the  increased trade were  relief shipments by the United  States. See  U.S.
BUREAU OF FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC COMMERCE, COMMERCE REPORTS, VOL. 4, at 561 (Oct. to Dec.,
1922). In March  1921,  the RSFSR also extended the Anglo-Soviet Trade Agreement of March  16,
1921, though disputes with Great Britain over the Wrangell Islands and the intervention led to a slight
decrease in trade in 1923.
48.  TARACOUZIO, supra note 43, at 143-50.
49.  Id.
50.  KOROVIN,  INTERNATIONAL  LAW  OF  THE  TRANSITION  PERIOD,  supra note  22,  at 69
(discussing the purpose of the Soviet consulates as being limited to: "(a) protection of economic and
legal interests of the RSFSR; (b) official representation of RSFSR and other Soviet organs in the given
state(sc);  the protection of interests  economic, legal and social  of citizens of the RSFSR and its
legal entities and firms") (emphasis added).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
1913)  levels.51 By 1930,  Soviet administrators and scholars openly prided
themselves on the exponential increase in trade with European powers and
with the United States during the 1920s.52
The  benefits  of these  bilateral  trade  treaties,  of course,  flowed both
ways.  From  the  Soviet  side,  the  treaties  were  conditioned  on  explicit
recognition  of the  Soviet  state  under  international  law.53  Therefore,  the
USSR  acquired  significant  leverage  and  legitimacy  from  initiating trade
relations.  In turn,  the  bilateral treaties  of commerce  provided  Western
European  powers  and  U.S.  firms  with  access  to  Russian  goods  and
concessions.  In  essence,  the  bilateral  trade  agreements  provided  most-
favored nation guarantees, "either in its absolute  form, or under the form
of a conditional (compensational)  favoredness, occasionally giving way to
preferential  regulations  more or  less extensive  in scope. 54  Two concrete
examples-the  issue of concessions and foreign debt-show the extent to
which Soviet leaders bowed to foreign pressure during this time. This,  in
turn, helps to contextualize the IP reforms in the crucial early years of the
Soviet state.
Concessions. Prior to 1928, the Soviet Union recognized three forms of
foreign  involvement  in  the  Soviet  economy:  (1)  direct  concessions;
(2)  foreign investment in Soviet firms established pursuant to Soviet law;
(3)  operation  of foreign  firms on Soviet  soil.55 With the  start of the first
5 1.  Boris Skvirsky, Russia's Internal Situation and Foreign Policy  Russian-American Trade
Relations, 138 ANNALS AM. ACAD. POL. & SOC. SC. 97, 99 (1928). Skvirsky's official titbleefo re the
restoration of diplomatic relations between the United States and U.S.S.R. was that of Director of the
Soviet Union Information Bureau, Washington D.C. Id. at 97.
52.  T.  JIJKJIOBCKHni,  Bonpocbz op,'aHu3afuu Gueueu u Guympunefu  mopteoa.u, 7  COBETCKOE
FoC. H PEBOJIIOI4HA  HIPABA 74 (1930)  [T. Shklovsky, Questions of Organization of Internal and
Foreign Trade, 7 Soy. Gos. i Revolutsia Prava 74 (1930)]. Shklovsky's article contains useful data on
Soviet private, public, and cooperative foreign trade during the period 1923 to 1929.
53.  See TARACOUZIO, supra note 43, at 258-60. Taracouzio, however, incorrectly dates the first
of the economic agreements  between the USSR and Western Powers  as being the March  16,  1921
agreement between the USSR and Great Britain. In actuality, the US-Soviet Memorandum on Trade
dated January 1921 was the first, though Taracouzio is correct that the Soviet-British agreement served
as the model  for the subsequent treaties with European powers. These treaties included, inter alia,
Provisional  Agreement with  Germany  of May 6,  1921; Provisional  Agreement  with Norway of
September 2, 1921; Treaty of December 7,  1921 with Austria; Provisional Agreement with Italoyf 
December 26, 1921; Provisional Agreement with Sweden of March 1, 1922; Provisional Treaty with
Czechoslovakia of June 5, 1922; Agreement with Denmark of April 23, 1923. Id.
54.  Evgeny A. Korovin, Soviet Treaties and International Law, 22 AM.  J. INTL L. 753,  754
(1928).  By "compensational  favoredness,"  Korovin  meant the right of the Soviet state  to  apply
preferential  regulations to commerce  "with the  border states, forming,  prior to  1917, part of the
Russian Empire  . IId... a.t "7 56.  This theme of regional trade preferences for the near-abroad  is
strikingly similar to recent regional integration efforts by the Russian Federation.
55.  M. fllOTKHH,  17papa uuocmpanyeG na coepe. 4erno.i 9mane, 3 COBETCKOE FOCYMAPCTBO
75 (1934) [M. Plotkin, The Rights of Foreigners at the Current Stage, 3 SOVETSKOE GOSUDARSTVO
75 (1934)].550  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
five-year  plan  (1928-1933),  the  Soviet  Union  did  not  award  a  single
additional  concession, and  sought to  restrict existing concessions  on the
basis  of special  agreements  by  purchasing  remainder  rights  from  the
holders.56  The  remaining  concessions  were  insignificant.  According  to
Soviet  sources,  private  industry  at  the  end  of the  first  five-year  plan
represented  only 0.07%  of the Soviet industrial  output.57 Similarly, joint
stock companies founded in the USSR with foreign capital during the NEP
period were progressively liquidated. During the first five year period, no
additional joint stock companies with foreign capital were formed.58 The
decrees of the Central  Executive Committee,  dated March  11,  1931,  also
slightly  liberalized  the  rules  pertaining  to  foreign  firms  and  their
representatives  operating  in the  Soviet Union. Pursuant to Article  12  of
this decree, firms engaged in negotiations with Soviet trade representatives
in Russia no longer had to register and apply for licenses prior to entering
into negotiations.59
The  Soviet  international  law  establishment  was  fully  engaged  in
support of foreign trade. This is evident not only in the spirit of doctrinal
writings  such  as  Korovin's  dispatches  to  the  American  Journal of
International Law, but also  in  calls  for  substantive  reforms  to  existing
treaties and trade agreements. For instance, by 1930-1931, the Soviet legal
academy was mobilized in opposition to a new round of trade tariffs from
the United  States. Within months of the announcement  of Article 307 of
the U.S.  Tariff Act of 1930 (prohibiting  the importation  of goods  made
with  forced  labor),  Soviet  international  lawyers  produced  a  series  of
articles critiquing the trade law on general political, as well as substantive,
grounds.60 The expectation of continued growth in foreign trade during the
second  five-year  plan  also  required  changes  in the  constitutions  of the
individual Soviet republics. Extensive protections were afforded to foreign
enterprises  and  their employees  operating  on  Soviet  soil.  For instance,
pursuant  to  an  instruction  of  the  Central  Executive  Committee  dated
56.  Id. at 76.
57.  Id.
58.  Id. at 77 (discussing liquidation proceedings against the companies Ratao and Sovpoltorg).
59.  Id. at 77.
60.  3KoHoA umUcKaqt 60pboa KanumalucmuqecKux cmpan npomu6 CCCP, 3 COBETCKOE FOC. H
PEBOJIIOIHAH  HPABA  113,  117 (1931)  [Economic Warfare of the Capitalist States 17ersus the Soviet
Union, 3  Soy. Gos.  i REVOLUTSIA  PRAVA  113,  117  (1931)]  (proposing the existence  of covert
economic  warfare against the early Soviet Union). Raevich  also published an article  disputing the
American allegations that Soviet goods were produced with forced labor. Id. at 127.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
October 3, 1930,  foreign workers were granted all formal political rights,
including the right to vote.61
Foreign Debt. Another external constraint  shaping Soviet attitudes on
foreign  relations  and  domestic  legal  reform  was  the  large  foreign  debt
owed to the United  States, France, and England, which the Soviet Union
inherited  from  the  Tsarist  and  Kerensky  governments. 622 The  original
position  of the RSFSR was to revoke all  debt obligations to  Europe and
the United States on the basis that these debts were neither incurred by the
toiling masses nor on their behalf.63 However, debt negotiations  formed a
major part of early Soviet diplomatic  efforts with the West, as evidenced
by  Chicherin's  report  of October  28,  1921  and  the  report  of January
1922.64  These  notes  show  that  Soviet  leaders  could  not  sustain  their
opposition to the debt, as the issue became a major bargaining point of the
Western  powers towards the  USSR.  In  response, the  Soviet  delegations
slowly  gave  way  on  these  issues.  First,  they  acknowledged  several
important  distinctions  between  classes  of  debt.  Pre-1914  debt  was
acknowledged  as possibly valid because  it was issued  for the purpose of
developing  Russia's  economy,  whereas  post-1914  debt  was  issued  to
sustain  the  imperial  war effort.65  Moreover, the  Soviet  Union  countered
with a number of offsets, consisting of two classes of claims: (1) for "[t]he
value of Russian assets situated abroad"; and (2) for the value of "damages
resulting  from  the  Allied  intervention  . . .. ,  By  1925,  the  Soviet
government  agreed  to  pay  outstanding  debts  to  European  states  by
modifying a number of terms, including reduction of the amounts of the
debt.67 The outstanding debt owed to the United States, however, remained
unsettled.
Diplomatic  notes  show  the  debt  to  have  been  a  major  point  of
contention  between the United  States and the Soviet Union well  into the
mid-1930s.  In  addition  to  setting  debt  repayment  as  a  precondition  for
61.  Plotkin,  supra note  55,  at  78.  The favorable  treatment  of foreign  workers  (including
government subsidies) was meant to demonstrate the equitable work conditions of the Soviet state.
Indeed,  according to one  Soviet scholar, the only distinction  between foreign workers  and Soviet
citizens was simply the conception of 'foreignness"  the existence of which was, again, necessitated
by capitalist encirclement. Id.
62.  KAZIMIERZ  GRZYBOWSKI,  SOVIET  PUBLIC  INTERNATIONAL  LAW:  DOCTRINES  AND
DIPLOMATIC PRACTICE 95 97 (SitIhoff 1970).
63.  The unilateral revocation of all outstanding debts was announced  by Lenin in a decree on
January 2 I/February 3, 1918. International Law Reports, 162.
64.  GRZYBOWSKI, supra note 62, at 95  96.
65.  Id.
66.  Id. at 96.
67.  Id.552  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
recognition of the USSR, the United States set the following requirements
for the  USSR  to:  (1)  reject  its  call  for  a  world  revolution  and  cease
propaganda  activities;  (2)  reverse  its decree  regarding  the annulment  of
international  debt  obligations (not just United States);68 and (3) agree  to
recognize  its  international  obligations  (generally).69 The  last point-the
agreement  to  recognize  general  principles  of international  law-related
directly to respect  for foreign  property  rights on the  Soviet territory,  an
issue  of central  importance to  the present discussion.  The  initial Soviet
response was flippant: the Soviet Union did not need any legal or de facto
recognition  from the West.70  However,  this posture was disingenuous,  as
the Soviet Union certainly sought recognition from the United States, and
the  Soviets  were  expending  great  diplomatic  efforts  to  win  U.S.
recognition.7'
In  international  law,  Korovin justified the  Soviet debt  annulment by
reference to his class/transition theory-essentially arguing that the Soviet
social revolution created  a radically new legal form that was qualitatively
different  from  other  states. 72 Korovin  admitted  that  ordinarily  any
successor  state  was  bound  by  the  legal  and  financial  obligations  of its
predecessor,  but refused  to acknowledge the Soviet debt  on the basis  of
communist principles. Diplomatic history and the facts of the actual debt
service by the Soviet state reveal a slightly different story.
First,  it  is  important  to  understand  that  the  Soviet  state  initially
continued to service (pay interest on) the debt, even following the decree
on annulment.73 This supports the theory that the Soviet Union sought to
68.  The  debt was partly due to the enormous  increase in  Russian-American trade (primarily
exports from the United States to Russia during WWI). See GEORGE F. KENNAN, THE DECISION TO
INTERVENE  323-24 (Princeton  1958) (discussing the influence of private American interests on the
decision to intervene, including American-Russian Chamber of Commerce composed of bankers (A.B.
Hepburn), industrialists and "[t]hirty to forty other firms").
69.  Id. at 20.
70.  Id.
71.  This position is surprising because the Soviet Union had worked exceedingly hard at gaining
recognition of European powers. The stance vis-a-vis the United States may have been a negotiating
tactic, but it certainly did not resemble the prior negotiation efforts.
72.  KOROVIN, INTERNATIONAL LAW OF THE TRANSITION PERIOD, supra note 22, at 30.
73.  Interestingly, in 1987 a class action case was decided in which a firm sued the Soviet Union
in a U.S. district court under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act ("FSIA") to recover part of the
debt ($75 million, representing  a $25 million issue in 1916 and a $50 million issue by the Tsarist
government in 1917). See Carl Marks & Co. v. USSR, 665 F. Supp. 323 (S.D.N.Y. 1987), affd per
curiam, 841 F.2d 26 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1219 (1988). The court denied the claim,
holding that the FSIA would not apply retroactively to the Imperial-era bond issue. CarlM  arks & Co.,
665 F. Supp. at 337. After reviewing case law, the court also held that as late as 1926, the USSR (like
any foreign sovereign)  would have expected absolute immunity from suit in the United States. Id. at
339. The USSR had a justified expectation that it would not be retroactively sued in the United States.
The case is noteworthy for its succinct retelling of the relevant facts of the debt issue. Id. at 324-32.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
project  adherence  to  international  norms and  bilateral  agreements  even
when  they  ran  counter  to  the  professed  ideology.74  Perhaps  more
importantly, servicing the debt intended to signal that the Soviets would be
reliable  members  of the  international  community  and  good  faith  trade
partners  despite theoretical  squabbles  with the  West. For the  following
fifteen  years,  while  the  Soviet  Union  publicly  espoused  Korovin's
position-arguing that the debt was not legally binding on the USSR, as it
was carried  out contrary  to  the wishes  of the proletarian  class-Soviet
diplomats privately emphasized that the debt would be settled and that the
USSR would fully comply with all international obligations.75
On November  16,  1933,  the Soviet state publicly agreed to repay the
debt in exchange for recognition by the U.S. and being allowed to join the
League of Nations. To save face and maintain theoretical consistency, the
debt  settlement  agreement  between  President  Roosevelt  and  the  USSR
People's  Commissar  for  Foreign  Affairs  Litvinov  did  not  expressly
stipulate  that  the  USSR  would  repay  debt  incurred  by the  Kerensky
government.  Rather,  the  agreement  employed  a  creative  legal  device
(which came to be known as the Litvinov Assignment). The USSR would
pay $9 million in pre-inflation money to the United States in exchange for
an assignment of all claims, including those due it as the successor of prior
governments of Russia, "on condition that it be notified of any recovery by
the United States on such claims. 76
Why did the USSR agree to repay the obligation when most historians
agree that it could have chosen not to recognize the debt?77 Unclassified
diplomatic dispatches between then-U.S. Ambassador to the USSR Joseph
Davies and the U.S. State Department shed light upon the matter. 78 On the
topic of debt owed to the United States, Ambassador Davies stressed the
symbolic  significance  to the  Russians  of repayment.  The amount  of the
loan itself was, in the words of Davies,
74.  Interest was paid  on the remaining three installments of the bond certificates  on July 10,
1918, January  10,  1919, and July 10,  1920. Id. at 326. Interest was also paid  on the bearer bond
coupons due on June 1, 1918, December 1, 1918, and June 1, 1918 [sic]. Id.
75.  U.S. Department of State, Records Relating to PoliticalR elations Between the United States
and the Soviet Union, The National Archives of the United States 1934 [Cornell Library Microfilm,
Film 5863,  Roll 1] (containing  diplomatic  dispatches from Joseph Davies, U.S. Ambassador to the
Soviet Union) [hereinafter Davies].
76.  Carl Marks & Co., 665 F. Supp. at 326-27. For a discussion of similar claims against the
Soviets,  see Alexander Nahum Sack, Diplomatic Claims Against the Soviets (1918 1938), N.Y.U.
LAW Q. REv. 507 (1938).
77.  The amount of the indebtedness was approximately $200 million in 1933 dollars (when it
was settled for $9 million). The original amount was approximately $75 million from two issues. It
was held in bearer bonds and credit participation certificates.
78.  See Davies, supra note 75.554  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
of relative unimportance of the matter to the United States and the
supreme importance to the Russian people of having in the future a
body of liberal  public  opinion  in the United  States sympathetic to
the  Russian  people,  particularly  in  view  of  the  uncertain
international situation [the threat of war] .9
Indeed,  since  by the  early  1930s  the  Soviet  Union  began  to  seriously
contemplate the threat from fascist regimes; paying off the minor debt in
an  effort  to  curry  favor  with  the  significantly  more  powerful  U.S.
government  seemed to have been a reasonable  step toward balancing the
deteriorating  relationship  with  Germany.  This  was  all  the  more  true
because  by  1933,  Stalin's  position  was  sufficiently  entrenched  to  the
extent  that  he  would  not really  lose  political  capital  domestically  for
settling the debt issue. In  any event, it is clear from the negotiations that
"it  was a serious matter to [Russia] to retain the confidence of the [U.S.]
government in the performance of the [debt settlement] agreement ....  "so
One  can  surmise  several  other  likely  motivations.  First,  Soviet  leaders
began to realize the immense economic potential of trading with the U.S.
and  other  developed  countries  in  order  to  further  accelerate
industrialization.  Second, with Soviet acquisition of Ford automobile and
tractor manufacturing plants, metal refineries, and general technical know-
how, measurable progress in the manufacturing sector meant moving away
from the status of a raw material exporter. The Soviets thereby improved
global standing and gave greater support to the possibility of "socialism in
one country."81
The subjective element  in the debt negotiations  should also be noted.
As  Davies  remarked,  the  Soviet  diplomats  went  out  of their  way  to
impress upon him (with personal guarantees  and gestures) that the Soviet
Union  would  pay  the  debt.  Likewise,  Davies,  in  both  his  official  and
personal  capacities,  made  a  great  deal  of the  humanitarian  similarities
between the United States and the Soviet Union. In his words:
[The  U.S.]  did  have  a  great  body  of  humanitarian  democratic
thought which did have great influence  upon world opinion among
liberal  minded  men  everywhere  which  might  be  of inestimable
79.  Id. at 15.
80.  Id. at 63-64.
81.  Of the over 2,500 treaties that Soviet Russia concluded during the first forty year period of its
existence (1917  1957), the majority concerned economic problems and questions, chiefly matters of
trade and commerce. See JAN F. TRISKA & ROBERT M. SLUSSER, THE THEORY, LAW, AND POLICY OF
SOVIET TREATIES 4-5 (1962)  (providing an excellent overview of Soviet treaty practice during early
Soviet period).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
value to Russia at some point in the future; and that speaking as a
friend of the humanitarian impulses and purposes of the Russian
people, personally  I felt  compelled to  say that  in  my  opinion  it
would be a great pity if a cloud were to be permitted by the Soviet
government  to  dim  the  confidence  which my  government  might
have in  the integrity  and character  of the men  who were  running
affairs here; that this was  particularly true in my opinion because
there was no leadership of any of the great nations of the earth that
viewed  with  as  much  sympathy  the fundamental humanitarian
purposes  of the  Russian people  to  the  degree  that President
Roosevelt and Secretary of State Hull did; that it would be too bad if
a condition were to be permitted by the Soviet government to exist
which would dampen or destroy their confidence in the integrity of
leadership;  that financial credits and business considerations in
importance faded into nothing in contrast with this matter of the
principle involved.  [The  Soviet  Union]  is  producing  enormous
agricultural  and  mineral  wealth  annually,  and  it  will  not  be
dependent upon import or export for many years to come. ...W. hile
there  is  no  question  but what,  in  its  present phase,  its efficiency
cannot  compare  with  capitalist  states  and  possibly  never  will,
nevertheless,  in  the  absence  of  competition  or  necessity for
competition with capitalists tates, such inefficiencies need not and
will not appea8r.2
From  the  Soviet  side,  Marshal  of the  USSR  and  staunch  Stalin  ally
Kliment  Voroshilov 83  agreed  that  the  financial  amount  involved  "was
relatively  small"  and urged  to  settle the  matter on "big  broad,  general
principles  and  that  a  way  should  be  found,  that  he  appreciated  the
greatness of the  President of the United  States. '84 Aside from subjective
factors,85 Voroshilov and Litvinov's desire to see the debt matter settled on
82.  Davies, supra note 75, at 64.
83.  Voroshilov was appointed People's Commissar for Military and Navy Affairs and Chairman
of the Revolutionary Military Council of the USSR, a post he held until 1934, when he was elevated to
Marshal of the Soviet Union.
84.  Davies, supra note  75, at 64 (Moscow, February  18,  1937-Dispatch No. 68 [Ambassador
Davies to Secretary of State Hull]).
85.  There  are  many  such  factors  in  the  diplomatic  notes,  and  they  call  for  a  critical
reexamination, both generally, as well as part of a "rehabilitation,"  so-to-speak, of Davies who was
branded "too softo"n  the Communists by critics. For instance, it is noteworthy to observe the near-
obsequiousness  of the Soviet leaders  in their interactions  with Davies. In  one example, President
Kalinin  warned Ambassador  Davies of superficial  snap judgments of Russia, "A visitor might see
some drunkenness on the streets of Moscow and therefore draw the conclusion that all Russians are556  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
"broad  principles" was highly consistent with the  body of Soviet treaty
practice  that  had  developed  by  that  time.  This  can  be  summarized  as
follows:
(1) Protection  of foreign  property  rights in the  USSR via bilateral
trade agreements;
(2)  Diplomatic  assurances  that  the  USSR  treated  investment  and
property  claims as  apolitical  "administrative"  issues governed  by
private international law;
(3)  Increasing  emphasis that  competition  with  "bourgeois"  states
was a matter of ideological difference, rather than an actual political
86
posture.
Of the three, the most important vehicle for the promotion of foreign trade
was projecting a predictable treaty regime. But demonstrating the strength
of domestic property  rights regimes  and enforcement mechanisms  was a
close corollary.
Korovin wrote  extensively  on this subject  in his treatises and journal
articles.87 In his InternationalL aw of the Transition Period, for instance,
he emphasized that treaties were the sole  source of international  law and
were  sacrosanct  in  Soviet practice (though  not in theory).88  In  his  1927
article on treaties, he explained that treaties formed a backbone  of Soviet
foreign  practice and were inviolable,  save to further advance the cause of
communism.89 The  Soviet diplomatic  corps was  instructed to emphasize
that the Soviet Union, in addition to rejecting secret diplomacy, had never
violated a single treaty. Aside from projecting a predictable treaty regime
and respect for international norms to attract investment, the Soviet Union
also  incorporated  international  customary  and  conventional  law  on the
drunkards, which, of course, was not the fact." Id. at2 8 (Moscow, Jan. 25, 1937  Dispatch No. 11
[Ambassador Davies to Secretary of State Hull]).
86.  See  id at  103  05  (Moscow, Mar.  12,  1937  Dispatch No.  116 [Ambassador  Davies to
Secretary of State Hull, titled "Russian Industy  How ItW orks and Why"]) (emphasis added).
87.  See,  e.g.,  E.A.  KOpOBHH,  K nepec'vwompy  "KenecKoii  Konernfuu,"  15(3)  COBETCKOE
FJPABO 52 (1925)  [Evgeny A. Korovin, Reexamination of the Geneva Convention, 15(3) SOVIET LAW
52 (1925)].
88.  E.A. KOpOBHH, Oeoopia rebus sic stantibus 6 medfc6yapocrnoh npaKmune P.C. I.C.P., 6(3)
COBETCKOE FJPABO  53  (1922)  [E.A. Korovin,  The Principle Rebus Sic Stantibus in International
Practice of the RSFSR, 6(3) SOVIET LAW 53 (1922)]  (upholding the classic conception of rebus sic
stantibus principle and doctrine of necessity for violating positive treaty obligations).
89.  E.A. KopOB1HN,  Co~emccue 6,O060pbl u me.oOcyuapoi~oe npa~o 30(6) COBETCKOE FJPABO
91 (1927)  [Evgeny A. Korovin, Soviet Treaties and InternationalL ai, 30(6) SOVIET LAW 91 (1927)].2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
protection of property  in its domestic legislation.  This issue is central to
the present vertical harmonization analysis.
2.  The Dilemma of Reconciling Communism, NEP & IP
Attracting and protecting foreign trade in the Soviet Union necessarily
required the adoption of domestic  laws to protect property, since without
security,  Western firms simply would not invest in Russia.90  Korovin and
subsequent  Soviet  authors  treated  the  protection  of  property  under
international  law  as  questions  of international administrative law,  as
apolitical  issues  on  which  cooperation  with  the  West  was  not  only
permissible,  but encouraged.91 Notwithstanding the centrality of property
rights  to  domestic  legal  battles  and  theoretical  debates,  international
protection  of property  rights, as  in the case of intellectual  property, was
seen by Soviet theorists as a foreign policy issue, and hence subordinate to
more  pressing  foreign  trade-related  policy  discussions.  For  instance,
despite not adhering to the Berne Convention of 188692 or the revision to
the  treaty  signed  at  Berlin  in  1908,93  the  early  Soviet  state  took
tremendous pains to signify its protection of foreigners'  copyright, patents,
and  trademarks.  This  was  done  principally  by  harmonizing  Soviet
domestic  legislation with international customary and conventional law-
tantamount to  participating  in  the  given  treaty  bodies,  without  actually
90.  See, e.g., H.B. MHPOHOB, HIPABOBOE PEFYJIPOBAHE BHEIIJHHX CHOULEHHI4 CCCP (1917-
1970) 275 n.29 (HMO, 1971) [NIKOLAI V. MIRONOv, LEGAL REGULATION OF FOREIGN RELATIONS OF
THE USSR (1917  1970) 275 n.29 (IMO 1971)] (discussing a decree issued by the NKID on May 23,
1919, "[o]n the Prohibition of Protection of Property of Foreigners from States Which Have Severed
Diplomatic  Relations with  RSFSR");  H.  BEPHILITEHiH,  B. JIAH)JAY,  B. MAIIIKEBHq,  HPABOBbIE
YCJIOBH3I KOHLIECCHOHHOfi }EIIEbHOCTH B CCCP 26-47 (M: 1930) [I. BERNSTEIN, B. LANDAU &
V. MASHKEVICH, LEGAL CONDITIONS OF CONCESSIONS IN THE USSR 26-47 (M: 1930)].
91.  See KOROVIN,  CONTEMPORARY  PUBLIC  INTERNATIONAL LAW, 98  102.  It is  curious that
Western legal historians have not focused more on this aspect of Soviet law and the contradictions
between Marxist conceptions of private property, Lenin's formulation of state capitalism, and Stalin's
foreign trade relations policy. It seems the contradiction  concerning property and Soviet trade and
concessions with Western firms was much more fertile soil for pointing out contradictions in Soviet
theory and practice than revisiting the abstract debates concerning the nature of law.
92.  The Berne Convention removed registration requirements to trigger copyright protection, and
codified continental conceptions of moral rights. Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works, Paris Act, arts. 2-3, 6 bis, July 24, 1971,  1161  U.N.T.S. 3 (amended Sept. 28, 1979);
TARACOUZIO, supra note 43, at 154 n.93. The United States opposed the Berne Convention because of
the removal of registration requirements. By contrast, as indicated above, the USSR removed domestic
registration requirements, without formally acceding to the Berne Convention.
93.  See TARACOUZIO, supra note 43, at 154 n.93.558  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
doing so.94 We can trace this process by observing the evolution of Soviet
domestic legislation on authors'  rights.
Authors' Rights.  Between  1924  and  1931,  there  were  almost  yearly
radical  changes  to  the  IP  regulatory  framework  and  the  administrative
organs  charged  with  implementing  the  laws.95  The  earliest  Soviet  law
concerning  authors'  rights  and  patent  rights  was  a  decree  in  1917
nationalizing all such rights "in the interest of government,, 96 with limited
protection for the authors. Pursuant to this decree, the duration of authors'
rights was  limited to  six  months,  after which all  rights reverted  to  the
state .97
Ivan Peretersky, writing in the journal Sovetskoe Pravo, analyzed these
domestic  legislative  changes in the field  of authors'  rights following the
Bolshevik  revolution.98  What  is  immediately  striking  regarding  these
reforms  was  that  they  occurred  so  soon  after  the  revolution.  The  first
proposed decree  on authors'  rights was issued on December 6,  1917, just
one month after the Bolsheviks gained control.99 Pursuant to this proposal,
the length of the protected term was reduced to fifteen years, followed by a
five-year  period  where  the  copyright °°  was  held  by  the  state  if the
People's  Commissariat  of Enlightenment  found  it  to  have  aesthetic  or
scientific  value.101 The proposal was not adopted. Instead,  an even more
restrictive  regime  was  adopted  by  decree  on  December  29,  1917,
monopolizing  authors'  rights  in  favor  of the  state  for  a  period  of five
years.102 Furthermore,  on  June  11,  1918,  a  decree  was  issued  on  the
abolition of the inheritance of authors'  rights, except in the case of heirs
below the age  of majority  or incapable  of working (nempyOocnoco6nbe
94.  This strategy  is remarkably  similar to the IP reform efforts of the Russian  Federation to
comply with TRIPS throughout the 2000s without being a signatory or member of the WTO, an issue
that will be discussed infra.
95.  FaimHa  BHTaibeBHa  JOBFaHb,  Cucmeva  ,ocyoapcm6eH~blX  opeaHo6 u  ojutecmeHbX
opManu3aluu e ctbepe u3o6pemame.4bcmaa 6 YCCP (1924-1931  rr.)[ Galina V. Dovgan', System of
State Organs and Social Organizations in the Sphere of Patent Protection in the Ukrainian SSR
(1924  1931)], available at http://www.lomonosov-msu.ru/archive/Lomonosov  2008/28 4.pdf.
96.  John  N.  Hazard,  Notes  on Economic Lau, (Prof. Amfitiatrov,  1936)  at 90  (Manuscript
Collection, Columbia University Libraries, Bakhmeteff Archive).
97.  Id.
98.  H. HepeTepcKHfi,  3aOaqu CoeemcKoo 3aKonoame7bcm6a 6 ojiacmu a6mopcmo 'o npa6a,
4(1) COBETCKOE IJPABO 92 (1923)  [I. Peretersky, Goals of Soviet Legislation in the Field of Author's
Rights, 4(1) SOVIET LAW 92 (1923)].
99.  Id. at 92.
100.  I shall use the terms "copyright" and "author's rights" interchangeably. The term "author's
rights"  is the preferred term in the Soviet literature (as  well as in continental jurisprudence  more
generally), but the concepts and legal ramifications are identical.
101.  Peretersky, supra note 98, at 92.
102.  Id.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
[disabled])." 3  Shortly thereafter,  on November 26,  1918,  another decree
was  issued  "nationalizing  scientific,  literary  and  artistic  works,"'104
remaining in force until 1923.
Pursuant to this decree, any work (published  or unpublished) could be
claimed  by the state as its property.105 The relevant state agency then had
the right to publication, reproduction, and public exhibition of the work.106
The  author  was  entitled  to  an  honorarium,  and  in  the  case  of minor
children, remainder rights could be paid out to the heirs from the proceeds
of  the  work.107  The  author's  right  expired  six  months  after  death.108
Interestingly, in regulations promulgated by the People's Commissariat on
Enlightenment on February 9,  1919, the old fifty-year terms were used for
works created prior to the nationalization, or specifically, June 1, 1919.09
These conflicting decrees  were  systematically reworked following the
introduction  of NEP,  not only to  protect  domestic  authors,  but also  to
incorporate  international  protections  for the  defense  of foreign  authors.
Peretersky indicates that more than one year went into the drafting of the
new law on authors'  rights. 10 This new law was intended to be a departure
from the Russian Imperial  Code of 1911,  both in substance and spirit, but
Peretersky's account points to tension within the Institute of Soviet Law in
the drafting of the new code.'  First, much like American  opposition to
the Berne Convention on the basis of moral  rights, drafters had difficulty
conceptualizing  precisely  what was being protected-whether  it was the
abstract  "spiritualized"  right  of the author to his  or  her creation  or the
work product of this spiritual, "psychological"  process.1 2 Moreover, there
were  proposals  to  discard  this  distinction,  as  well  as  the  distinction
between authors'  rights and patents over physical inventions, in favor of a
broad principle protecting quite simply, products of labor, consistent with
Marxist  ideology. 13  After  discussing  at  length  the  legal  distinction
between  patents  and  authors'  rights,  Peretersky  conceded  the  need  for
103.  Id.
104.  Id.
105.  Id.
106.  Id.
107.  Peretersky, supra note 98, at 92.
108.  Id.
109.  Id. at9 3. In addition, by decree dated August 16, 1921, all textbooks were to be published by
the state publishing house FocH3,jaT (Gosizdat). Id.
110.  Id.
111.  Id. at93  94.
112.  Peretersky, supra note 98, at 93-94.
113.  Id. at94.560  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
different terms and legal protection regimes, though the goal, in principle,
4
was a single unitary system.1
Peretersky's  Marxist critique of copyright law illuminates  how Soviet
theorists  balanced  individual  versus  (what they  considered)  new  social
rights.1 5 According  to Peretersky, the  state had rights to the given work
because  the  actual  creator  of the  work  was  not  merely  the  individual
author,  but also the social  medium in  which  he or she  worked. 16 Next,
since  copyright, like all law, was not a logical but a historical  construct,
copyright  law  had  to  take  into  account  relevant  economic  relations  of
production  and  the  social  utility  of  given  works.''  However,  it  is
remarkable  to  observe  the  workings  of the  NEP  and  the  hold  of the
capitalist mindset, as Peretersky concludes that defense of authors'  rights
was  necessary to protect the  incentives for  the  creation  of works-a
proposition  completely  incompatible  with  Marxist  thought." 8  Thus,
Peretersky proposed  reintroduction  of all Imperial-era rights, such as the
author's right to prevent alteration of his or her "mental child," the right of
reproduction,  and the right of compensation  for takings." 9 To the extent
that the government retained rights, these had to be limited so that the state
could  not  seize  works  for  commercial  benefit. 20  With  respect  to  the
objects of copyright, Peretersky suggested sweeping categories, including
traditional works, but also new works stemming from the introduction  of
film (Peretersky  suggested copyright over plotlines to films, whether they
were written or not).121 Lastly, Peretersky  suggested the introduction of a
uniform template publication agreement (between publishers and authors)
modeled  on  the  Swiss  contract  code  of  1911,  subjecting  publication
contracts to the statute of frauds.122
Peretersky's discussion elided conflicts of laws issues and international
treaties,  but  these  became  major  points  of  contention  in  subsequent
writings.  With  economic  growth  came  the  decree  of  1925,  which
established  longer duration  terms,123  but maintained  the widest possible
114.  Id.
115.  Id. at 95.
116.  Id.
117.  Id. at 94-95.
118.  Peretersky, supra note 98, at 95.
119.  Id. at 96.
120.  Id. at 97.
121.  Id.
122.  Id. at 99.
123.  BUTLER, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW IN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION, supra note 5, at xiv
Xv.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
state use and public use exceptions,  such as translation of foreign works
124
without compensation.
Furthermore, the Soviet Union took a favorable  position on the Berne
Convention  (continuing the  Imperial  legacy).125 The  Berne treaty regime
was affirmed  in bilateral treaties with a number of European  states. For
example, the Soviet-German treaty "on the defense of industrial property"
dated October  12,  1925  required  the USSR to apply German  law and IP
protections  in  dealings  with  German  citizens  and  firms.126  Despite
recognizing the Berne protections, the Soviet Union entered into a number
of  separate  agreements  where  the  USSR  claimed  broad  state-use
exemptions in the "use of the technical and cultural heritage of the West,"
which Korovin justified by reference to the "[Soviet]  material and cultural
121
paucity." 
The  1925  set  of  fundamental  principles  on  authors'  rights  was
expanded  in 1928, and ultimately codified in the Law on Author's Rights
of October 8,  1928. Pursuant to this law, the author's right expanded from
25  years  from the  date  of publication  or presentation,  to the life  of the
author, plus fifteen years after the author's death. In the opinion of Soviet
jurists, these  copyright terms  were  entirely  consistent  with  international
norms.128   Soviet  jurists  were  of  the  same  opinion  on  the  related
harmonization process with respect to trademarks and patents. 29
In  fact, by 1935,  Pashukanis dropped  any opposition  to  international
conventions for the defense of industrial or property rights.130 In formalist
fashion,  he  wrote  about  the  International  Council  for  the  Defense  of
124.  Hazard, supra note 96, at 90.
125.  KOROVIN,  CONTEMPORARY PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW, supra note 91, at 100.
126.  Id. at 99.
127.  Id. at 100.
128.  Id.
129.  NEP and post-NEP Soviet legislation  fully protected domestic and foreign trademarks in
accordance  with bilateral  and general  principles  outlined  in international  agreements.  Writing  on
trademarks  in  1924,  S.I. Raevich  began  his  article  with  a note  on how  "fortunate"  it was that
trademarks received sufficient legislative attention both during the period of war communism and the
NEP  and remarked  how consistent  Soviet patent legislation  was  with  European standards.  C.H.
PaeBnq,  0  mo~apnbIx  MnaKax no coeemcKzo.y  npaey, 12(6) COBETCKOE  IIPABO  64  (1924)  [S.I.
Raevich, On Trademarks in Soviet Law, 12(6)  SOVIET LAW 64 (1924)].  With the adoption of the law
"On  Patents on Inventions" in 1924, the committee on inventions under the Supreme Soviet of the
National Economy (BCHX CCCP) continued functioning, but its prerogative was greatly restricted to
issuing applications, licenses for the use of models, shop drawings and trademarks. Dovgan', supra
note 95,  at 1. The patent system introduced in 1924 created a patent bureau and required users to
obtain permission of the patent owner prior to using the invention. Id. (citing BCHX CCCP No1 1 Oi
25.11.1925).
130.  E.  HALIYKAHHC,  OqEPKH  HO  ME)K)JYHAPOJHOMY  FIPABY  165-66  (Foc.  H3J.  COB.
3acoHojaTeJIbCTBO,  1935)  [E. PASHUKANIS,  ESSAYS ON  INTERNATIONAL LAW  165  66 (State Publ.
Soviet Jurisprudence 1935)].562  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
Industrial Property rights founded in Berne in 1883  (pursuant to the  1883
Paris  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Industrial  Property).131  To
Pashukanis,  these  "special  questions  of  international  law"  and
international  administrative  unions  were  to  be  analyzed  based  on  a
concrete estimate of their expected utility.132 He saw no danger or conflict
between  these special treaty bodies and overarching Soviet principles, so
long as they did not signify the wholesale adoption of bourgeois systems
or conflation into the League of Nations apparatus.133
Whereas to the early Pashukanis,  the debate over property concerned
the  basic  form/substance  distinction  and  the  legal  notion  of property
(including  socialist property concepts in Soviet law) was but a sham for
what  was in  essence  bourgeois  law,134  by  the  late  1920s  scholars  like
Korovin  succeeded  in  showing that  it was permissible to  use  seemingly
bourgeois  constructs  during  the  transition  stage  to  communism.  Both
Korovin  and  Pashukanis  reconciled  the  seeming  contradiction  between
intellectual  property protection  and Marxist theory by situating both in  a
broader  international  law  and  foreign  policy  context.  Whereas  lesser
figures  like  Dotsenko  continued  to  struggle  to  create  a  theoretical
distinction between private property and personal property-where private
property  was  deemed  to  be  that  which  was  acquired  as  a  result  of
commercial enterprise (as for instance, under NEP), and personal property
was that acquired as a result of work in a communal  enterprise (such as the
Kolkhoz)135   Korovin's  notion  of  the  transition  theory  and
instrumentalism  obviated  the  need  to  ground  intellectual  property
discussions  in  more  fundamentally  theoretical  terms.  To put  it  another
way, protecting  intellectual  property  rights was  indispensable  to  attract
trade,  and  trade  was  indispensable  to  strengthening  the  Soviet  state;
likewise,  whatever  was  necessary  to  strengthen  the  Soviet  state  was
consistent with Marxist-Leninist tenets. This position was solidly endorsed
by Pashukanis'  successor, Andrey Vyshinsky,136 and continued to serve as
131.  Id.
132.  Id.at  165.
133.  Pashukanis observed that Article 24 of the Statute of the League subordinated existing treaty
bodies to the League. Id. at  164 65. However, aside from the expressed desire to see these bodies
separate,  Pashukanis offers no discussion of the interaction of the various administrative  organs and
the League.
134.  See generally PASHUKANIS, LAW AND MARXISM: A GENERAL THEORY, supra note 6.
135.  Id.at  9.
136.  Michael Head, The PassionateL egal Debates of the Early Years of the Russian Revolution,
14 CAN. J. L. & JURISPRUDENCE 3, 27 (2001) (discussing Vyshinsky's arguments in defense of law and
"stability of laws" by reference to property rights: "[Vyshinsky's examples of the need for law] all
concerned the protection of private property interests.  'To reduce law to policy would be to ignore2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
the basis for the Soviet "stability of laws" doctrine for the remainder of the
Soviet Union.
C. Late Soviet IP Protection:A  n Overview
Having  discussed  the  centrality  of the  property  rights  and  vertical
harmonization  debates  in  the  creation  of the  early  Soviet  state,  it  is
worthwhile to explore the late or "classic" Soviet treatment of IP law. This
section  provides  an  overview  of this  phase  of the  Soviet  IP  regime,
including  the  USSR's  participation  in  international  conventions
concerning intellectual property.
In the domestic realm, Soviet copyright law resembled European  civil
law authors'  rights protections, with a major distinction being the goal of
the  law.  From  the  Soviet  perspective,  Soviet  copyright  law  sought  to
balance the rights  between  authors  and  "society,"  whereas  Western  law
was  seen  as  being  unfavorably  biased  towards  publishers  against
authors. 3'  However,  despite  this  rhetorical  position,  Western
commentators writing on Soviet copyright law stressed the similarities to
European  regimes.  Western  comparativists  routinely  remarked  on  the
Soviet's  relatively  unremarkable,  and  even  "unexciting,', 38  distinctions
with respect to Western copyright law, contrary to what one would expect
from a socialist state. Unlike Cuba's complete disavowal of copyright law
in  the  1960s,139 for instance,  the Soviet Union  fully ascribed  to reigning
international  obligations throughout its existence (whether by conforming
domestic law to international standards, or by joining the relevant treaties).
On the international  plane, the  Soviet Union  was a  state party to the
three principal conventions relating to authors'  rights from the mid-1970s:
the Berne Convention on the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works as
amended  in  1971;  the  Universal  Copyright  Convention  ("UCC")  as
amended  in  1971140  (the USSR ratified the  UCC in  1973); and the  1971
such tasks confronting law as that of the legal defense of personal, property, family and inheritance
rights and interests, and the like."').
137.  Dietrich  A.  Loeber,  "Socialist" Features of Soviet  Copyright Lair,  23  COLUM.  J.
TRANSNATL  L. 297 98  (1985)  [hereinafter  Loeber]  (offering  an excellent  introduction  to Soviet
copyright law).
138.  Id. at298  302.
139.  Id. at 302 03  (quoting Fidel Castro Speaks, 214, 218 (1969)).  Cf Ley No.  14 de 28 de
diciembre de 1977, Ley del Derecho de Autor, available at http://www.cenda.cu/php/loader.php?cont
-legis.php&tipo-2  (harmonizing Cuban copyright law with international standards).
140.  Universal  Copyright Convention  as  revised  at  Paris  on 24  July  1971,  with  Appendix
Declaration  relating to Article  XVII  and  Resolution concerning  Article XI  1971,  July 24,  1971,
available at http://portal.unesco.org/en/.564  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
Convention  on Protection  of the  Interests  of Producers  of Phonograms
Against the  Illegal Reproduction  of their Phonograms.  The  major legal
maneuver  exercised by the USSR concerned  its accession to the UCC  in
1973.  The  Soviet  Union  adopted  the  UCC  before  the  1971  Paris
amendments  to  the  UCC  went  into  force,141  so  as  to  avoid  the  1971
amendments which gave authors greater exclusive rights to their work and
significantly restricted legal licenses.142
On  February  21,  1973,  six  days  before  the  USSR  deposited  its
declaration of accession to the UCC, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
of the  USSR enacted  a series of amendments to chapter IV of the  1961
Fundamentals to bring the Soviet copyright law in line with the minimum
requirements the UCC imposed.143 Ultimately, in 1978 the USSR acceded
to the Paris amendments,  subject to  a reservation  granting liberal  use  of
Soviet works by  developing  countries.  The political justification  for the
USSR acceding to the treaties  was explained  in a separate  letter (1978)
from the USSR to the treaty body:
Desirous of helping to create favorable conditions for the use of the
works of Soviet authors by the developing countries for educational
purposes,  the  Union  of Soviet  Socialist  Republics  agrees  to  the
application  of the  aforementioned  Convention  to  the  works  of
Soviets [sic] authors. 44
With  its accession  to the  UCC, scholars observed  that a  seemingly  dual
system  of  copyright  law  emerged.  For  works  published  by  domestic
authors  (or  works  by  foreigners  which  were  first  published  on USSR
territory),  the  Soviet  copyright  legislation  applied.  On  the  other hand,
international law governed copyright rights for foreign works. As analyzed
by Michiel  Elst, the consequences  of this dual system of copyright were
felt particularly  in the limitations of copyright.45 Thus, domestic authors'
rights  were subject to the most far-reaching  free uses and legal  licenses,
141.  See ELST, supra note 5, at 82 n.147.
142.  Id. An amendment made at the Paris diplomatic conference in 1971  pertained to Article VI
his (1) & (2) relating to reproduction, public use, and transmission of works by radio.  See M.M.
BOGUSLAVSKII, PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW: THE SOVIET APPROACH 173 (William Simons trans.,
1988); see also Records  of the Conference for  Revision  of the  Universal Copyright Convention:
Unesco House, Paris, 5 to 24 July 1971 (Unesco 1973).
143.  See ELST, supra note 5, at 82 83.
144.  Supra note  140 (Universal  Copyright Convention,  with Appendix  Declaration relating to
Articles XVII and Resolution concerning Article XI 1952, UNESCO Convention Documents, Protocol
2 (letter from the USSR dated August 24, 1978)).
145.  ELST, supra note 5, at 95.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
whereas those who fell within the purview of the UCC enjoyed  broader
protection.
This dual  system  had  noticeable  practical  effects.  For instance,  if a
musical work of a Soviet writer was publicly performed, it could be freely
reproduced  in a film or freely broadcast on radio and television. On the
contrary, public performance of a work by a foreign author did not subject
the author to the free use exemptions or legal licenses  of Soviet law: the
author's  permission  was  required146 because  the  extent  of fair use/legal
license  use  in  the  domestic  context  was  quite  broad,147  especially  for
educational or scientific purposes.48 However, with the Soviet state often
the  copyright  holder,  and  in  many  instances  the  ostensible  copyright
encroacher,  copyright issues in the domestic  arena were mostly moot. 149
With  respect  to traditional  copyright  protection  issues  (length  of term,
etc.),  Soviet  domestic  implementation  of the  UCC  was  consistent  with
international  standards.150  The  term of protection was twenty-five  years
after the death of the author with remainder rights paid out to heirs, much
like in capitalist states.151
Elst  correctly  notes  that  the  foreign-domestic  duality  in  Soviet
copyright  law was  untenable.  However,  when  Soviet jurists  recognized
this discrepancy,  their solution was to simply adapt the much broader free
use standards found in Soviet copyright law to international  law, and not
vice  versa.152  In  other  words,  consistent with  the  USSR's  political  and
cultural policy, reconciling "fair use" between Soviet law and international
norms often meant adopting the wider fair use exemptions. For purposes
of the  present  analysis,  this  can  be  rephrased  as  rejection  of vertical
harmonization. By insisting on its own legal  standards, the  Soviet Union
146.  See id. at 95 99.
147.  Id. It was  also  expanded domestically  in  1973  to permit newspapers  to  reproduce  any
published report or scientific, artistic, literary, or oral work; either in the original or as a translation.
MICHAEL A. NEWCITY, COPYRIGHT LAW IN THE SOVIET UNION  110 (Praeger 1978). This was used
famously by Soviet literary journals to publish translations of Vonnegut's Breakfast of Champions and
Norman Mailer's Marylin. Due to highly-publicized protests from the West, the Soviet Union bought
publishing rights to the works shortly thereafter. Id. at 111  12.
148.  NEWCITY, supra note 147, at 112.
149.  SERGE L. LEVITSKY,  COPYRIGHT, DEFAMATION,  AND PRIVACY  IN SOVIET CIVIL LAW: DE
LEGE LATA Ac FERENDA, No. 22(l): LAW IN EASTERN  EUROPE  420 21  (Martinus Nijhoff  1979)
(listing instances where copyright claims could not be invoked against the state pursuant to Soviet civil
law limitations despite being enumerated as fundamental constitutional or traditional author's rights).
150.  Loeber, supra note 137, at 299 300.
151.  Id. at 300 ("As to the property rights of the deceased-the royalties-comparative lawyers
would expect some 'socialist  impact on the law, such as the denial of monetary benefits to an heir on
the grounds that these would accrue to him as 'unearned income.' Soviet law, however, stops short of
imposing such a limitation and conforms in this respect to capitalist practices.").
152.  ELST, supra note 5, at 101.566  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
was maintaining  an exceptionalist posture  on the issue of broad  fair use
protections.
With  respect  to  actual  enforcement  of copyright  claims  against  the
Soviet  Union,  it  should  be  noted  that  very  few  claims  (foreign  or
domestic) actually proceeded through the Soviet judiciary. Peter Maggs, in
his introduction to the copyright volume of Soviet Statutes and Decisions,
explained  that  this  was  due  to  the  realities  and  context  of  state
publishing.153 The limitation on who could actually publish authors' works
and  control  the  revenues  and  royalties  indeed  presented  a  serious
limitation  on  the  free  exercise  of rights,  although  some  transfers  did
occur.154 Moreover, in the domestic context, copyright infringement claims
were limited by the remedies available to aggrieved parties through Soviet
civil, labor, and administrative  law, representing the interplay between the
three  major  characteristics  of  the  Soviet  system:  socialist  property,
economic planning, and the leading role of the Communist Party. 155With
respect  to  foreign  claims,  interpretation  of  obligations  arising  under
international  treaties  was  rare  due  to  the  small  number  of  potential
disputes involving foreign claimants.
By the mid-1980s, advances in technology required the modernization
of Soviet IP law (as in other countries) to reflect the challenge posed by
new  digital  reproduction  technologies.  During this time,  like  most legal
systems,  the Soviet  system only sporadically  investigated  the challenges
156
posed to copyright by technical advances.
II. RUSSIAN IP LAW (1992-2006): TRANSITION
A.  Change, Transplants, andH  armonization
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia's IP regime underwent a
radical  series of transformations. Generally speaking, they can be divided
into three periods. The first, lasting from 1992 to  1994,  was a period  of
indigenous  change  with  law reform  proposals originating  from working
groups  established  in  the dying  days  of the  USSR.  The  second  period,
153.  Loeber, supra note 137, at 312 (citing 14 SOVIET STATUTES AND DECISIONS  5 (P.B. Maggs
ed., 1977  78)).
154.  Id. at 303  12.
155.  Id.
156.  ELST, supra note 5, at 109.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
roughly  from  1995 to 2006, was a period  of legal transplantation157  and
vertical  harmonization.' 58  Here,  vertical harmonization  characterizes  the
relationship between Russia and international  trade bodies like the WTO,
as well  as the perception  of more  diffuse norms or general  principles  of
international  law.159 This period is notable because it coincided with what
Gianmaria  Ajani  identified  as  the  second  stage  of transition  and  law
reform  in  Russia,  "marked  by a  more  critical  approach  towards  'paper
laws'  and  by  a  more  conscious  attitude  towards  the  'Anglo-American
thinking'  of legal  advisers  and of international  financial  institutions."160
Because IP reform in Russia followed other reforms, this period may also
reveal  how  Russian  policymakers  internalized  the  lessons  of preceding
reforms in other substantive fields, if at all. Lastly, the third period of IP
reform  corresponds  to the adoption  of Part  IV of the Russian  Civil Code
on November 24, 2006 (effective  January  1, 2008), intended to supersede
all  previous  legislation  relating  to  intellectual  property  and  to  bring
Russian law into compliance with international  obligations.
Scholars  have  chronicled  the  evolution  of  Russia's  IP  regime  in
exceedingly  detailed accounts, 161 so there is no need to retell  the reform
process, save but in general strokes. As a state successor to the USSR, the
Russian Federation remained a state party to each of the treaties discussed
above. 62  Aside  from  inheriting  Soviet  treaty  obligations,  the  Russian
Federation was also heir to a new Soviet intellectual  property law which
was to go into effect in the USSR on January  1, 1992,  but actually went
into  force  in  the  new  Russian  Federation  on  August  3,  1992.  This
157.  See ALAN WATSON, LEGAL TRANSPLANTS:  AN APPROACH TO COMPARATIVE  LAW (1974);
Gianmaria Aj ani, By Chance andP restige: Legal Transplants in Russia and EasternE urope, 43 AM. J.
COMp. L. 93, 93 n.1 (1995).
158.  Peter Maggs,  The Process of Codification in Russia. Lessons Learned from the Uniform
Commercial Code, 44 MCGILL L.J. 281 (1999).
159.  See Larry Cata Backer, Introduction and Analysis, in HARMONIZTNG  LAW IN AN ERA OF
GLOBALIZATION:  CONVERGENCE,  DIVERGENCE,  AND  RESISTANCE  13-14 (Larry  Cat6  Backer ed.,
2007) (discussing vertical integration, and citing the definition of harmonization as the "effect [ol] an
approximation  or  co-ordination  of different  legal  provisions  or  systems  by  eliminating  major
differences and crating minimum requirements or standards").
160.  Ajani, supra note 157, at 96.
161.  See generally ELST, supra note 5.
162.  In  1994,  Victor  Chernomyrdin  issued  a governmental  decree  to  clarify  that  Russian
Federation inherited its international treaty obligations with respect to IP. See Russian Federation,
decree no. 1224/1994:  0 npucoecuueuuu PoccuiicKon 'leOepaziuu K tepnCKoh KoH6eUu o6 oxpaue
lumepamyp-bX u xydoomcecrn6enbX npou36oeenu  6 peOcaatuu 1971 -ooa, Bceiupnout KoHet/uu o
amopcKwoV  npaee 6 pe~aKicuu 1971 -o~a u Oono.numebubI.V1 HpomoKoiavi 1 u 2, Koneeumuu 1971
-oca o6 oxpane u-inlepeco6 npou36ooumleeh 4boHopamli out He3aKoHno o 6ocnpou3odcmea ux
/onopaivw, November  3, 1994 (Russian)  [Governmental  decree no.  1224 from  1994, signed  by
Viktor Chernomyrdin, Regarding Russia's Accession to the Berne Convention, UCC, and the 1971
Additional Protocols to the UCC], available at http://www.copyrighter.ru/full/index.html?berne4.htm.568  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
legislation  lasted  only  one  year  before  being  replaced  by  the  Law  on
Author's Rights and Neighboring Rights, which went into force on August
3,  1993 .t
In  a clean  break  with the  Soviet past, the  1993  Russian  Constitution
also  recognized  and  protected  by  law  "intellectual  property"  as  an
aggregate  of exclusive  rights to the results of intellectual activity.164 The
use of the term "intellectual  property"  versus authors'  rights is significant
as it was the first time the term was used in Russian legislation since the
early 1920s. As relevant to the discussion below, the Russian Constitution
also  enshrined  additional  limited  guarantees  with  respect  to  mass
information.  For instance,  Article  29(4)  provides:  "Each  shall have  the
right  to  freely  seek,  receive,  transmit,  produce,  and  disseminate
information  by any legal means."'165  Similarly, Article 29(5) provides that
"[t]he  freedom  of mass  information  shall  be guaranteed."  These  rights
must  be  interpreted  in  light of the  copyright  law,  and  vice  versa,  but
Russian courts have yet to rule on any likely conflicts.166
Equally  important,  the  1993  Russian  Constitution  codified  a  monist
conception  of international  law.'6   Article  15,  Section 4 proclaimed  that
general principles of international law, customary international  norms and
international  agreements  to which  Russia is  a  party shall  henceforth  be
constitutive  norms  of the  Russian  legal  system. 68  Pursuant to the  plain
163.  WILLIAM E. BUTLER, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW IN THE RUSSIAN  FEDERATION, supra
note 5, atx vi; see also id at1 5 (providing an English translation of the 1993 law).
164.  See Konstitutsiia Russiiskoi  Federatsii  [Konst.  RF] [CONSTITUTION]  art. 44,  available at
http://www.gov.ru/main/konst/konsti  html.
165.  Id. art 29(4); WILLIAM E. BUTLER, RUSSIAN LAw 710 (2d ed. 2003) (providing an English
translation of 1993 Russian Constitution).
166.  The above provisions respecting freedom of information have been interpreted to refer to the
government's duty to release information. However, as explained fully below, this provision may also
be read more broadly to suggest a protection of the means of access to mass information, such as the
Internet. For instance, such a broad protection may be employed to immunize Russian Internet service
providers from their customers' copyright violations.
167.  In the USSR,  the relationship  of treaties to municipal  law was  one of the most hotly-
contested  issues in  international  law. One view was that the act of ratification  of a treaty by the
Presidium of the  USSR  Supreme  Soviet was  "a special normative  acti mparting  legal  force to
international  treaty norms."  William E. Butler, Comparative Approaches to InternationalL aiv,  190
RECUEIL DES COURS 9, 52-53 (1985). Another view held that transformation of national legislation
was necessary before an international treaty became part of municipal law. Id. at5 3. Third, according
to Article  21  of the  1978  USSR  Law  on  the  Procedure  for  the  Conclusion,  Execution,  and
Denunciation  of  International  Treaties,  certain  treaties  became  automatically  binding  upon
incorporation pursuant to Article 21. Id.
168.  Konstitutsiia Russiskoi Federatsii [Konst. RF] [CONSTITUTION],  Art. 15, available at http:/
www.gov.ru/main/konst/konstll  html  ("O6ruenpH3HaHlbe  npHHnMb1  Hb Op mb me)K4yHapO  HO[O
npaBa  H Me)KYaPOHbIe  ROrOBOPbI  PoccnicKott  OeiepaIui  ABI IOTCI  COCTaBROft  qacTIo ee
UpaBOBOft cilcTeMbI. Eciii  Me)KFiynapORMbIM jOFOBOPOM PoccnttcKofi O(Ceiepaum  ycTaHOBJieHbI HHbIe
npaB"jia, qeM npeayCMOTpeHHble 3aKOHOM, TO npHMeHIOTGIC  npaaa  MelyHapOJHOFO J OFOBopa."2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
language  of Article  15,  international  treaties were  elevated  higher even
than domestic  legislation: under Section 4, if an international  convention
contravenes other laws, then the international convention trumps domestic
law.169 Article  15,  Section  4 itself did not stipulate whether international
law  required  national  implementation,  translation,  or transformation,  or
whether  international  treaties  are  self-implementing.7°  Accordingly,  the
constitutional  provision  immediately became  the locus of a major debate
in post-Soviet international  legal theory.171 This debate, by and large, has
continued to the present day.172
Returning to the copyright law, the  1993  Law on Author's Rights and
Neighboring Rights was not well  received  by either Russian  scholars or
Western  observers. While the law recognized  individuals' property rights
in cultural and artistic works of their own creation, it considerably reduced
the list of free uses,  a longstanding custom  in  Soviet IP  law.  Remaining
free uses were defined much more narrowly than before, and compulsory
licenses were abolished altogether. 73 From the West's viewpoint, the 1993
law reform package lacked many of the basic elements found in Western
practice,  such as the right to alienate and encumber  intellectual property
rights.' 4  Accordingly,  the  legislative  package  was  quickly  tabled  for
amendment.  Incidentally,  this was to  have  positive  consequences,  as  it
allowed  legislators  to  assess  the  impact  of  emerging  information
["General  principles  and norms  of international  law,  and  international  treaties to  which Russian
Federation is  a party,  are constitutive  parts  of Russia's legal  system. If national  law contradicts
international treaties, then international law supersedes national legislation."]).
169.  Id.
170.  B.B. FaBplJIOB, Teopuu mpanctop.iazmu u une.vienmaltuu nop.M m e)ccynapoino.o npaea
6 omeqecmeenHou npae6o0o0  OoKmpuHe. 2 MOCKOBCKHI )KYPHAJT ME)KIQYHAPOAHOFO  YPABA 39-61
(2001)  [V.V. Gavrilov, Theories of Transformation and Implementation of International Legal Norms
in Russian Legal Doctrine, 2 MOSCOW J. INTL L. 39, 40 (2001)], available at http://www.law.edu.ru/
article/article.asp?articlelD= 162606.
171.  E.T. YCeHKO, Coomnotuenue u 63au4oOeucnue. 4e)OyHapoOno2o U Hat/uoHabHo o npaea
u PoccuucKaq KoncmumyquA, 2 MOCKOBCK1I4i  )KYPHAJI  ME,  LCYHAPOHOFO HPABA 16 (1995)  [E.T.
Usenko,  Correlation  and Interrelationship of International and Domestic  Lan, and the  Russian
Constitution,  2  Moscow J.  INT'L  L.  16  (1995)];  B.B.  FaBPwIOB,  Teopuu  npaHcpopmaitu  u
uvne.vieumajuu  nopm  ,viewcbyuapo6noo  npa~a  6  omeiecmennoi  npaeo~ou  ooKmpune.  2
MOCKOBCKHIH )KYPHAl ME)K, YHAPO}IHOFO HPABA 39, 39 61  (2001) [Gavrilov,  supra note  170, at
39-61.
172.  See K.N. Ratsiborinskaia, Application of InternationalL aw by Russian Courts, in RUSSIAN
LAW:  THEORY  & PRACTICE  59  (2004);  O.A.  Ishchenko  & E.G.  Ishchenko,  Implementation of
International Law in Russian Legislation, 2 RUSSIAN LAW:  THEORY & PRACTICE  196 (2008); L.L.
Ponomareva, International Law in Decisions of Russian CriminalC  ourts, I RUSSIAN LAW: THEORY &
PRACTICE 52, 55  59 (2008) (discussing the Surgut District Court's failure to consider international
standards  and  extradition  rules,  and  proposing  legislative  changes  to  require  courts  to  explain
analytical process in court decisions).
173.  ELST, supra note 5, at 370-75.
174.  Id.570  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
technologies  and to compare similar reform projects then being proposed
in various jurisdictions, as well as internationally.
The Russian civil  code was  incrementally amended  in  1995  and 2004
to  further  conform  Russian  domestic  law with  evolving  TRIPS175  and
bilateral  obligations.176 Generally  speaking,  the  1995  and  2004 reforms
kept with  longstanding  Soviet practice and the civil  law tradition.  Rights
were  based on the moral  theory of authors'  rights; that  is, an author has
exclusive  rights to use  his works,  including  the rights  of reproduction,
distribution, "communication  to the general public by cable,"  and others
(all referred to as the "property rights"). The copyright law applied broadly
to any work, whether technical, artistic, or of another nature, and also to
all  reproducible  media.177  The  2006  reform  also  added  to  the  list  of
exclusive  rights  an  "Internet  right" 78 -that  is,  the  right  of
"communication  of a  work in  such  a  way  that  it  is  accessible  for  any
person in the interactive mode from any place and at any time at his choice
(right  of making  available  to the  general  public)."'179  A limited  fair use
exemption  was  provided  in  Articles 20-24  covering traditional  cultural,
educational, and scientific uses.18°  Part IV of the Russian Civil Code was
adopted in 2006 and became effective on January 1, 2008.
These  reforms  were  meant  to  be  evolutionary  and  to  gradually
modernize  and  bring  Russian  law  in  line  with  international  norms.
175.  See Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, April 15, 1994, 33
I.L.M. 1197 (1994) [hereinafter TRIPS Agreement].
176.  Sergey Budylin  & Yulia Osipova, Is AlloJIP3 Legal? Non-Contractual Licensing under
Russian Copyright Law, 7 J. HIGH TECH. L. 1, 3 n. 16 (2007).
177.  In addition to the General Law on Author's Rights, there also exists a 1992 Law on the Legal
Protection of Programs of Electronic Computers and Data Bases (as amended 24 December, 2004).
See WILLIAM E. BUTLER, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY TN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION, supra note 5, at
xxii. Pursuant to this law, "[c]omputer programs are treated as works of literature, and data bases, as
collections."  Id. The substantive provisions of the law are similar to the Law on Author's Rights. Id. A
Russian  Agency  for the Legal  Protection of Computer  Programs,  Data Bases, and Topologies  of
Integral  Microcircuits  was formed to register computer programs,  data bases,  and topologies and
contracts assigning such (pursuant to the 1992 law on Computers and Data Bases, amended in 2004).
Id. at xxii-xxiii.  However,  it  is unclear  how  many computer programs  were or are  voluntarily
registered with this agency.
178.  In 2006, the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation issued an advisory opinion seeking to
clarify  the  then-existing  copyright  law,  delineate  civil  and  criminal  jurisdiction,  procedure  and
evidentiary rules, and highlight the need for further reform as a result of challenges posed by the
Internet. See  Supreme  Court  of the Russian  Federation:  0  Gonpocax, 6o3uuCuuy y cy~o6 npu
pacc viompeHUU ,pamfcdaHcKux Oe,7,C 6313aHHbIX C npuwveHeHue f 3aKoHocarne lbcm6a oo a6lopcKom
npaee u c~e)igcbzy npaaax, Plenum decision no. 15 of June 19, 2006 [On Questions Regarding the
Application of the Copyright Law], availablea t http://www.supcourt.ru/vscourt  detale.phpid=4349.
179.  See Budylin & Osipova, supra note 176, at 4 (this provision went into effect on September 1,
2006, but has since been superseded by Part IV of the Russian Civil Code).
180.  1993 Law on Author's Rights and Neighboring Rights, Arts. 20  24 (author's translation).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
However, aside  from mandatory harmonization required  by Article  15(4)
of the Russian Constitution, Russia also sought to voluntarily harmonize
its domestic  IP regime with  WTO-related  IP norms.  Yet how did Russia
interpret  these  obligations?  To  what  extent  did  Russia  succeed  in
coordinating  its domestic  legal regime with TRIPs?  These questions  can
be analyzed through Russia's evolving conceptions of fair use/free license
in  copyright  policy.  Fair  use  is  a  useful  analytical  frame  because  it
illustrates  where  a  legal  regime  strikes the  balance  between  individual
rights to a given work and social or public rights. For instance,  if during
Soviet  times  legal  doctrine  avoided  the  term  "intellectual  property"
altogether-criticizing  it  "for  not  only  its  inaccuracy  but  for  being
bourgeois  and  exploitative"'8 '-and  provided  fairly  broad  fair  use
exceptions  to  copyright,  analyzing  fair  use  in  the  post-Soviet  context
elucidates  the  continuities/changes  between  Soviet  and  post-Soviet
sensibilities182 towards intellectual property more broadly.
Prior  to  embarking  on  the  fair  use  analysis,  however,  a  review  is
necessary  of the driving forces,  both  domestic  and international,  behind
the harmonization reforms.
B. Policy-DrivenH  armonization (2000-Present)
Effective  January  1, 2008, Russia's entire intellectual property regime
was  codified  in a new  Part  IV of the Russian  Civil Code. 83 The stated
purpose  of Russia's  new Part TV  of the  Civil  Code  ("New Copyright
Law")  was  to  bring  Russian  copyright  law into  line with  international
copyright norms. 84 The express goal was harmonization of Russia's entire
IP regime-not merely individual normative acts, but the entire regulatory
and  enforcement  system-with  the  standards  set  forth  in  multilateral
conventions, namely TRIPS, but also other conventions.'85 The law reform
181.  William E. Butler, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW IN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION, supra note
5, at x.
182.  "Sensibility" here refers to the opinions of legal scholars and policymakers regarding a given
proposition. Research has revealed no opinion polls or ethnographic data on the topic of intellectual
property rights  in  the late  1980s  and  early  1990s from  the  perspective  of Soviet  citizens. The
assertions,  therefore,  are based  on logical  inferences,  doctrinal writings  and a small unscientific
opinion sample from Russian colleagues.
183.  Alexander L. Makovsky, On the Fourth Part of Russia's Civil Code, in CIVIL CODE OF THE
RUSSIAN FEDERATION, FOURTH PART 24 (Peter Maggs & Alexander Makovsky eds., 2008) (offering a
parallel English-Russian translation).
184.  GRAZHDANSKII  KODEKS ROSSLISKOI FEDEATSI  [GKRF] [Civil Code] pt. 4, available at
http://www.internet-Law.ru/law/kodeks/gk4.htm  (Russ.).
185.  V.N. Monakhov, Conference Presentation at Moscow State University Faculty of Journalism:
Mass Information in Internet: Freedom and Responsibility (Oct. 12  13, 2007). A draft version of the572  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
project followed  more than  ten years  of advisory work from the  United
States, the WTO and international IP organizations.1 86 The reform project
was  championed  by a  number of domestic  actors,  such  as the  Moscow
Media Law and Policy Institute and media industry groups, who sought to
clarify  the  confusing  maze  of  rights  and  obligations  under  previous
legislative enactments.  But a foreign lobby also took active part in shaping
the new  law. A common overarching political reality for both camps was
that  perceived  success/failure  of the  reforms  would  influence  Russia's
accession to the WTO.187
1.  WTO, TRIPS & the American Lobby
Russia's  long  road  to  WTO  membership  began  almost  twenty-five
years  ago.  Even  under  the  Soviet  Union,  one  of the  first  steps  of the
Gorbachev  administration  was to apply  for membership to the GATT in
August 18,  1986, and to participate in the Uruguay Rounds,  both of which
were rejected by the West.'88 The Russian  Federation reapplied for GATT
membership  in  1993,  one  year  after  the  dissolution  of the  USSR.1'89
present section was presented at the conference. Sample treaties include the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Sept. 9, 1886, last amended 1979), in force in the Russia
Federation  since March  13,  1995; Brussels Convention  Relating to the Distribution of Programme-
Carrying  Signals Transmitted  by Satellite  (May  21,  1974),  in  force in Russian  Federation  since
January 20, 1989; Madrid Agreement for the Repression of False or Deceptive Indications of Source
on Goods (Apr.  14,  1981)  (revised at Washington  on June 2, 1911,  at The Hague on November 6,
1925, at London on June 2, 1934, and at Lisbon on October 31, 1958 and was added to in Stockholm
on July 14, 1967);  Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (Mar. 20,  1883, last
amended  1979), in force in Russian Federation since August 12, 2009; Patent Law Treaty (Sept.  1,
2000), with currently signed parties, in force in Russian Federation since August 12, 2009; Convention
for  the  Protection  of  Producers  of  Phonograms  Against  Unauthorized  Duplication  of Their
Phonograms (Oct. 29, 1971), with 80 currently signed parties, in force in the Russian Federation since
March  13,  1995; Rome Convention for the Protection of Perforners,  Producers of Phonograms and
Broadcasting Organizations  (Oct. 26,  1961),  in force in Russian Federation since May 26, 2003;
Trademark Law Treaty (Oct. 27, 1994), with 77 signers, and which the Russian Federation signed May
11,  1998; Washington  Treaty on  Intellectual Property in Respect  of Integrated Circuits  (May 26,
1986), the ten signers of which include Zambia, Serbia, Saint Lucia, Liberia, India, Guatemala, Ghana,
Egypt, China, Bosnia and Herzegovina; WIPO Copyright Treaty (Dec. 20, 1996); WIPO Performances
and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) (Dec. 20, 1996).
186.  GJIbra FljieImaHoBFaIp awc~aucKu1fK  eKc paoue c  c mpe6oeaHui4u BTO, KoMMepcaHT
(24.07.2006) [Olga Pleshanova,  Civil Code Departsf rom Demands of WTO,  Kommersant (July 24,
2006), availablea t http://www.kommersant.ru/doc.aspxDocslD=692256.
187.  RUSSIA  IN THE  INTERNATIONAL  CONTEXT:  PRIVATE  INTERNATIONAL  LAW,  CULTURAL
HERITAGE,  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY,  HARMONIZATION  OF  LAWS,  FESTSCHRIFT  FOR  MARK  M.
BOGUSLAVSKIJ (A. Trunk, R. Knieper A.G. & Svetlanov eds., Berliner Wissenschafts-Verlag 2004).
188.  KAzIMIERZ  GRZYBOWSKI,  SOVIET  INTERNATIONAL  LAW  AND  THE  WORLD  ECONOMIC
ORDER 187 (1987).
189.  Elmira Danelyan,  Russia's Long Journey to the WTO:  Whose Interests Will Be Served if
Russia Joins the World Club?, 1:4 LANDSLIDE 52, 52 (2009).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
Russia's WTO accession process has been tumultuous, and reflects many
of the  broader  anxieties  about liberalization  reforms  in Russia over the
past twenty years. This is not the place to delve into the large amount of
literature  on  Russia  and  the  WTO, 90  but  a  review  of the  debate  over
TRIPS191 and IP reform is necessary.
Russia's IP regime first gained widespread global attention around the
late  1990s and  early 2000s, when  a vocal  opposition  to  Russian piracy,
coupled  with lax IP regulation,  began to take shape  in the West.192 The
West's criticism had  several roots. First, Russia's  large, highly educated
and  technologically  savvy  work  force  (diminished  and,  perhaps,
emboldened by the "brain drain" of the 1990s) began to use the Internet to
download vast amounts of copyrighted Western-sourced media, including
video  games,  computer  programs,  films,  music,  and  electronic  books.
Second, around the late 1990s, the rate of high-profile hacking, spamming
and  phishing  attacks  originating  from  Russia  began  to  multiply
exponentially.  These attacks raised public awareness of the danger posed
by emerging technologies, especially in  light of the then-impending  Y2K
crisis. A third publicized  source  of tension between  America and Russia
was America's allegation that the Russian government was complicit in its
public's  obsession  with  Internet  piracy  by  completely  disregarding  its
obligations  to  protect  copyright  with  respect  to  new  and  emerging
technologies. 193  This  was  seen  as  stemming  from  weak  enforcement
mechanisms, corruption, low penalties, and "lack of education and training
for law enforcement and judicial officials. 194
190.  Chiedu  Osakwe  et  al.,  Russia's Accession to  the  WTO,  CARNEGIE  ENDOWMENT  FOR
INTERNATIONAL PEACE (Dec. 10, 2009), available at http://www.carnegieendowment.org/events/?fa-
eventDetail&id-1496; see also Jasmine Cameron, WTO Accession and Legal Tradition in the Area of
Intellectual Property Rights: A  Comparative Case Study of Kyrgyzstan and Russia, 11  J.  EAST
EUROPEAN LAW  1 (2004); Mike Moore, Director-General, World Trade Organization, speech att he
Fifth Annual Russian Economic Forum:  Russia and the WTO: Reintegration in the World Economy
(Apr.  19,  2002),  available at http://www.wto.org/french/news  f/spmm f/spmm84  f.htm;  Harry G.
Broadman, Russian Trade Policy Reformfor WTO Accession, 401 WORLD BANK DISCUSSION PAPERS
41,  51-53 (1999);  Christian L. Broadbent & Amanda M. McMillian, Russian and the World Trade
Organization: Will TRIPS Be a Stumbling Block to Accession?, 8 DUKE J. COMP. & INT'L L.  519
(1998).
191.  The TRIPS Agreement, in concordance with the general WTO regime, prohibits intellectual
property laws from offering any benefits to local citizens which are not available to citizens of other
TRIPS signatories.
192.  See David  E.  Miller,  Combating Copyright Infringement in  Russia: A  Comprehensive
Approachf or Western Plaintiffs, 33 VAND. J. TRANSNAT'L L. 1203,  1220-22 (2000).
193.  Id. at 1207  12.
194.  Hearing to Explore Permanent Normal Trade Relationsf or Russia: Before the Subcommittee
on Trade of the House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means, 107th Cong. 48 (2002)
(statement of Thomas R. Pickering, Senior Vice President, International Relations, Boeing).574  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
A common  sentiment among Western  observers  in the early to  mid-
2000s  was that among the world  leaders in global  music  piracy, Russia
had one of the largest piracy problems in the world because of inadequate
laws  and  enforcement  mechanisms. 95  Despite  a  computer-literacy  and
population growth rate that was a fraction of China's, the Russian threat
was perceived as equaling,  if not exceeding, China's. This was partly due
to China's  earlier adoption  of IP  regulations  (China joined the  WTO in
2001),  but  may  also  have  reflected  Cold  War-era  mistrust  and
apprehension. Rhetoric from American industry groups like the Recording
Industry Association  of America (RIAA)  and political  leaders bears this
out. In 2005, for instance, Senator Orrin Hatch (R-UT) stated that, before
he would vote on Russia's accession to the WTO, "many of us will have to
be convinced that the Russian government is serious about cracking down
on theft of U.S. intellectual  property."' 96 In  addition to copyright claims,
the United  States contended  that Russian  law does  not provide TRIPS-
consistent protection against unfair commercial  use of test data and other
data  submitted  to  obtain  marketing  approval  for  pharmaceutical  and
agricultural  chemical  products.197   The  2006  annual  U.S.  Trade
Representative  "Section  301"  report,  for instance,  refers to  deficiencies
which  include:  the  "lack  of  an  effective  and  deterrent  criminal
enforcement system ...  ; the lack of effective plant inspection  [for optical
media production  and distribution]  . . . ; the lack of civil ex parte search
procedures;  an extremely porous border;  delays  in criminal  prosecutions
and adjudications; and infrequent destruction of seized pirate goods."198
To  overcome  this  impasse,  in  November  2006,  United  States  and
Russia signed a "market access agreement" requiring Russia to take action
to  address  piracy  and  make  continuing  law  reforms  before  the  Unites
States would consent to Russia joining the WTO.199 In a side letter to the
market  access  agreement, the  United  States  singled  out  Russian  optical
195.  Michael  Mertens,  Thieves in Cyberspace: Examining Music Piracy and Copyright Law
Deficiencies in Russia as it Enters the Digital Age, 14 U. MIAMI  INT'L & COMP.  L. REV.  139, 143
(2006); see also Russia loses WTO bid as G8 begins, 16 July, 2006, available at http://news.bbc
.co.uk/2/hi/europe/5183892.stm  (describing  Bush-Putin  talks  prior  to  G8  summit  relating  to
enforcement of Russian laws against the piracy of American music, computer programs, and DVDs).
196.  Bradley S. Butterfield, Kevin J. Mason, Joseph B. Payne, and Robert R. Trumble,  Human
Resources and Intellectual Property in a Global Outsourcing Environment: Focus on China, India,
and Eastern Europe, 15 INT'L H.R. J. 7 (2006).
197.  2005 OFFICE OF U.S. TRADE REPRESENTATIVE  SPECIAL 301 REPORT.
198.  Id. at 32; Laurence R. Helfer, The Neuw Innovation Frontier? Intellectual Property and the
European Court of Human Rights, 49 HARV. INT'L L.J. I n.218 (2008).
199.  Susan Butler,  US. Labels Target Russian Music Site, BILLBOARD, Jan. 27, 2007,  at  17;
OFFICE OF U.S. TRADE REPRESENTATIVE,  FACT SHEET, RESULTS OF BILATERAL NEGOTIATIONS ON
RUSSIA'S ACCESSION TO THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION (Nov. 19, 2006).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
media (CD, DVD, etc.) factories and Internet servers that manufactured  or
distributed  foreign copyrighted works, calling on the Russian government
to  aggressively  target  these  offenders.2°°  In  exchange  for  Russia's
agreement to step up enforcement and to streamline the passage of Part IV
of the Civil Code, the United States promised to provide further training
and advisory support for the Russian Ministry of Economic Development
and Trade.2°'
Notwithstanding  the  market  access  agreement  and  assurances  from
Russian  leaders,  losses  from  IP  infringement  originating  in  Russia
continue  to  rise.  An  annual  report  compiled  by the  Office  of the  U.S.
Trade Representative  pursuant  to  Section  182  of the U.S.  Trade Act of
1974  provides  a  glimpse  into  the  alleged  losses  from  copyright
infringement  in  countries  like  Russia. 202 In  2009  alone,  the  estimated
losses  from  Russian  piracy  of  business  software  were  nearly  $1.9
billion. 203 In sum, the American copyright industry estimates that it loses
at minimum $2.5 billion dollars to Russian piracy each year. These figures
do not include estimates for losses of records and music, motion pictures,
entertainment  software,  and  books.  Consequently,  the  U.S.  Trade
Representative  maintains  Russia  on  its  "Priority  Watch  List."  By
comparison,  losses  due  to  Chinese  piracy  (with  its  significantly  larger
population  and  computer  and  internet  access  rates)  amount  to  $3.5
billion.204
200.  OFFICE  OF  U.S.  TRADE  REPRESENTATIVE,  U.S.  RUSSIA  BILATERAL  MARKET  ACCESS
AGREEMENTISIDE  LETTER ON  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY  RIGHTS  (Nov.  19,  2006),  available at
http://ustraderep.gov/assets/World  Regions/EuropeMiddleEast/Russia  the NIS/asset upload filel
48  10011.pdf;  Bilateral  Market  Access  Agreement  on  Intellectual  Property  Rights,  U.S.-Russia,
available at http:/ustraderep.gov/Trade  Sectors/Intellectual  Property/Russia/Section  lndex.html.
201.  OFFICE  OF  U.S.  TRADE  REPRESENTATIVE,  U.S.  RUSSIA  BILATERAL  MARKET  ACCESS
AGREEMENTISIDE LETTER ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (Nov. 19, 2006).
202.  The "Special  301"  Report is an annual  review of the global state of intellectual  property
rights  (IPR)  protection  and  enforcement,  conducted  by  the Office  of the United  States  Trade
Representative (USTR) pursuant to Section 182 of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended by the Omnibus
Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 and the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (enacted in 1994).
See 19 U.S.C § 2101 (2006).
203.  These statistics are compiled by the International  Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA) and
incorporated into the Special 301 Report. See IIPA, SPECIAL 301 REPORT 126 (2010), http://www.iipa
.com/rbc/2010/2010SPEC301RUSSIA.pdf. By comparison, the 2008 losses from Russian piracy of
business software were nearly $2.3 billion. Id. Globally, annual American losses due to IP violations
amount  to  more  than  $100  billion,  according  to  one  U.S.  trade  group,  the  Coalition  Against
Counterfeiting and Piracy (headed by NBC VP Rick Cotton). See Darrell A. Hughes, NBC VP:  US
Needs Intellectual-PropertyR ights Protection Plan, WALL ST. J., Feb.  18, 2010, available at http:/
online.wsj.com/article/BT-CO-20100218-714295.html.
204.  Id.576  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
2.  Russian Civil Code (PartI V) and Legal Licenses
The following  section  outlines several  substantive  provisions  relating
to  legal  licenses  and  fair  use,  and  compares  them  with  established
American  fair  use  standards  to  determine  the  extent  of likely  actual
harmonization. The U.S. copyright law and fair use exemption are chosen
as a functional equivalent25 because of the vast number of American cases
interpreting  and applying the fair use doctrine and the dominance of the
U.S.  approach  in  international  IP  regulation  regimes.  Copyright
infringement  claims in Russia and the United States also often arise from
similar  factual  circumstances,  especially  in  cases  involving  copyright
infringement on the Internet.
To begin, Article  1245 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation (all
subsequent  article references  are to the New Copyright Law)  governs the
reproduction of copyrighted works in the form of "home copies"-limited
copies  of  copyrighted  musical  works  for  private  use.  Even  "home"
reproduction  of such  musical  works  must  be compensated.  As  before,
copyrighted  musical  works  are  protected  more  strictly  than  other
audiovisual  electronic  works,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that,  currently,
more  and more  books,  academic  materials,  and  other works  containing
scientific, artistic, photographic, or other non-musical works take the form
of electronic, easily reproducible  works. The distinction between musical
and other audiovisual electronic works made in Article  1245 illustrates the
ambiguity of the current scheme. Thus, the traditionally protected right to
"home  copy"  musical  works  for  personal  archive  needs  is  eliminated,
while  home  reproduction  of non-phonographic  or non-musical  works  is
allowed. Such ambiguities abound in the new law.
For  instance,  Article  1266  protects  authors'  rights  to  prohibit
alterations  of their works. 206 Pursuant  to  this  law,  the  author's  written
permission  is  required  to  make  any  additions,  alterations,  deletions,
provision of illustrations, to issue a preface, postscript, or add comments
or explanations to a text. In  short, all alterations of a work are prohibited
without the author's express consent,  save the separately preserved  right
for parodies and caricatures.  Article  1266 marks a strong departure  from
the previous right against alteration.  Currently, the author's right to his or
her "reputation"  is invoked solely in  instances where the alterations  may
have caused an infringement on the author's reputation or honor.
205.  See Graziadei, supra note 4.
206.  These rights are properly titled the rights of inviolability over a given copyrighted  work
(npaBa Ha HenpHKOCHOBeHHOCTb HpOH3BejeHHM1).2011] RUSSIAN IP REFORM
Similarly, Article 1273 provides for a limited "private use"  exemption.
Pursuant to this Article, reenactment of a copyrighted work is permitted so
long as  it  is  strictly  performed  for  private use.20   However,  like Article
1245 (Right to "Home  Copy"), the private use exemption is ambiguous on
its face. Applied to the Internet context, the implications of this provision
become  even  more  unclear.  First,  the  term  "reenactment"
(Bocnpoii3Begeuiie)  does not clearly define a particular set of permissible
rights or acts. Secondly, "private use" is notoriously fuzzy when applied to
the  Internet.  For instance,  is posting  a  clip  of copyrighted  music  on a
private Internet message board so that the individual can enjoy clips of the
music remotely considered private use, or is the fact that the music clip is
reproduced  and hosted on a  remote server sufficient to constitute  illegal
reproduction?
Article  1274  contains  a  limited  "cultural  use"  exemption.208  This
section  provides  a  legal  license  for  free  use  of copyrighted  material  in
"informational,"  scientific, educational,  or cultural contexts. Although the
educational  and  cultural  exemption  seems  broad, the exemption  itself is
subject to several very broad limitations. For instance, pursuant to Article
1274  Section  2,  libraries  may  lend  electronic  versions  of copyrighted
works (CDs, DVDs, VCR cassettes,  e-books) only so long as the works
are  viewed  in  library  facilities,  under  conditions  making  reproduction
impossible.  Immediately,  such  a  limitation  bans  legitimate
207.  See  CTaTbg  1273  (CBo60,HOe  BOCnPOH3BeeHue  npoU3BejHmi  B  J]HqHb]X  LleJItX
,ronycKaeTcH  6e3 co[JlacH~t aBTopa  im  IHOFO HpaBoo6iajaTeq  [  6e3 BbHljlaTbi  BO3HaFpa)IeHHt
BOCrIPOn3Bejenne rpaKIannnoM HCKJiLOqHTeJiHo B IqHbIX UeJIAIX.)  [Grazhdanskii Kodeks Rossiiskoi
Federatsii  [GKRF] [Civil Code] art. 1274 (Russ.)  (allowing the free right of reproduction for private
use without the permission of the author or the holder of author's rights and without compensation.)].
208.  Id. art.  1274 (allowing  the free  use of copyrighted  works  for informational,  scientific,
educational/teaching and cultural purposes).
[. ..]
2. B cnyqae, KOFra 6H61noTeKa  rlpejocTaBJIxeT  3K3ennIMH1PbI  Hpon3BexeHH,  npaBoMepHo
BBealeHHbie  B FpaxicaHCKH  o6opOT,  BO BpeMeHHOe  6e3BO3Me3,iHOe  nOJlb3OBaHHe,  TaKoe
HOJI1b3OBaHne  RionycKaeTcA  6e3  coFjiacnIA  aBTopa  illi  HHOFO  rlpaBoo6iajaTei  H1 6e3
Bb.IaTbI  Bo3Harpa)K~reHm.  Hp"  3TOM  Ubipa)KeHH61e  B  LI4HdpOBOHi  (bopue  3K3eMHJHPbl
npoH3Be, eH H,  npeJrocTaBnloeM6be  H  iOTeKaM H  BO  BpeMeHHOe  6e3BO3Me3,,Hoe
HoJlb30BaHne, B TOM qHCJ1e B HOPAIRKe B3aHMHOFO HCfIOJIb3OBaHH5I  6H6 JiOTeqHbIX pecypcoB,
MOFYT  npeJoCTaBJ19TbCM TOJ1bKO  B noMeeH "Mx 6H6JIOTeK  npi  YCJIOBHH  [CKJ[IoqeHHHI
BO3MO)KHOCTII  CO3,JaTb KOnI  3THX npoH3BemeHHH B lulHppOBOA (bopMe.
[2. When a library offers samples of works that have been legally introduced into public use,
for temporary non-profit use, this use is allowed without the consent of the author, the holder
of the author's rights, and without compensation. Electronic copies of works, including works
introduced for reciprocal use of resources, may be lended only in the library facilities and
under conditions prohibiting the possibility  of creation  [reproduction]  of these  works in
digital form.]578  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
educational/cultural  uses  of films  and  musical  works  in  the  home  or
classroom context. Clearly, the limitation on libraries'  rights to lend cuts
deeply  into  the  educational  and  cultural  prerogatives  of the  libraries,
namely the  free and reasonable  dissemination  of knowledge  and literary
and cultural works.209 Moreover, beyond restricting citizens'  longstanding
rights to fair,  uncompensated  use  of copyrighted  works via the libraries,
the  Article  arguably  infringes  on  legitimate,  constitutionally-protected
rights to access information, especially of those who are unable to travel or
visit libraries.
Article 1275 echoes the restrictive and outdated spirit of Article 1274.
This  Article  grants  libraries  the  right  to  reproduce  one  copy  of  a
copyrighted  work  without  compensation  for  purposes  of archiving  the
given  work. Like Article  1274,  Article  1275  Section  2 contains  a broad
limitation prohibiting the reproduction  or storage of reproduced works via
electronic  means. 210 In other  words,  libraries may  reproduce  works  via
facsimile with the aid of any technical  devices,  so long as the devices do
not yield electronic copies of the works.
To put  it mildly,  the "one  analog  copy"  rule  is  a relic  of an  analog
past.2 '  Moreover,  this  rule,  far  from  enabling  a  vibrant  multimedia
academic  atmosphere,  stifles  research  by  reducing  legitimate  fair
electronic  uses to paper reproductions. 2   The practical  effect  of Articles
209.  See  Janice  T.  Pilch,  Fair Use and Beyond:  The Status of Copyright Limitations and
Exceptions in the Commonwealth of Independent States, 65(6) COLL. RES. LIBR. 468, 468  504 (Nov.
2004) (discussing the evolution of fair use in Russia between the 1995 and 2004 legislation).
210.  See CTaTbM  1275  (CBo60JHOe  HCnlOJlb3OBaHHe  HPOH3BeeHH1  nyTeM  penporyUmpoBaHHq)
[Grazhdanskii Kodeks Rossiiskoi Federatsii [GKRF] [Civil Code] art. 1275 (Russ.). Free use of works
using reproduction].
[. ..]
2.  HoR  peipO1JYUHPOBanneM  (perIporpaqinqecKHM  BocHpon3BeieHneM)  HOHHMIaeTcI
()aKCHMHJlbHOe  BOCHPOI3BeeHHe i1pO!3BeeH4ig C nlOMOIHbO J]1o0blX TeXHHqeCKHX cpeCTB,
ocyu~eCTBJIieMoe He B UeJIX nH3jaHHA. PeIpO!IyUHpOBaHHe He BKjiIoqaeT BOCIPOH3Be  eHHe
npOH3Be7eHHM  Him  xpaHeHHe e[O  KOnHfi B )j]eKTpOHHOfi  (B TOM  qHce B uH1j)poBo),
OrlTHqeCKOH  Hul!  HHOH  MaWIHHOqHTaeMoH  ( opMe,  KpoMe  cjlyqaeB  Co3jaHl1m  C HOMOIJHB[O
TeXHHqeCKHX  cpejCTB  BpeMeHHbIX  KOifHH,  HIpejHa3HaqeHHbIX  Rj15  OCyIIIeCTBJleHHSI
perlpoyUHpoBaHHA.
[2. Reproduction (reprographic reproduction) is understood to mean fascimile reproduction of
a given work  with the help  of any  technical  device,  aside  from the  initial production.
Reproduction  does not  include reproduction  or storage of copies in  electronic (including
digital), optical  or other  machine form,  except in instances  of creation  with the aid of
technical devices of temporary copies, for the purpose of reproduction.]
211.  Pnina Shachaf and Ellen  Rubenstein, A Comparative Analysis of Libraries' Approaches to
Copyright: Israel Russia, and the U.S.,  33:1 J. ACAD. LIBRARIANSHIP 94 (2006).
212.  For instance, Article 1275, Section 1, Subsection 2, provides that reproductions of excerpts of
copyrighted works may be made upon request from private citizens, but also for educational/scientific
uses. Grazhdanskii  Kodeks Rossiiskoi Federatsii [GKRF]  [Civil Code]  art. 1274 (Russ.). This is a2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
1274 and 1275 read together is extremely restrictive. For example, schools
are  permitted  to  reproduce  paper  excerpts  of given  texts,  but may  not
distribute identical excerpts in electronic form to students.
Article 1276 codifies a limited "public domain exemption.'213 Pursuant
to  this  provision,  if an  architectural  or  artistic  object  is  in  the  public
domain,  reproductions may be made of it and distributed via airwaves or
via electronic means. As with the foregoing limited copyright exemptions,
the  scope  of this  exemption  in  the  Internet  context  remains  unclear.
Nevertheless,  this  provision  offers  substantive  justification  for  an
expanded  conception  of  free  licensed  use  on  the  Internet.  Thus,
photographs of copyrighted works which are found in public squares may
be broadcast on the Internet. However, it is unclear whether reproductions
of copyrighted works appearing in publicly accessible museums would fall
within this exemption. As will be analyzed  below, this positive provision
should  be  interpreted  to  allow distribution  of works  in  all public  (i.e.,
public  squares)  and quasi-public  (i.e.,  museums) domains  via electronic
means such as the Internet.
3.  Russian Legal Licenses v. US. "FairU  se" & Berne Convention
As shown above, the New Copyright Law seeks to bring Russian law
in line with strict international copyright norms. Consistent with the Berne
three-part  test, the New Copyright  Law  provides  only  the most  limited
legal  licenses  or  so  called  "fair  use"  exemptions  to  copyright.  The
following section will compare the legal licenses afforded  by Russian law
with the right to "fair use" embodied in U.S. copyright law.
The "fair use"  exemption to the U.S. Copyright Act is codified in  17
§ 
214
U.S.C.  § 107.  Section 107 also sets out four factors to be considered in
determining whether or not a particular use is fair:
subtle but drastic departure from the existing law which contains language seemingly allowing entire
works to be reproduced for educational use.
213.  CTaTb5I  1276.  CBO6O0iHOe  HCfiOJIb3OBaHHe  HpoH3BeieHnI,  iOCTOAIHHO  HaxowmerocA  B
Mecre, OTKPbITOM  VMJCilBt O6OHOFO nocemeH141.  [Grazhdanskii  Kodeks Rossiiskoi Federatsii  [GKRF]
[Civil Code] art. 1276 (Russ.) (uncompensated use of likeness of work located in a public place)].
214.  "[T]he  fair use of a copyrighted  work, including such use by reproduction  in copies or
phonorecords  or by any  other  means  specified  by that section,  for purposes  such  as  criticism,
comment,  news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for  classroom use), scholarship,  or
research, is not an infringement of copyright."  17 U.S.C. § 107 (2006). The U.S. Berne Convention
Implementation Act of 1988, an amendment to the Copyright Act of 1976, modified several aspects of
U.S. copyright law to harmonize with the requirements of the Berne Convention (Paris Act, 1971) and
entered into force on March 1, 1989. The Berne Implementation Act granted limited moral rights to
authors of visual works within complex limits, but did not modify the "fair use" regime.580  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
(1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use
is of commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes;
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work;
(3) amount and substantiality of the portion  used in relation to the
copyrighted work as a whole; and
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the
copyrighted work. 215
All four of these factors require a court to look at the specific work at issue
using  a  fact-based  analysis  of  the  copying  in  light  of  surrounding
circumstances  to determine  whether infringement  has occurred.216 As the
U.S.  Supreme  Court  has  stated  in  one  of its  most  recent  copyright
decisions:
[T]he "fair use"  defense allows the public to use not only facts and
ideas contained  in a copyrighted work, but also expression itself in
certain circumstances....  The fair use defense affords considerable
"latitudef or scholarship and comment. ,217
The scope of this "considerable  latitude"  is varied in U.S. Supreme Court
jurisprudence. Nevertheless, the ambiguity in the scope allows for a wide
range  of ostensibly  permissible  uses,  with  only  the  risk  of post facto
sanctions for copyright infringement. In other words, rather than providing
a  strict positive  enactment  of permissible  uses,  the  U.S.  copyright  law
establishes a flexible retroactive  "fair use" limitation.2 8 In over 150 years
of common law litigation (prior to codification in 1976),219 this system has
proven  flexible,  yet  procedurally  and  substantively  fair,  by  forcing
plaintiffs to guard and enforce their rights.220
215.  17 U.S.C. § 107 (2006).
216.  Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 577  78 (1994) (stating that "[fair use in
copyright] is not to be simplified with bright-line rules," but rather in "case-by-case analysis" in which
the four factors "are  to be explored, and the results weighed together, in light of the purposes of
copyright");  see also WILLIAM  F. PATRY, THE FAIR USE PRIVILEGE IN COPYRIGHT LAW 361-458
(1985).
217.  Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186, 219-20 (2003) (emphasis added).
218.  See generally Daniel J. Gervais, Towards A New  Core InternationalC opyright Norm: The
Reverse Three-Step Test, 9 MARQ. INTELL. PROP. L. REV. 1 (2005).
219.  The U.S. Copyright Act of 1976 was a comprehensive revision of the 1909 Copyright Act. It
became effective on January 1, 1978.
220.  Cf David Nimmer, "Fairesto f them All" and Other Fairy Tales of Fair Use, 66 LAW &
CONTEMP. PROBS. 263 (2003) (describing inconsistency in applying the "fair use" standard).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
There  are  a  number  of  practical  consequences  of  this  "reverse"
approach.  First,  it  gives  private  individuals  and  educational  or  cultural
institutions  the  right  to  independently  assess  their  own  conduct  and
develop  unique  policies  for  non-infringement,  based  on  their  own
capacities  for  risk,  litigation,  etc.  Thus,  educational  bodies  such  as
universities  may  interpret the first factor in the  "fair use"  test-whether
the use is for a commercial purpose or a non-profit educational purpose-
rather broadly (perhaps as a dispositive factor), and opt to provide clearly
copyrighted material to their students under the guise of "fair use.,221
The  Russian  legal  licenses  provided  in  the  New  Copyright  Law
correspond  to the "fair use"  standard  found in U.S.  copyright law. Major
categories  of historically protected use are respected in the New Russian
Law. Thus, the major academic rights are adequately  protected:  the right
to  use  excerpts  of works  in  an  academic  setting;  the right  to create  an
archival reproduction  of copyrighted works; the right to reproduce works
for "personal use."  In the traditional print and durable media context, these
major rights are uncontroversial.
Nevertheless,  with  respect  to  emerging  technologies,  the  positive
limited legal  license approach seems unworkable on its face. For instance,
one  can  imagine  myriad  legitimate  educational  uses  of  copyrighted
musical  or film  works  in  the home  or  classroom  settings. Accordingly,
many U.S. libraries with  flexible interpretations  of the "fair use"  standard
allow their borrowers to rent copyrighted musical works,  videos, DVDs,
and other media in furtherance of their educational and cultural missions.
Of course, other U.S. libraries do not have faith in the purely educational
motives of their patrons  and restrict  borrowing  of these materials  out of
fear  that  the  materials  are  being  illegally  reproduced.222  The  important
point, however, is that these libraries have an independent right to interpret
their  patrons'  habits  and  devise  policies  which  they  feel  adequately
embody true "fair use."  In  other words, there is a freedom  to make new
technologies  available,  but the  freedom  imposes  on  libraries,  and their
borrowers,  the  responsibility  to  use  the  technologies  in  a  responsible,
copyright-friendly  manner.  Depending  on  their  preference  for  risking
copyright  infringement  lawsuits,  libraries  can  adapt to  completely  new
technologies  (providing  copyrighted  works via electronic  means to their
221.  Indeed, this is the rationale employed by multiple major research universities in the United
States (such as the University of Michigan) for allowing the Google Books project to scan, copy, and
reproduce theiern tire collections.
222.  I draw on my personal experiences with public, private, academic, and general use libraries
in the United States and experiences with libraries in Russia.582  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
patrons) or opt in favor of tried and true paper book lending models.223 As
a  result,  new  technologies  are  used  in  innovative  and  efficient  ways,
contributing to broader dissemination  of the original  copyrighted work in
question.
The new Russian model employs a completely different approach. For
instance, by banning libraries from reproducing works in electronic form,
Articles  1274  and  1275  reduce  libraries  to  traditional  book  lending
institutions. Not only are these acts unenforceable,  but they unnecessarily
inhibit  innovation  towards  the  development  of more  efficient  library
models. 24  Likewise,  the  new  acts  seem  to  outlaw  existing  innovative
technological  library  projects  such  as  the  Open  Russian  Electronic
Library25 of the Russian State Library or the digitization efforts started by
the  Russian  State  Library  in  1999  (ADAMANT  project). 226 Cases  like
ZAO  Kommersant, Publishing House v.  ZAO  Public Library & 000
Vector Info will likely  be resolved  even more  forcefully against  private
companies wishing to establish limited public access online libraries.27
More generally,  in the words of one commentator, "fair use is a much
more flexible and adaptable doctrine with respect to new forms of use than
223.  For instance, the Cornell University library system (along with several other American Ivy
League  universities)  currently  allows  patrons  to  request  portions  of copyrighted  works  to  be
electronically imaged and sent to the borrowers via e-mail. This benefit is intended to serve Cornell
scholars residing away from the main Ithaca, NY campus. The borrower of course assumes the duty to
use the work in ways consistent with U.S. copyright laws.
224.  LENTA NEWS,  Ostankino Court Found Lib.ru in  Violation of the Rights of the Writer
Gevorgyan, Mar. 31, 2005, http://lenta.ru/news/2005/03/31 /lib/.
225.  OTKbIpTaAI  pyccKaA  3JIeKTPOHHa5I  6H6inoTeKa, http://orel.rsl.ru  (last visited Oct. 25, 2011)
(previously containing over 8,655 online books); see also National Electronic Library, http://rusnel
.ru/index.php (last visited Oct. 25, 2011) (providing free access to multiple current copyrighted literary
works, e.g., ten of Boris Akunin's stories and plays). It should be noted that in its charter, the National
Electronic Library requires member libraries and contributors to the electronic fund to be copyright
holders or to act pursuant to the Law on Author's  Rights and Neighboring Rights. See Charter of
Russian Electronic Library, Section 1.1, Legal Basis, available at http://rusnel.ru/conception.htm.
226.  The ADAMANT project was started in 1999 with the goal of digitizing (creating digital
copies) the entire Russian State Library collection, over 40 million works. The ADAMANT  project
eventually evolved into the Open Russian Electronic Library and the National Electronic Library. See
Creating an Information System for the Russian State. A pilot project Challenging IT, 66th IFLA
Council and General Conference, http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla66/papers/056-142e.htm  (last visited Oct.
25,2011).
227.  V.B. Naumov,  LAW  AND THE  INTERNET:  ESSAYS  ON  THEORY  AND PRACTICE  199 205
(University Publishing House 2002). The case involved a private for-profit company that included
copyrighted material in its paid library without the copyright holders'  consent. The court applied the
law on libraries to the private company, holding that the company did not have a right to use the
content. The holding rested on several factors: (1) the access to the website was on a subscription or
paid basis; (2) the publication on the Internet differed  from traditional  library uses in that it was
permanent. A modern case involving similar "embedded" content with a "time-bomb" (file expires
after certain time) would have probably passed the court's scrutiny under the current law. However,
under the New Copyright Law, this act would probably constitute infringement.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
purpose-specific  exception,  most  of  which  are  not  technologically
neutral.,,228  This  is  not  to  say  that  the  current  "fair  use"  standard  in
American  law  is  fully workable  or  applied  consistently  with  respect  to
alleged  Internet copyright violations. It is not. The only real  advantage of
the "fair use"  standard  is its relative flexibility.  Scholars know that they
may use works "fairly"  and act "fairly"  according to their own meanings
of what is "fair."  One student  standing at a Xerox® may copy five pages
of a textbook and deem it fair;  another may copy five books and deem it
fair. Depending on the context, both instances may be legitimate fair use.
The  key is  that it is  not necessary  to  draw bright lines, to  impose  page
limits on copies, or to restrict the modes of reproduction. Some students or
professors  may  be  caught  copying  books  and  be  forced  to  pay
compensation,  but most will know they have a reasonable  right to copy,
and more importantly, will continue to copy.
However, compared to the relatively flexible "fair use" standard, which
may be litigated following particular alleged copyright violations, the legal
license  approach works the opposite  way. It seeks  to enumerate  specific
rights  that institutions  have,  but by doing  so ambiguously,  it  stifles the
institutions'  rights  to  invent  and  experiment  with  novel  teaching
techniques  and new technologies  in the classroom,  such as  multi-media
teaching and playing films in cultural centers.
These  problems are not unique  to  Russia. Nearly two  decades of IP
litigation  in  the  United  States  has  not produced  a workable  "fair  use"
standard  with  respect  to  the  copyright  obligations  of Internet  service
providers,  Internet  cataloguers,  Internet  encyclopedias,  and  so  forth.
However, it is perhaps the failure to produce a comprehensive  catalog of
Internet rights and liabilities which has contributed to the dramatic growth
of the information technology (IT) sector, and the Internet in particular. As
renowned  Internet law expert Lawrence Lessig and others have argued,  it
was perhaps a boon to the IT industry and to American culture that many
of the most popular Internet uses remained in legal limbo, or in the gray
shadow  of legitimacy  in the first decade of the Information  Age.229 Even
today, the most important issues of copyright law, including the scope of
the "fair use"  exemption, are being tested and reshaped  by Google (e.g.,
Google  Books)  and  numerous  other  Internet  pioneers  eager  to  stake
legitimate  legal  claims  to  virgin  Internet  territory.230  Despite  new
228.  See Gervais, supra note 218, at 27.
229.  See generally LAWRENCE  LESSIG,  FREE CULTURE  (2006),  available at http://www.free-
culture.cc/freecontent/.
230.  For instance, the right of search engines to display portions of other websites was extensively584  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
legislation in the United States such as the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act  (heightening  penalties  for  copyright  infringement  on the  Internet),
U.S.  law  remains  uncertain  with  respect  to  key  copyright  issues.  Not
surprisingly, as the law remains uncertain, innovation continues.
The Russian  experience  with Internet  innovation  has  been equally  if
not more spectacular since the early 1990s, precisely because of a similar
legal uncertainty  regarding the status of the Internet.  For this reason, sites
like AIIofMP3 sprung onto the international stage, gaining wide following.
Russian  Internet  use  surged  and  a  vibrant  and  lucrative  information
technology sector was  able to develop  throughout Russia and the former
Soviet Union, including smaller nations like Moldova.  Immediately  after
its launch in 2000, AllotVP3  became embroiled  in domestic  lawsuits by
international  firms,  including  the  RIAA.  The  disputes  continued
throughout the 2000s. Despite mounting international  opposition, the legal
theories  being  litigated  before  the  local  Moscow  courts  pointed  to  a
growing  appreciation  among  Russian  jurists  for  American-style
231I
ambivalence  in  Internet  law . Uncertainty  in  Russian  law  on  non-
contractual  licensing  also  seemed to  encourage  innovation  in the  sector
throughout the  1990s  and  early 2000s.232  However,  as  shown  above,  in
enacting the New Copyright Law, Russia sought to greatly limit traditional
legal  licenses  and  fair  use  exceptions,  indeed  in  a far  more  restrictive
manner than found in U.S. legislation.
Similarly,  along with  enacting  the New Copyright Law,  from  2007,
Russia also began an aggressive effort to implement and strictly  enforce
the  letter of the new  law.  In  June  2007,  for  instance,  the  popular file-
sharing  site  mentioned  above,  AllofMP3.ru,  was  shut  down  due  to
pressure  from the Russian government. Not coincidentally, the lawsuit by
debated within academic circles in the early years of the Internet, with the courts ultimately ruling that
search engine displays were permissible fair uses. See, e.g., Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp., 336 F.3d 811
(9th  Cir. 2003) (inlined thumbnails in search engine results considered  fair use since they did not
undermine the copyright holder's potential market); Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc., 508 F.3d
1146 (9th  Cir. 2007) (echoing Kelly); Field v. Google, Inc., 412 F. Supp. 2d 1106 (D. Nev. 2006)
(content cached  by search engines'  crawlers  did not violate  fair use principles);  see also Danny
Sullivan, Google Book Search Wins Victory in German Challenge, SEARCH ENGINE WATCH, June 28,
2006,  http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2058383/Google-Book-Search-Wins-Victory-In-German-
Challenge (noting that a German court advised against plaintiffs lawsuit against Google Book Search
based on the theory that Google's display of portions of copyrighted work in Google Book Search
engine was similar to search engines' display of result data).
231.  On August 27, 2007, a Moscow district court ruled that AllofMP3.com operated within the
law, http://www.allofmp3.ru/press.shtml (last visited Oct. 25, 2011).
232.  Budylin & Osipova, supra note 176, at 1.2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
the  RIAA  was  dropped  shortly  thereafter.233  Since  2008,  the  New
Copyright Law has also signaled the start of a new era in Russian Internet
law, more broadly speaking, marked by increasingly detailed positive laws
relating to property rights in non-traditional  network media, Internet, and
over products of intellectual  activity concerning the Internet. Aside from
an  expected  decrease  in  experimentation  and  innovation  by information
technology  firms due to  exposure  to litigation  risk, this new  era is  also
marked  by  greater  cooperation  between  Russia  and  Western  firms  in
defense of these rights.
The forecast for the immediate future of copyright in Russian  Internet
law  seems  filled  with  challenges.  With  the  enactment  of  the  New
Copyright Law,  Russia seems  poised to take  on an ambitious  range  of
enforcement measures aimed at "cleaning  up"  its Internet piracy problem,
as  well  as  its  image  with  respect  to  copyright  enforcement  before  the
international  community.  The  end  result promises  to  be  harmonization
between  Russian,  EU,  and broader international  copyright law, all aimed
at supporting Russia's accession to the WTO.234
The more important question at this point is whether  Russia will need
to further amend  its New Copyright Law to conform to WTO standards?
At present, it is doubtful that further law reform will be necessary,  as the
current  law  seems  to  codify the  existing  Berne  three-step  test235 and  is
likely to be strictly applied in practice.236 Thus far, the scope of this three-
part test has not been delimited on the international plane, and application
of the test has produced  only general guidelines.237 Furthermore,  Russia
233.  Music Industry Drops Copyright Suit Against Russian Music Site, ALLFMP3 BLOGS (May
26, 2008,  12:35  PM), http://blogs.allofmnp3.ru/music-news/2008/05/26/music-industry-drops-copyright-
suit-against-russian-music-site/.
234.  Cameron, supra note 190.
235.  The Berne three-step test is a clause that has been included in several international treaties on
copyright (notably the TRIPS Agreement, the WIPO Copyright Treaty, the EU Copyright Directive,
and  the  WIPO  Performances  and  Phonograms  Treaty).  It  imposes  constraints  on  the  possible
limitations  and  exceptions to  exclusive rights under national  copyright laws.  The most important
version of the test is that included in Article 13 of TRIPS. It reads: "Members shall confine limitations
and exceptions to exclusive rights to [1] certain special cases which; [2] do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work; and [3] do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the rights
holder." TRIPS Agreement, supra note 175, art. 13.
236.  Research  has  not produced  a sufficient number  of Russian  cases  interpreting the New
Copyright Law. Therefore, the analysis regarding likely application in practice is based on firsthand
empirical research and discussions with Russian IP attorneys and scholars.
237.  See  Gervais,  supra note  218, at  14-19 (analyzing  application  of three-part test  to  US
Copyright Act by 2001 WTO panel).586  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
has  recently  acceded  to  the  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization
("WIPO") Internet Treaties.238
One can expect that in the near term Russia will seek to further restrict
fair  use  exemptions,  particularly  in  the  Internet  context.  To  promote
enforcement, Russia may even experiment with new anti-piracy measures
such as Internet trolls, restrictive firewalls, and similar measures currently
used  and being developed by governments  like  China to restrict Internet
access. With a large, highly sophisticated pool of information technology
specialists,  Russia  is  particularly  well-equipped  to  experiment  with
disastrous  Internet  monitoring  measures  under  the  guise  of  copyright
enforcement.  The  threat  of  such  measures  for  media  and  particularly
Internet freedom  in Russia cannot  be  understated,  especially  in light of
Russia's historical experience with state censorship and restrictions on the
flow of information.
In sum, the New Copyright Law accomplishes exactly what its writers
set  out  to  do-it  marks  a  complete  break  with  the  legacy  of Soviet
copyright policy that remained in the 1993  Law on Author's Rights (such
as  the broad  academic/cultural  use  exemption)  and harmonizes  Russian
law  with  existing  international  copyright  norms.  As  has  been  argued
elsewhere,39  instead  of developing  workable  parameters  for  copyright
exceptions for the Internet, or invoking new technologies that mitigate the
threats against copyrights, or drawing a flexible line between  copyrights
and  exceptions,4°  the  New  Copyright  Law  can  have  the  unintended
consequence  of chilling the exercise of free speech. As a result of the strict
New  Copyright  Law  and  out  of  fear  of  litigation,  companies,
organizations,  and  individuals  may  be  less  likely  to  exercise  their
constitutionally protected speech and access to information rights not only
in the  Internet context, but also more  generally.  Subsequent waves  of IP
law reform in Russia will most likely attempt to delineate these previously
ambiguous rights.
238.  The WIPO Internet Treaties refers  to the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT). The WCT and the WPPT entered into force on March
6,  2002, and  May  20,  2002, respectively.  See  World  Intellectual  Property Organization,  WIPO
INTERNET TREATIES, available at http://www.wipo.int/freepublications/en/ecommerce/450/wipopub
1450in.pdf.
239.  Conference  Presentation at Moscow State University,  Faculty of Journalism: "Fair  Use" In
Russia's New Internet Regulation Regime  A Law and Economics Perspective, Mass Information in
Internet: Freedom and Responsibility (Oct. 12-13, 2007).
240.  For  instance,  Digital  Rights  Management,  or  legal  recognition  of  viable  read-only
alternatives to text versions of e-books (i.e.,  non-printable, non-copyable Adobe .pdf files  such as
AHTOH Cepro, HHTEPHET H HPABO (2002), available at http://intemet-law.ru/book/text/book  5.pdf).2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
But  as  concerns  us  here,  the  domestic  IP  sector  reforms  are  also
symptomatic  of several  broader  developments  in Russian  international
legal theory.  First, just as in the Interwar period, the post-Soviet reforms
signify  a  general  willingness  to  conform  to  customary  and  evolving
international norms. From the standpoint of Russian international lawyers,
the domestic  implementation  of international  norms aimed at delineating
and defending private property  rights seems to constitute  a core function
of  public  international  law.  As  in  the  Interwar  period,  post-Soviet
international  jurists  are  fully  aware  that  state  relations  are  no  longer
confined  to  matters  of  war  and  peace,  but  increasingly  encompass
commercial  concerns. In Russia, economic practices and firm activity are
perceived  as  having  an  impact  on  Russia's  image  as  a  responsible
economic  actor.  The  image  of  a  predictable  economic  actor  is  also
bolstered by actions which demonstrate predictable  state action,  and vice
versa.  This  means  that,  for  now,  Russia  will  continue  its  efforts  to
strengthen  its IP regime, especially in high-profile copyright infringement
cases.
C. Policy Trade-Offs, Resistance, Values, and Interests
The  historical  outline  provided  above  suggests  several  normative
lessons.  First, and  most significant, the  WTO's continued  opposition  to
Russia's  accession  has  had  the  effect  of  forcing  Russia  to  explore
alternative  economic  integration  arrangements,  often  along  lines
resembling  the  previous  Soviet  economic  union.241  Russia's  surprise
announcement  in  July 2009  that it  intended to  accede  to the  WTO as  a
regional customs body along with Kazakhstan and Belarus (instead of as a
state party) sent ripples of discontent in the international trade community.
However,  this resistance  was  to  be expected.  Russian  international  law
discourse  has  been  voicing  discontent  regarding  the  WTO  accession
process for at least the last five years.242 Leading Russian jurists involved
241.  HIROSHI ODA, RUSSIAN COMMERCIAL LAW (2d rev. ed., Nijhoff 2007).
242.  F.M.  BEJBM3MHHOB,  ME)K)JYHAPOHOE  DKOHOMWIECKOE  FIPABO  H HPOIIECC  §  588
(BO.Tepc  K.lyBep,  2004)  ("COOTBeTCTByLuHi  1,O0FOBOPHO  CKpeHJ1eHHb61  CHH,3pOM
6e3OTBeTCTBeHHOCT  iTaeT  oTqacTH,  Hapl)AIy  c  HpOqHMH  MOTHBaMH,  H  aMepHKaHCKOe
coripOTHBJIeHHe  l)opmaarlHO  RaBHO  Ha3peBHemy HpHegy POCCHH  B BTO,  H60  B paMKaX 31o
opraH3am H npuaeTcM  OTKa3aTbCM  O ,HuCKpHMHHaLmmOHHOA  6e3OTBeTCTBeHHOCT"  nepej PoccHen.")
[G.M.  VELYAMINOV,  INTERNATIONAL  ECONOMIC  LAW  AND PROCEDURE  §  588  (WaltersKluwer,
2004) ("The corresponding and contractually binding syndrome of irresponsibility [regarding the U.S.-
Russian bilateral agreement absolving U.S. firms of liability in Russia] partially feeds into, along with
other motives, the American opposition to Russia's accession to the WTO, which is formally long
overdue. As a result, Russia will likely be forced to withdraw from the discriminatory treatment [of the588  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
in the IP harmonization efforts, like Victor A. Dozortsev, genuinely hoped
that  their  efforts  would  be  rewarded  with  WTO  accession  and  were
surprised, if not outright offended,243 when the United States continued to
stall  Russia's  integration efforts.44  For its part, the American  lobby has
raised  legitimate  concerns  regarding  the  implementation  of  the  New
Copyright Law and related legislative enactments.  Yet there is a palpable
indignation  among certain Russian jurists  at the treatment Russian good-
faith efforts  have  received  in the U.S.  For  instance, American  demands
that copyright violations  be governed  by criminal, rather than civil law,
and that  software programs  carry copyright protection  rather than  patent
protection, were  extensively  debated  in the Russian working  group,  but
ultimately rejected  on policy  grounds,  such as  the fact that no Western
European state afforded such protections. 45
WTO].")]. Velyaminov, a professor of law and a chief researcher at the ISL, is one of Russia's leading
experts on international economic and trade law.
243.  AeKcaHp  JI.M aKOBCK1fl,  Aviepuwcaucxa2q  Hcmopu2,  7(1)  BECTHHK FPACAQAHCKOFO
FJPABA 165  96 (2007) [Alexander L. Makovsky, American History, 7(1) VESTNIK GRAZHDANSKOGO
PRAVA  165-96  (2007)]  (discussing  the  involvement  of individual  U.S.  Senators  during  the
development of Part IV, and personal  dissatisfaction with their conduct);  see Letter from Chuck E.
Grassley  &  Max  Baucus,  U.S.  Senators,  to  Peter  F.  Allgeier,  Acting  United  States  Trade
Representative  (Apr.  11,  2005)  (on  file  with  author),  reproduced at http://finance.senate.gov/
newsroom/ranking/release/?id-ef71e567-f685-4b37-9203-2d56fca0e86a  (letter  concerning  U.S.
reservations about Russia's accession to WTO due to IP infringement). Alexander L. Makovsky (b.
1930) is one of the leading civil law jurists in Russia and a renowned authority on intellectual property
law. He was the deputy chair of the working group that developed Part IV. See also AJIEKCAHJIP A1.
MAKOBCKHTI,  0 KOAHsHKAI4ImH FPAIA AHCKOFO HPABA (1922  2006) (M: CTaTyT, 2009) [Alexander
L.  Makovsky,  On  the  Codification  of Civil  Law  (1922-2006)  (Moscow:  Statute  2009)];  A.A.
MaKOBcKHfl,  06pauqetue K qumameno, BECTHI4K  FPAKAAHCKOFO  HPABA  ("C03,aHHe HOBOFO
pOCCHIfCKoFO Fpa) RJaHCKOFO 3aKOHOaTe.IbCTBa eIe He 3aBepileHo. )JayleKo He Bce B yXce IpH,HTbIX H
,AefiCTByOIUIHX  3aKonax ce6  onpa jaio --3TO H MHOFHe <<aMep1lKaH13Mbi ) B KOpHOpaTHBHOM  ipaBe H
HOpMaTHBHbiX  aKTaX  O  HHBecTHLIHOHHbiX  [teHHbiX  6yMavax,  H  KpafiHe  HpOTHBOpeqHBOe
3aKOHOIaTeJ1bCTBO  0  HeKOMMepqeCKHX  opFaHH3aIJHsIx,  H MHOFOe  jipyFoe.  PAR21K pyHHbIX 3aKOHOB
Hy)KIaeTCI  B HpoyMaHHOM  CoBepweIeHCTBOBaHHH.  He slBJIleTCst B )TOM  OTHOIHeHHH  HCKJIHOqeHHeM H
FpaKIaHCKHfi KoxeKc.")  [Alexander L. Makovsky, Appeal to the Reader, VESTNIK GRAZHDANSKOGO
PRAVA, available at http://www.mvgp.ru/full  obr/ ("The creation of a new Russian civil code is not
yet complete. By far not all of the adopted and active laws were vindicated [by history]-along with a
number  of "Americanisms"  in  corporate  law  and normative  acts  on  investments  and negotiable
instruments, and contradictory legislation on NGOs, and much else. A series of maior laws is in need
of measured reevaluation, not excluding the civil code.")].
244.  See generally BHKTOP A.  103OPIIEB, HHTEJIlEKTYAJIbHBIE  FIPABA: HOHSTHE, CHCTEMA,
3AAqH  KOJEIHHKAAHI4  (CbOPHHK  CTATEfi)  (M.:  CTaTyT, 2005)  [VICTOR  A.  DOZORTSEV,
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY:  CONCEPTION,  SYSTEM  AND  PROBLEMS OF CODIFICATION  (COLLECTED
ARTICLES) (Moscow: Statute 2005)]. Dozortsev (1928-2003) was one of the leading Russian jurists in
the working group developing Part IV of the Civil Code.
245.  Pleshanova, supra note 186. U.S. copyright law also provides mainly civil remedies, though
the U.S. government may file criminal  charges for any violation of the Copyright Act provided that
such infringement  is undertaken "willfully"  and "for  purposes of commercial advantage or private
financial gain." 17 U.S.C. § 506(a) (2006). However, the United States has moved more aggressively2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
Second, U.S. insistence on further law reform-even after the passage
of Part IV of the Civil Code-seems unlikely to resonate due to the U.S.'s
failure to deliver on its promises (most significantly, dropping opposition
to  WTO accession).  For  instance,  in  its 2009  "Section  301"  report, the
Office  of the  U.S.  Trade  Representative  "look[ed]  to  Russia  to  make
further progress by ensuring that the  Russian Customs  Code, Civil Code
and  Law  on  Medicines  comply  with  the  Intellectual  Property  Rights
('IPR')  Bilateral  Agreement  and  the  relevant  TRIPS  Agreement
obligations that will take effect upon Russia's accession to the WTO. 246
While  these  recommendations  are  certainly  warranted,  they  are
increasingly perceived by Russian elites as disingenuous.
In contrast to the United States, the EU has been consistently in favor
of  Russian  accession,  notwithstanding  Russia's  evolving  IP  regime.247
This may be reflected in the EU's own complex process of standardization
in  the  realm  of IP  throughout  the  1990s.248  The  underlying  rationale
behind  EU  standardization  in  the  IP  domain  is  similar  to  any
harmonization project.
The underlying philosophy of standardization,  to put ideas into the
public domain, and the philosophy of intellectual property rights, to
maintain ideas  or expression as private properties, are  inconsistent
and that tensions between  them could inhibit the rapid adoption of
EU standards.249
However, the EU proceeded with the understanding that actual de facto
harmonization could  only occur as the result of actual trade, contestation,
and revision over a prolonged period of time following WTO accession.250
towards criminalizing copyright infringement, particularly to fight piracy over the Internet. See, e.g.,
No Electronic Theft (NET) Act, Pub. L. No. 105-147, 111 Star.  2678 (1997).
246.  OFFICE OF THE U.S. TRADE REPRESENTATIVE,  SPECIAL 301 REPORT  16 (2009), available at
http://www.ustr.gov/sites/default/files/Full  / 20Version / 20of  2Othe%/2 02009%/2 0SPECIAL / 2030I
%20REPORT.pdf
247.  For EU-Russia trade issues related to Russia's accession to the WTO, see Rafael Leal-Arcas,
The European Union and New Leading Powers: Towards Partnershipi n Strategic Trade Policy Areas,
32 FORDHAM INT'L L.J. 345 (2006); Despite Obstacles, EU Expects Russia to Join WTO This Year, 12
INTL CENTRE FOR TRADE & SUSTAINABLE DEV.: NEWS & ANALYSIS 23 (2008), available at http:/
ictsd.org/i/news/bridgeweekly/12267/.
248.  MICHAEL  A.  EPSTEIN,  RONALD  S.  LAURIE  &  LAWRENCE  E.  ELDER,  INTERNATIONAL
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AND EASTERN EUROPE  12.5 (Prentice Hall
Law & Business 1992).
249.  Id.  (citing  European  Commission,  Communication on  the  Development  of European
Standardization Action for Faster Technological Integration in Europe, COM (90) 456 final, 1991
(C 20) 1 [Green Paper], at 25).
250.  See  Backer, supra note  159, at 3-17 (suggesting that harmonization  and  convergence is
primarily the result of, and in furtherance of, economic activity).590  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
The EU's position on Russian intellectual property reform is informed by
this pragmatic experience, and is borne out by the harmonization reforms
in  former socialist countries that have since joined the EU. The principal
lesson of EU harmonization  in the IP domain was that even as states adopt
formal  European  Community  directives,  emerging  technologies  will
continue to challenge traditional IP forms.2"5'
Third, while there is a dissenting isolationist strain in Russian  foreign
policy discourse,252 Russian  leaders and elites are fully committed to the
view that globalization is a good thing, and that further integration into the
global trading regime is in Russia's long term interests. This thinking has
been  entirely consistent with the historical  development  of international
law  in the West253 and in Russia since the collapse of communism. The
notion  that  individuals  and  firms  have  universal  fundamental  economic
rights that transcend the  wills of national  rulers has strong resonance in
contemporary  Russia. As  seen  above,  even  during  the  early  and  later
Soviet periods,  the  USSR  subordinated  its  ideological  rhetoric  to  more
concrete  economic  realities.  At  the  same  time,  Russian  leaders  are
noticeably sensitive to what they perceive as American international trade
gamesmanship,  egoism,254  and  imposition.255  Under  Putin,  Russia  has
closed  nearly  all  outstanding  international  aid  projects  and  reform
initiatives. 256 Furthermore,  Russia has also started to reassess  its reliance
251.  See  Peter  Smulders,  The  European Union and Copyright § 4(2),  in  INTERNATIONAL
COPYRIGHT LAW AND PRACTICE (Paul Edward Geller ed., 2009).
252.  BaauM lbiM6ypcKHA,  Ocmpo6 PoccuR, PYccKfi4  APXHYTEJTAF  (2002) [Vadim Tsimburgskii,
The Island of Russia, RUSSIAN ARCHIPELAGO  (2002)], available at http://archipelag.ru/ru mir/ostrov-
rus/cymbur/island  russia.
253.  BErN STEIL, MANUEL HINDS, MONEY, MARKETS & SOVEREIGNTY 11 (2009).
254.  Bureau Report, US Can Never Regain Its Status in Global Market: Putin, ZEENEWS, Oct. 9,
2008,  (on  file  with  author);  see also VINCENT BARNETT,  A HISTORY  OF RUSSIAN  ECONOMIC
THOUGHT  ix (Routledge  2005) (explaining Western economists'  view of Russian counterparts as
"inferior").
255.  KATHERINE  VERDERY,  WHAT WAS  SOCIALISM,  AND WHAT  COMES NEXT? 3  16  (1996)
(discussing the perception of the transferring of Western institutions, such as markets and democracy,
to non-Western settings).
256.  World  Bank  Proiect No. P008831  (Russian  Legal Reform  Project)  (June  13,  1996 to
December  31,  2005),  http://web.worldbank.org/external/proiects/main?pagePK-64283627&piPK-
73230&theSitePK-40941&menuPK-228424&contentFed-yes&Projectid-P008831;  see also World
Bank Report No. T-6883-RU, Appendix G (setting forth priority substantive areas of law such as
international  trade and property law). The proiect was administered by the Russian Foundation for
Legal  Reform ("RFLR"),  a governmental non-profit organization founded in April 1996 pursuant to
Presidential Decree No.81 of February 2, 1996. The founders were the Administration of the President
of Russian Federation, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Justice, the Federal Commission on
Securities and Stock Market of RE  Federal Government, and the Russian Academy of Science. The
EU  also  participated  in  Russian  law  reform  from  December  1997  to  March  2001.  See,  e.g.,
Strengthening the State  of Law and  Legal Education Under New Market Relations, Tacis Project
EDRUS 9607.  Smaller mainly European-funded law reform research projects  continued in Russia2011]
RUSSIAN IP REFORM
on Western economic models in the wake of the financial crisis, although
what tangible changes will result remains to be seen.257
CONCLUSION
Despite  ascribing  to  a  communist  ideology  and  professing  an
exceptional  "socialist  international  law"  in  the  domain  of international
intellectual  property  law (specifically,  copyright  law),  the  Soviet Union
has  consistently  worked  to  harmonize  its  domestic  law  with  general
developments in international law. This has been done to facilitate trade in
material  and  intellectual  property  with  Western  powers.  Soviet
international  law scholars reconciled legal harmonization with communist
principles  by employing a number of novel rhetorical and argumentative
structures,  such  as:  (1)  the  transition  theory  to  justify  temporary
concessions  and  compromises;  (2)  international  legal  instrumentalism  to
justify the ends  over the means;  and  (3)  de-politicization  of substantive
international  law matters to make intellectual property protection a matter
of administrative  international  law,  and hence not  subject to theoretical
contestation with the West.
Since the collapse of the USSR, Russia has implemented at least four
major law reform projects in the IP domain (1993,  1994,  2004, 2008) to
further  harmonize domestic  law with  emerging  international  norms.  The
latest round of reforms is intended to be a definitive domestic codification
of  Russia's  outstanding  international  obligations  in  the  realm  of
intellectual  property.  In  anticipation  of, and  in  furtherance  of, WTO
accession,  Russia  has  harmonized  its  domestic  legislation  with  all
outstanding  TRIPS  obligations,  including  the  WIPO  Internet  Treaties.
Comparative  analysis  of Russian  copyright  law  with  U.S.  "fair  use"
standards  reveals  Russian copyright  law to be at least as  stringent as  its
U.S. counterpart.
The WTO's continued refusal to permit Russian accession is based, in
part,  on  Russia's  lax  enforcement  of IP  protections.  Considering  that
Russia has coordinated  its  formal domestic  legislation  with  international
through 2008, such as that administered by the Dutch Center for International Legal Cooperation. See
DUTCH CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL LEGAL COOPERATION, ANNUAL REPORT 18 (2007), available at
http://www.cilc.nl/annualreport2007.pdf  (three-year Matra-funded proiect to assist the harmonization
of Russian civil and administrative procedure law ended in July 2008).
257.  Robert Jellinek, Russia and the Global Meltdown: Domestic and Foreign Policy Responses
to the InternationalF inancial Crisis 33, CARNEGIE CENTER, available at http:/camegieendowment
.org/files/I 1972Jellinek.pdf. Jellinek's analysis of Russia's response offers an excellent introduction to
Russia's measures in the wake of the crisis.592  WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY GLOBAL STUDIES LAW REVIEW  [VOL.  10:535
norms, it is unclear how long Russia must wait to demonstrate acceptable
levels of enforcement.  This ambiguous position has generated resentment
among leading Russian policy-makers  and jurists. This is likely to hinder
future  reform  projects,  spawn  further  resistance  to  WTO-mandated
reforms, and interrupt the organic legal harmonization efforts underway in
Russia.