Illuminating Innovation: From Patent 
Racing to Patent War 
Lea Shaver* 
Abstract 
Patent  law  assumes  that  stronger  protection  promotes 
innovation,  yet  empirical  evidence  to  test  this  “innovation 
hypothesis”  is  lacking.  This  Article  argues  that  historical  case 
studies hold unique promise to provide an empirical foundation 
for modern patent policy. Specifically, this Article uses the history 
of  patents  surrounding  the  light  bulb  to  examine  a  recently 
articulated theory of “patent racing” as a justification for patent 
protection.  Thomas  Edison’s  experience  confirms  that  Mark 
Lemley’s racing model has substantial descriptive merit. Yet this 
case  study  also  reveals  the  limits  of  the  patent  racing  model. 
Looking  past  the  initial  finish  line  of  patent  filings  to  later 
litigation, the competition looks less like a race and more like a 
war.  
                                                                                                     
  *  J.D., Yale Law School; M.A., University of Chicago; Associate Professor 
of Law, Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law. I would like to 
thank Jack Balkin, Christopher Beauchamp, Joseph Blocher, Samuel Buell, 
Michael Carrier, Dennis Corgill, Eric Dannenmaier, Rochelle Dreyfuss, Laura 
DeNardis, Elizabeth Glazer, Laurence Helfer, Lauren Henry, Paul Israel, Eric 
E. Johnson, Mark Lemley, David S. Levine, Gerard Magliocca, Robert Mensel, 
Emily Morris, Adam Mossoff, Lisa Larrimore Ouellette, Jerome Reichman, Jake 
Sherkow, Rose Villazor, Carleton Waterhouse, and R. George Wright for their 
particularly helpful comments. Portions of this Article were presented at Duke 
Law School’s Legal Theory Workshop, Hofstra Law School’s Junior Faculty 
Forum, the Indiana University Maurer School of Law, the Information Society 
Project at Yale Law School, the Intellectual Property Scholars Conference at 
Stanford  University,  and  on  the  Stanford  University  radio  show  Hearsay 
Culture. This Article is made available to the public under the terms of a 
Creative Commons—Attribution license. A digital copy may be downloaded at 
no  charge  from  the  Social  Sciences  Research  Network  at  http://ssrn.com/ 
abstract=1658643. Copies and reprints should acknowledge first publication as: 
Lea Shaver, Illuminating Innovation: From Patent Racing to Patent War, 69 
WASH. & LEE L. REV. (2012), available at http://law.wlu.edu/lawreview/ and 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1658643. 
 
1891 1892  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
The Article then proposes a new model of “patent warfare” 
resembling the board game Risk. In the game, competing parties 
assemble strategic assets, then turn to battle their rivals for world 
domination. Similarly, innovative technology companies assemble 
patent portfolios—initially for defensive purposes in the context of 
a  dynamic  and  competitive  field.  As  an  industry  matures, 
however, dominant players convert their shields into weapons to 
eliminate their competition. Just as nineteenth-century companies 
in the early electrical industry battled to control the light bulb, a 
new patent war is now emerging to control the smartphone. This 
anticompetitive endgame diminished next-generation innovation 
in electric light and now threatens the future of innovation in 
mobile computing. 
A  new  appreciation  of  patent  warfare  should  prompt 
increased skepticism of the “innovation assumption” at the heart 
of  patent  law.  Patent  protection  clearly  provides  short-term 
benefits to innovation, but it also produces unanticipated long-
term costs to competition and next-generation innovation. Further 
empirical  research  is  needed  to  ascertain  whether  the  benefits 
outweigh the costs or vice versa and what tweaks to the patent 
system might allow us to continue to capture the benefits while 
lowering the costs. In this continued effort, historical case studies 
will prove particularly helpful because they permit insight into the 
complex workings of patent law on an industry over a longer time 
horizon, revealing not only the short-term benefits but also the 
long-term costs.  
Table of Contents 
  I.  Introduction ................................................................... 1893 
  II.  Testing the Innovation Hypothesis ............................... 1896 
    A.  Patents and Innovation ........................................... 1896 
    B.  Case Study as Methodology .................................... 1900 
    C.  Law and the Light Bulb .......................................... 1907 
  III.  Dynamics of Inventive Races ........................................ 1911 
    A.  The Theory of Patent Racing ................................... 1913 
    B.  Support for Patent Racing Theory .......................... 1915 
    C.  Problems for Patent Racing Theory ........................ 1921 ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1893 
  IV.  Learning from the Light Bulb ....................................... 1926 
    A.  From Patent Racing to Patent War ........................ 1926 
    B.  The Current Smartphone Patent War .................... 1933 
    C.  Implications for Innovation ..................................... 1944 
  V.  Conclusion ...................................................................... 1947 
I. Introduction 
More than a century after its introduction, the incandescent 
light  bulb  remains  the  defining  icon  of  invention.  Elegantly 
simple,  this  humble  device  was  nonetheless  a  transformative 
technology.1  Just  as  spreadsheet  software  drove  demand  for 
personal computers and email clients drove demand for Internet 
service, the incandescent lamp was the “killer app” that drove 
demand for electricity.2 In the process, the light bulb paved the 
way for every other electronic appliance, including the radio, the 
television, and the personal computer. No less than the computer, 
the light bulb revolutionized our world.  
This Article sheds light on the role that patent law played in 
the  light  bulb’s  emergence.  The  story  told  here  is  not  a 
conventional  tale  of  great  inventors,  bright  ideas,  and  the 
inevitable march of scientific progress. It is a story of corporate 
maneuvering and high-stakes litigation, as Thomas Edison and 
                                                                                                     
  1.  For greater discussion of the concept of “enabling technologies,” see 
Mark A. Lemley, Patenting Nanotechnology, 58 STAN. L. REV. 601, 606–13 
(2005).  
  2.  See  ARTHUR  A.  BRIGHT,  JR.,  THE  ELECTRIC-LAMP  INDUSTRY: 
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FROM 1800 TO 1947 8–11 
(1949) (explaining the importance of the incandescent lamp to the emergence of 
an electrical supply system, scientific and public interest in electricity, the 
radio, and economic growth through World War I generally). Edison himself 
played  a  great  role  in  developing  and  building  out  the  technology  and 
infrastructure for electricity distribution. Of Edison’s patents related to electric 
light between 1881 and 1883, only 37% were related to the light bulb. The 
majority of his patents related to other elements of the electric power delivery 
system, including voltage regulation and engine governors (24%), transmission 
and distribution (14%), and dynamo design and operation (12%), among other 
aspects. Paul Israel, Claim the Earth: Protecting Edison’s Inventions at Home 
and  Abroad,  in  KNOWLEDGE  MANAGEMENT  AND  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY: 
CONCEPTS, ACTORS AND PRACTICES FROM THE PAST TO THE PRESENT (Graham 
Dutfield & Stathis Arapostathis eds., 2013) (forthcoming) [hereinafter Israel, 
Claim the Earth] (on file with author). 1894  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
his competitors employed patents as weapons in their battle to 
dominate  the  electrical  industry.  Although  famous  for  his 
workshop talents, Edison would be better understood as an early 
Bill Gates, his business success built on a keen appreciation of 
the power of aggressive intellectual property strategy and the 
frailty of antitrust law.3  
This  story  holds  particularly  important  lessons  for  the 
modern  information  technology  (IT)  industry,  where  an  epic 
patent  battle  is  now  underway.4  Although  early  incandescent 
                                                                                                     
  3.  See generally WILLIAM H. PAGE & JOHN E. LOPATKA, THE MICROSOFT 
CASE:  ANTITRUST,  HIGH  TECHNOLOGY,  AND  CONSUMER  WELFARE  (2007) 
(examining  the  antitrust  case  against  Microsoft  in  the  context  of  shifting 
debates about antitrust law); see also Israel, Claim the Earth, supra note 2 
(explaining that Edison used patents as part of a larger strategy to establish 
industry  dominance  through  his  early  work  in  the  telegraphy  industry, 
strategically identifying certain technological features of the electrical system as 
choke points for where to achieve “the commercial monopoly of the general 
[electricity] distribution business”). 
  4.  As this Article went to print in December 2012, Apple had recently won a 
$1 billion judgment against Samsung for intellectual property infringement related 
to  smartphones  and  tablets  running  Google’s  Android  operating  system.  This 
Apple–Samsung trial, completed in August 2012, is just one among dozens in a 
broader pattern of transnational litigation. See generally Andy Baio, A Patent Lie: 
How  Yahoo  Weaponized  My  Work,  WIRED  (Mar.  13,  2012,  3:44  PM), 
http://www.wired.com/epicenter/2012/03/opinion-baio-yahoo-patent-lie/  (last  visited 
Nov. 14, 2012) (on file with the Washington and Lee Law Review); Michael A. 
Carrier, A Roadmap to the Smartphone Patent Wars and FRAND Licensing, CPI 
ANTITRUST  CHRON.,  Apr.  2012,  available  at  http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ 
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2050743;  Robert  McMillan,  How  Apple  and  Microsoft 
Armed 4,000 Patent  Warheads, WIRED (May 21, 2012,  6:30 AM),  http://www. 
wired.com/wiredenterprise/2012/05/rockstar/ (last visited Nov. 14, 2012) (on file 
with the Washington and Lee Law Review); Marissa Oberlander, Martin Stabe 
& Steve Bernard, The Smartphone Patent Wars, FIN. TIMES (Oct. 17, 2011, 
5:43 PM),  http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/de24f970-f8d0-11e0-a5f7-00144feab49a.ht 
ml#axzz25KFyAXEL (last visited Nov. 14, 2012) (“Patent wars are raging in the 
smartphone  industry.  What  began  as  Apple  v  Google  Android  conflict  has 
turned into a vast legal quagmire involving everyone from Amazon to ZTE.”) (on 
file with the Washington and Lee Law Review); Richard A. Posner, Why There 
Are  Too  Many  Patents  in  America,  ATLANTIC  (July  12,  2012,  10:20  AM), 
http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2012/07/why-there-are-too-
many-patents-in-america/259725/  (last  visited  Nov.  14,  2012)  [hereinafter 
Posner, Too Many Patents] (on file with the Washington and Lee Law Review); 
Jessica E. Vascellaro & Evan Ramstad, Apple, Samsung Set Patent Talks: 
Settlement Attempt Unlikely to Bear Fruit, WALL ST. J. (May 21, 2012, 9:59 AM), 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303879604577414832794580586.
html  (last  visited  Nov.  14,  2012)  (“Chief  executives . . .  will  meet  in  San 
Francisco  Monday  in  a  court-directed  session  aimed  at  settling  their 
smartphone patent war. But a deal seems unlikely, people familiar with the ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1895 
light  bulbs  and  modern  smartphones  are  very  different 
technologies, they have much in common from the perspective of 
patent strategy.  Understanding  the  patent war  over the  light 
bulb can help us understand what is at stake in the current war 
over the smartphone.5  
Edison’s  lamp  can  also  shed  light  on  one  of  the  most 
challenging  questions  asked  in  patent  scholarship  today.  Is 
patent protection on the whole helpful or harmful to innovation? 
And how might the law be tweaked to achieve an even better 
balance between protection and competition? The light bulb can 
illuminate these questions by testing existing theory and helping 
to improve on it. For more than two centuries, U.S. patent law 
has assumed that patents promote innovation.6 Yet for all the 
profound impact that patent law has on industry and society, we 
have  little  empirical  evidence  to  test  this  “innovation 
assumption.”  In  fact,  there  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that 
patents  may  also  impede  innovation  by  creating  barriers  to 
competition.7 The assumption should more prudently be treated 
as a hypothesis in need of empirical testing. 
Part  II  of  this  Article  argues  that  careful  case  studies, 
particularly  those  drawn  from  history,  may  best  advance  our 
understanding  of  patent  law’s  impact  on  innovation.  The 
remainder of the Article develops such a case study, focusing on 
Thomas Edison’s efforts to market an incandescent light bulb. 
Part III takes up a recently articulated theory of patent racing, 
using the case study to test and refine the racing model. Part IV 
explores  the  lessons  of  this  case  study  for  the  innovation 
hypothesis. Here, a new model of “patent warfare” is advanced, 
which  not  only  explains  the  experience  of  the  early  electrical 
                                                                                                     
matter and others tracking the battle say.”) (on file with the Washington and 
Lee Law Review). 
  5.  This insight becomes even more timely in light of Judge Posner’s recent 
ruling in the Apple–Google litigation. See infra notes 183–84 and accompanying 
text (discussing Judge Posner’s decision to dismiss the recent suit between 
Apple and Motorola for lack of an adequate, acceptable remedy). 
  6.  See generally BRUCE W. BUGBEE, GENESIS OF AMERICAN PATENT AND 
COPYRIGHT LAW 60–103 (1967). 
  7.  See infra Part II.A (discussing the economic and social costs of a patent 
system). 1896  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
industry, but also reveals the high stakes of the new patent war 
now breaking out in the smartphone industry. 
II. Testing the Innovation Hypothesis 
A. Patents and Innovation 
For  more  than  two  centuries,  the  notion  that  patent 
protection encourages technological innovation has remained the 
conventional wisdom.8 In 1830, Anglo-American legal philosopher 
Jeremy  Bentham  captured  its  essence:  “In  new  inventions, 
protection  against  imitators  is  not  less  necessary  than  in 
established manufactures protection against thieves. He who has 
no hope that he shall reap will not take the trouble to sow.”9 A 
half-century later, the same notion is reflected as the popular 
wisdom of industrial Americans in Mark Twain’s A Connecticut 
Yankee in King Arthur’s Court.10 In this tale, a New England 
                                                                                                     
  8.  This utilitarian argument has never been the only justification for 
patent  protection.  Adam  Mossoff  has  persuasively  argued  that  normative 
concepts  of  fairness,  not  expectations  of  economic  benefit,  have  been  a 
significant—perhaps even primary—justification for patent protection since the 
founding of America. See Adam Mossoff, Who Cares What Thomas Jefferson 
Thought  About  Patents?  Reevaluating  the  Patent  “Privilege”  in  Historical 
Context, 92 CORNELL L. REV. 953, 954–59 (2007). For a recent and thorough 
treatment of ethical justifications for intellectual property not relying on the 
innovation  assumption,  see  generally  ROBERT  P.  MERGES,  JUSTIFYING 
INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY  (2011).  Of  course,  patent  protection  can  also  be 
challenged on ethical grounds, including notions of human rights. See, e.g., Lea 
Shaver, The Right to Science and Culture, 2010 WISC. L. REV. 121, 122–28. 
Nonetheless,  the  empirical  assumption  that  patent  protection  will  promote 
technological progress finds expression in the U.S. Constitution, which provides 
that Congress may offer inventors monopoly privileges on their inventions for 
limited times “to promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts.” U.S. CONST. 
art. I, § 8, cl. 8. At the Constitution’s signing, a number of states were already 
granting patents and some had done so even as British colonies. See BUGBEE, 
supra note 6, at 57–103 (describing the early patent system in colonial America). 
The  true  effect  of  this  constitutional  provision,  then,  was  not  to  create  a 
governmental power to grant monopolies, but to establish this power as an 
exclusively federal one, to be exercised by the legislative branch. See BUGBEE, 
supra note 6, at 129–31 (explaining the establishment of a federal patent 
system). Whether the provision also established meaningful limits on the term 
of such monopolies is a topic that remains open to substantial debate. 
  9.  JEREMY BENTHAM, THE RATIONALE OF REWARD 318 (1830).  
  10.  MARK TWAIN, A CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR’S COURT (Oxford 
Univ. Press 2008) (1889). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1897 
mechanic from the 1880s travels back in time to Camelot, where 
he becomes a valued advisor to the English king. On the subject 
of technological innovation, Twain’s hero relates:  
[T]he very first official thing I did, in my administration—and 
it was on the first day of it, too—was to start a patent office; 
for I knew that a country without a patent office and good 
patent laws was just a crab, and couldn’t travel any way but 
sideways or backwards.11 
As  an  empirical  matter,  however,  the  benefits  of  patent 
protection  for  innovation  are  far  less  certain.  Scholarly 
skepticism  about  the  anticipated  benefits  of  patent  protection 
also has deep roots.12 In the 1950s, the noted economist Franz 
Machlup advised Congress: 
If we did not have a patent system, it would be irresponsible, 
on  the  basis  of  our  present  knowledge  of  its  economic 
consequences,  to  recommend  instituting  one.  But  since  we 
have  had  a  patent  system  for  a  long  time,  it  would  be 
irresponsible,  on  the  basis  of  our  present  knowledge,  to 
recommend abolishing it.13 
Fifty years later, noted scholar Richard Posner lamented that 
economists  have  still  not  determined  whether  the  benefits  of 
intellectual property protection outweigh the costs.14 Economists 
                                                                                                     
  11.  MARK TWAIN, A CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR’S COURT 107 (1st 
ed. 1889). Credit is due to Mark Adelman for leading me to Twain’s work. For a 
more serious interview with Mark Twain suggesting that the Yankee hero’s 
statement reflects Twain’s own beliefs rather than simply words thrust upon a 
satirical strawman, see MARK TWAIN, MARK TWAIN: THE COMPLETE INTERVIEWS 
295 (Gary Scharnhorst ed., The University of Alabama Press 2006) (using 
historical evidence himself to suggest that patent protection encourages not so 
much invention itself as the diligent perfection of invention into a commercially 
practical technology). Twain was also a patent holder. See Improvement In 
Scrap-Books, U.S. Patent No. 140,245 (filed May 7, 1873) (issued June 24, 1873) 
(disclosing a self-pasting scrap-book). 
  12.  See, e.g., Mark D. Janis, Patent Abolitionism, 17 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 
899,  901–03  (2002)  (analyzing  parallels  between  the  Victorian-era  British 
movement to abolish patents and contemporary debates).  
  13.  FRITZ MACHLUP, AN ECONOMIC REVIEW OF THE PATENT SYSTEM: STUDY OF 
THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON PATENTS, TRADEMARKS, AND COPYRIGHTS 80 (1958). 
  14.  See,  e.g.,  Richard  A.  Posner,  Intellectual  Property:  The  Law  and 
Economics  Approach,  19  J.  ECON.  PERSP.  57,  59  (2005)  (“Unfortunately, 
economists do not know whether the existing system of intellectual property 
rights is, or . . . whether any other system of intellectual property rights would 
be, a source of net social utility, given the costs of the system and the existence 1898  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
and  legal  scholars  have  recently  devoted  great  theoretical 
attention to clarifying the ways in which patent protection may 
inhibit innovation, as well as incentivize it.15 
                                                                                                     
of alternative sources of incentives to create such property.”). 
  15.  See, e.g., YOCHAI BENKLER, THE WEALTH OF NETWORKS: HOW SOCIAL 
PRODUCTION TRANSFORMS MARKETS AND FREEDOM 35–41 (2006) (analyzing the 
digital environment with the “understanding that markets based on patents or 
copyrights involve a trade-off between static and dynamic efficiency”); MICHELE 
BOLDRIN  &  DAVID  K.  LEVINE,  AGAINST  INTELLECTUAL  MONOPOLY  206  (2008) 
(offering a litany of economic arguments against patents and copyrights and 
concluding  that  “the  patent  system  destroys  productive  capacity,  generates 
useless and damaging monopoly, and last but not least, humiliates and destroys 
decent and humble geniuses”); JAMES BESSEN & MICHAEL J. MEURER, PATENT 
FAILURE: HOW JUDGES, BUREAUCRATS, AND LAWYERS PUT INNOVATORS AT RISK 
145–46 (2008) (“It is important to emphasize that our evidence suggests that 
patents today constitute a brake on innovation, not a roadblock . . . . [O]ur 
evidence implies that patents place a drag on innovation. Without this drag, the 
rate of innovation and technological progress might have been even greater, 
perhaps much greater.”); ADAM B. JAFFE & JOSH LERNER, INNOVATION AND ITS 
DISCONTENTS: HOW OUR BROKEN PATENT SYSTEM IS ENDANGERING INNOVATION 
AND PROGRESS, AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT 2 (2004) (arguing that innovation is 
threatened by the uncertainty created by a patent system that provides poor 
notice of property boundaries); WILLIAM M. LANDES & RICHARD A. POSNER, THE 
ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW 11–24 (2003); Dan L. 
Burk & Mark A. Lemley, Policy Levers in Patent Law, 89 VA. L. REV. 1575, 
1597–99 (2003); Rochelle Cooper Dreyfuss, Does IP Need IP? Accommodating 
Intellectual Production Outside the Intellectual Property Paradigm, 31 CARDOZO 
L.  REV.  1437,  1465–73  (2010)  (surveying  contexts  in  which  intellectual 
production flourishes without intellectual property as well as reasons to believe 
that intellectual property may still be necessary to provide optimal incentives); 
Rochelle Dreyfuss, Pathological Patenting: The PTO as Cause or Cure, 104 
MICH. L. REV. 1559, 1561 (2006) (reviewing Jaffe and Lerner’s Book Innovation 
and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent System Is Endangering Innovation 
and  Progress,  and  What  To  Do  About  It  and  arguing  that  “[w]ith  some 
modification,  [the  authors’ suggested  reforms]  could  go  a  long  way  toward 
healing the system”); Herbert Hovenkamp, Mark Janis & Mark A. Lemley, 
Anticompetitive Settlement of Intellectual Property Disputes, 87 MINN. L. REV. 
1719, 1721–24 (2003) (noting that questionable patent litigation is frequently 
being used as cover for collusion between market competitors); Adam B. Jaffe, 
The U.S. Patent System in Transition: Policy Innovation and the Innovation 
Process,  29  RES.  POL’Y  531,  531–32  (2000);  Mark  A.  Lemley,  Property, 
Intellectual Property, and Free Riding, 83 TEX. L. REV. 1031, 1058–59 (2005); 
Christopher Leslie, The Anticompetitive Effects of Unenforced Invalid Patents, 
91  MINN.  L.  REV.  101,  103  (2006);  Katherine  J.  Strandburg,  Evolving 
Information Paradigms and the Global Intellectual Property Regime, 41 CONN. 
L. REV. 861, 871–79 (2009) (arguing that changing dynamics of innovation are 
poorly  served  by  international  regimes  imposing  substantive  standards  of 
intellectual property protection); Mark A. Lemley, Industry-Specific Antitrust 
Policy for Innovation 2–4 (Stanford Law & Econ. Olin, Working Paper No. 397, ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1899 
Patent law and policy, however, continue to operate on the 
assumption that patents not only incentivize greater innovation, 
but that the patent incentive is substantial such that innovation 
would be greatly diminished if the incentive were removed or even 
weakened.16  By  and  large,  the  field  of  patent  scholarship  also 
treats  this  assumption  as  presumptively  correct,  while 
acknowledging  that  future  research  might  one  day  call  it  into 
question. This willingness to assume—at least for the time being—
that patents work as intended has the same practical effect as an 
evidentiary presumption: it shifts the burden of proof onto the 
challengers  of  the  conventional  wisdom.  There  are  virtues  to 
adopting  this  assumption.  One  such  virtue  is  enabling  patent 
scholars  to  focus  productively  on  calibrating  less-entrenched 
aspects of patent doctrine and on suggesting reforms that may be 
implemented in the near future.17  
Embracing  this  assumption  too  fully,  however,  carries  an 
unacceptable risk. Patent law is a tremendously influential aspect 
of modern economic regulation.18 What if its central assumption is 
wrong?  So  far  we  have  justified  the substantial  social  costs  of 
patent protection—litigation costs, anticompetitive effects, higher 
prices for consumers, barriers to adoption of new technologies—on 
the basis that these sacrifices are worthwhile in order to achieve 
faster innovation. If patent protection offers much fewer benefits 
for innovation than widely supposed, the law is imposing these 
substantial costs needlessly. And if patent protection actually has 
a net negative impact on innovation, the real costs to economic 
growth  may  be  appalling  in  scale.  Because  the  risks  of  being 
                                                                                                     
2010), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1670197. 
  16.  Indeed, evidence suggests that patent law’s reliance on the innovation 
assumption has, if anything, increased in recent years. See Gaia Bernstein, In 
the  Shadow  of  Innovation,  31  CARDOZO  L.  REV.  2257,  2259–60  (2010) 
(documenting  an  increasing  use  of  the  phrase  “innovation”  in  intellectual 
property opinions beginning in the 1980s). 
  17.  See,  e.g.,  Lisa  Larrimore  Ouellette,  Do  Patents  Disclose  Useful 
Information?, 25 HARV. J.L. & TECH. 531, 532–35 (2012) (surveying the mixed 
empirical  support  for  the  innovation  hypothesis  without  taking  sides  and 
proceeding to focus on a more politically open question: What emphasis should 
patent doctrine place on disclosure as a central policy goal?).  
  18.  See, e.g., BESSEN & MEURER, supra note 15, at 6–7 (comparing the 
economic impact of tangible property law to economic incentives potentially 
created by patent laws). 1900  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
wrong  are  so  great,  the  innovation  assumption  should  more 
prudently be treated as the innovation hypothesis, in need of 
further empirical testing. 
B. Case Study as Methodology 
A  major  challenge  for  researchers  seeking  to  test  the 
innovation  hypothesis  is  the  complexity  of  the  phenomenon. 
Changes in patent policy take time to play out in the marketplace 
and  affect  different  industries  in  different  ways.19  At  the 
macroeconomic  level,  it  can  be  very  difficult  to  separate  out 
impacts due to changes in patent policy from those due to other 
causes.20 Cross-national comparisons are further complicated by 
the  trend  toward  harmonization  of  patent  law,  which  limits 
opportunities for empirical evaluation of differing regimes.21 Even 
defining  “innovation”  as  a  quantifiable  outcome  has  proven 
elusive.22 These challenges make it difficult to reliably measure 
patent law’s impact through large-scale quantitative analysis. 
                                                                                                     
  19.  See, e.g., Burk & Lemley, supra note 15, at 1576–78 (explaining how 
innovation and therefore the impacts of patent policy differ based on the 
industry studied). 
  20.  See, e.g., BESSEN & MEURER, supra note 15, at 11 (“Many interrelated 
factors  can  influence  R&D  spending,  innovation,  and  the  resulting  social 
welfare, so it is difficult to disentangle these to determine the independent 
influence of patents.”). 
  21.  Economist Petra Moser has creatively approached this problem by 
analyzing  evidence  of  innovation  predating  the  modern  trend  toward 
international harmonization of patent law. See Petra Moser, How Do Patent 
Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth-Century World’s Fairs, 
95 AM. ECON. REV. 1214, 1231–33 (2005) (concluding that, because patent 
protection appears to enhance innovation in some industries but impede it in 
others, variance in patent regimes across countries may result in optimal 
global results by encouraging the development of comparative advantages). 
  22.  In 2006, the United States Department of Commerce launched a 
special  advisory  committee  to  help  it  develop  metrics  for  measuring  the 
innovativeness of the United States’ economy. U.S. DEP’T OF COMMERCE, ECON. 
&  STATISTICS  ADMIN.,  INNOVATION  MEASUREMENT,  TRACKING  THE  STATE  OF 
INNOVATION  IN  THE  AMERICAN  ECONOMY  (2008),  available  at  http://www. 
esa.doc.gov/Reports/innovation-measurement-tracking-state-innovation-american-
economy. The Measuring Innovation in the 21st Century Economy Advisory 
Committee’s first meeting in February 2007 highlighted some of the challenges of 
measuring innovation. See Brian Wingfield, Measuring Innovation, FORBES (Feb. 
23,  2007,  6:00  AM),  http://www.forbes.com/businessinthebeltway/2007/02/22/ 
innovation-commerce-companies-biz-washington-cx_bw_0223innovate.html  (last ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1901 
In my first article, I explored some of the problems inherent 
in  macroeconomic  measures  of  innovation,  particularly  the 
problematic reliance on rates of patent filing as the measure of 
innovation.23 Rather than relying on numerical data, the article 
suggested  that  careful  case  studies  are  likely  to  prove  more 
enlightening at the present stage of research.24 An empirical case 
study steps back from the overwhelming web of data to pick up 
the  thread  of  a  single  “case,”  which  might  be  the  life  of  a 
particular  patent,  technology,  company,  or  industry.25  The 
                                                                                                     
visited Nov. 14, 2012) (describing the first meeting of the committee) (on file with 
the Washington and Lee Law Review); see also NAT’L SCI. FOUND., DIV. OF SCI. 
RES. STATISTICS, NSF 07-306, ADVANCING MEASURES OF INNOVATION: KNOWLEDGE 
FLOWS, BUSINESS METRICS, AND MEASUREMENT STRATEGIES (2007), available at 
http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf07306/pdf/nsf07306.pdf  (concluding  that  much 
further research will be necessary to develop reliable innovation metrics).  
  23.  See Lea Bishop Shaver, Defining and Measuring A2K: A Blueprint for 
an Index of Access to Knowledge, 4 I/S: J.L. & POL’Y FOR INFO. SOC’Y 235, 264–65 
(2008) (noting that rates of patent applications and grants reveal more about 
the ease and advantages of obtaining a patent, rather than accurately reflecting 
underlying rates of innovation). 
  24.  See id. (suggesting that researchers focus on “high-value innovation” or 
narrow the focus of their study to one field rather than attempt to measure 
innovation across an entire society). 
  25.  The empirical “case study” has no necessary relationship with the “case 
method” widely used in legal research and education. Literature on case studies 
as an empirical research methodology has been careful to distinguish its subject 
from the quite different use of cases as a teaching tool in law and business. See, 
e.g., ROBERT K. YIN, CASE STUDY RESEARCH: DESIGN AND METHODS 4–5 (4th ed. 
2009) (describing a “teaching case” as one designed to establish a framework for 
discussion and debate among students and noting that the focus on his work is 
on the use of case studies as a research method). In contrast to the case method, 
the case study need not take a particular legal dispute or judicial opinion as its 
focus of inquiry. Of course, the “case” that is the object of empirical study might 
be a legal case, such as the Supreme Court’s hearing of the Incandescent Lamp 
Case, 159 U.S. 465 (1895). But the “case” might also be a patent (such as 
Edison’s ’898 Patent), a technology (the light bulb), a patentee (Thomas Edison), 
a firm (General Electric), or a sector (the early electrical industry). Any specific, 
complex, functioning thing may be a “case” for study. See ROBERT E. STAKE, THE 
ART  OF  CASE  STUDY  RESEARCH  2  (1995)  [hereinafter  STAKE,  CASE  STUDY 
RESEARCH].  My  interest  in  understanding  how  patent  law  influences 
technological innovation led me to define my case around one technology—the 
early light bulb. Many different legal disputes, patents, patentees, and firms 
influence innovation in any particular field of technology. Therefore, focusing on 
any one particular opinion, patent, inventor, or company would likely narrow 
the  inquiry  too  much  and  miss  essential  aspects  of  the  larger  innovation 
dynamics. A concrete technology (such as the light bulb or the smartphone) 
appears to be the simplest unit of investigation that allows us to seek answers 1902  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
researcher follows the path of that one subject to see where it 
leads  and  attempts  to  interpret  its  lessons.26  A  leading 
articulation of the case study methodology in the social sciences 
proposes  that  “case  studies  are  the  preferred  method  when 
(a) ’how’ or ‘why’ questions are being posed, (b) the investigator 
has  little  control  over  events,  and  (c) the  focus  is  on  a 
contemporary  phenomenon  within  a  real-life  context.”27  These 
three  conditions  accurately  capture  the  challenges  associated 
with asking how patent law impacts technological innovation.  
To  be  sure,  a  case  study  of  any  one  technology  has  only 
limited  utility  for  answering  our  larger  questions  about 
innovation. The dynamics of the particular technology selected 
may not be representative of all sectors or even of the general 
trend.  Multiple  data  points  are  needed.  It  should  also  be 
acknowledged  that  case  studies  are  fundamentally  acts  of 
interpretation.28  To  guard  against  investigator  bias,  these 
interpretations should be subject to peer review, public debate, 
                                                                                                     
to questions about technological innovation and diffusion, without hiding the 
complex operations of patent law in the real world.  
  26.  Within  the  substantial  social  scientific  literature  employing  and 
commenting on case study methodology, some researchers prefer case studies 
because  of  normative  commitments  that  achieving  objective,  accurate 
explanation of complex social phenomena is unattainable or undesirable. From 
these researchers’ point of view, there is no “truth” in social science, only 
“interpretation.” See Robert E. Stake, Case Studies, in THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF 
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH 435, 439 (Norman K. Denzin & Donna S. Lincoln eds., 
2d ed. 2000) [hereinafter Stake, QUALITATIVE RESEARCH] (describing some of the 
criticisms of case study research regarding their value to generalizability). This 
is not my point of view, nor is it my motivation for adopting this methodology. 
Quite to the contrary, the present study assumes that there is a correct answer 
to the question, “Does patent protection promote technological innovation?” and 
that social science can help us find that correct answer. Of course, the correct 
answer is unlikely to be a simple “yes” or “no.” Rather, the accurate answer to 
this question is likely to be complex, to be filled with caveats, and to inevitably 
have some margin of uncertainty. The correct answer is likely to be: “Under 
certain circumstances, yes, patent protection does appear to promote innovation; 
and  under  other  circumstances,  no,  patent  protection  appears  to  be 
counterproductive.” Careful case studies can help illuminate these complex 
dynamics and help to form provisional answers, which may in turn be further 
tested and verified through quantitative analysis. 
  27.  YIN, supra note 25, at 13. 
  28.  See, e.g., STAKE, CASE STUDY RESEARCH, supra note 25, at 8 (“According 
to one highly respected writer on qualitative studies, Fred Erickson, the most 
distinctive  characteristic  of  qualitative  inquiry  is  its  emphasis  on 
interpretation.”). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1903 
and independent studies of other cases, a phenomenon referred to 
in  the  case  study  literature  as  “triangulation.”29  Over  time, 
however, the collective work of many scholars may build a robust 
body of case studies, which could provide a strong empirical basis 
to support or call into question key predictions and assumptions 
about  the  impact  of  patents  on  innovation.  Even  before  this 
critical  mass  is  reached,  individual  case  studies  can  offer  a 
helpful reality check  on  our  theoretical  models  of  how  patent 
incentives work. Do theoretical predictions that seem to make 
sense in the abstract actually fit with what can be observed in the 
historical record? Or is there a significant gap between theory 
and fact, at least in the particular cases available to date?  
The  present  work  builds  upon  a  body  of  empirical  case 
studies  that  have  already  been  developed  by  patent  scholars 
looking at a number of modern technologies. For example, Lisa 
Ouellette  has  examined  the  disclosure  function  of  patents  in 
spreading  scientific  knowledge  through  the  nanotechnology 
sector.30  Graham,  Merges,  Samuelson,  and  Sichelman  have 
drawn findings about the role of patents in assisting startups, 
drawing  on  surveys  of  more  than  one  thousand  high-tech 
entrepreneurs  in  sectors  ranging  from  biotechnology  to 
software.31  Samuelson  and  Scotchmer  have  examined  the 
economic impact of reverse engineering in the semi-conductor and 
software industries.32 Health economist Heidi Williams has used 
interviews and statistical analysis to document a negative impact 
                                                                                                     
  29.  See id. at 111–15 (describing the triangulation protocols to “increase 
credence  in  the  interpretation”  and  “to  demonstrate  commonality  of  an 
assertion”). 
  30.  See, e.g., Ouellette, supra note 17, at 552–71 (drawing on a survey of 
more  than  200  nanotechnology  researchers  and  case  studies  of  selected 
nanotechnology  patents  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  patents  on  scientific 
disclosure).  
  31.  See Stuart J. H. Graham et al., High Technology Entrepreneurs and the 
Patent System: Results of the 2008 Berkeley Patent Survey, 24 BERKELEY TECH. 
L.J. 1255, 1255 (2009) (“We offer description and analysis of the 2008 Berkeley 
Patent  Survey—the  first  comprehensive  survey  of  patenting  and 
entrepreneurship in the United States—summarizing the responses of 1,332 
early-stage technology companies founded since 1998.”). 
  32.  See Pamela Samuelson & Suzanne Scotchmer, The Law and Economics 
of Reverse Engineering, 111 YALE L.J. 1575, 1595–1626 (2002) (describing the 
results of the authors’ study of the economic impact of reverse engineering in 
the semi-conductor and software industries). 1904  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
on  downstream  innovation  for  gene  sequences  covered  by 
intellectual property.33 Fiona Murray and colleagues documented 
a similar negative impact in a comparison of laboratory mouse 
varieties subject to differing intellectual property restrictions.34 
The  above  case  studies  each  have  a  quantitative  component, 
focusing on a particular set of data to answer particular questions 
about  their  cases.  These  studies  illustrate  the  point  that  the 
empirical case study need not be purely qualitative. 
A  more  recent  trend  in  patent  scholarship  is  to  explore 
historical,  as  well  as  current,  case  studies.35  Thus,  Gerard 
Magliocca  has  harvested  lessons  from  the  behavior  of  patent 
                                                                                                     
  33.  Heidi Williams, Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence 
from the Human Genome (Nat’l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 
16213,  2011),  available  at  http://www.law.nyu.edu/academics/colloquia/ 
innovationpolicy/ECM_PRO_070944; see also Rochelle C. Dreyfuss & James P. 
Evans, From Bilski Back to Benson: Preemption, Inventing Around, and the 
Case of Genetic Diagnostics, 63 STAN. L. REV. 1349, 1365–70 (2011) (surveying 
empirical research on the effect of gene patents on medical innovation and 
drawing lessons for the patentability of genetic correlations). 
  34.   See Fiona Murray et al., Of Mice and Academics: Examining the Effect 
of Openness on Innovation 4–5 (Nat’l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper 
No. 14,819, 2009), available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w14819 (determining 
that  research  using  mice  species  subject  to  greater  intellectual  property 
restrictions resulted in less “downstream” innovation than research using less-
restricted species). 
  35.  There  is  also  a  larger  body  of  historical  work  on  patent  law  not 
employing the case study approach. See generally, e.g., B. ZORINA KHAN, THE 
DEMOCRATIZATION  OF  INVENTION:  PATENTS  AND  COPYRIGHTS  IN  AMERICAN 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, 1790–1920 (2005) (providing a historical overview of 
the development of patent and copyright law in America and its impact on 
economic  development);  CHRISTINE  MACLEOD,  INVENTING  THE  INDUSTRIAL 
REVOLUTION: THE ENGLISH PATENT SYSTEM, 1600–1800 (1988) (examining trends 
in patenting and innovation as well as offering an intellectual history of the 
concept of invention in this time period); Catherine L. Fisk, Removing the ‘Fuel 
of Interest’ from the ‘Fire of Genius’: Law and the Employee-Inventor, 1830–1930, 
65 U. CHI. L. REV. 1127 (1998) (examining the development of law respecting 
ownership  of  employee  inventions  during  the  19th  and  20th  centuries  in 
America); Moser, supra note 21 (using exhibition data to examine the impact of 
patent laws on innovation); Brad Sherman & Leanne Wiseman, Fair Copy: 
Protecting Access to Scientific Information in Post-War Britain, 73 MOD. L. REV. 
240  (2010)  (discussing  the  impact  of  library  copying  provisions  on  the 
development of copyright law in post-war Great Britain); Kara Swanson, The 
Emergence of the Professional Patent Practitioner, 50 TECH. & CULTURE 519 
(2009) (tracing the historical roots of the modern patent bar); Steven Wilf, The 
Making of the Post-War Paradigm in American Intellectual Property Law, 31 
COLUM. J.L. & ARTS 139 (2008) (reviewing the expansion and development of the 
scope of intellectual property law in America since World War II). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1905 
trolls with regard to nineteenth century agricultural machinery.36 
Adam Mossoff has delved into patent thickets surrounding the 
early sewing machine industry.37 Kara Swanson uncovered the 
hidden  dimensions  of  “the  corset  case”  to  offer  a  gendered 
perspective on patent law.38 And Christopher Beauchamp picks 
up the telephone as an object of cultural and legal disputes over 
inventorship.39  
So far, historical scholars have not typically focused their 
attention on the innovation hypothesis, and innovation scholars 
have not generally favored historical case studies.40 Yet historical 
case studies may be critical to testing patent law’s innovation 
hypothesis. The unique advantage of a historical case study is 
that the passing of time allows researchers to observe both short-
term  and  long-term  results.  This  is  crucial  because  the  full 
impact of patent protection plays out over several decades. In the 
near term, incentives are perceived, a technology is developed, 
patents are issued, and products come to market. In the longer 
term,  the  new  industry  matures,  litigation  ensues,  the  first-
generation  patents  expire,  and  second-generation  innovation 
takes  place.  When studying  cutting-edge  technological  sectors, 
our analysis is necessarily limited to the near term; the longer-
term effects remain in the future, out of sight. This shortened 
horizon  may  introduce  a  systematic  blind  spot  in  our 
                                                                                                     
  36.  Gerard N. Magliocca, Blackberries and Barnyards: Patent Trolls and 
the Perils of Innovation, 82 NOTRE DAME L. REV. 1809, 1808–14 (2007). 
  37.  Adam Mossoff, The Rise and Fall of the First American Patent Thicket: 
The Sewing Machine War of the 1850s, 53 ARIZ. L. REV. 165, 166–70 (2011). 
  38.  Kara W. Swanson, Getting a Grip on the Corset: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Patent Law, 23 YALE J.L. & FEMINISM 57, 59–62 (2011). 
  39.  Christopher  Beauchamp,  Who  Invented  the  Telephone?:  Lawyers, 
Patents, and the Judgments of History, 51 TECH. & CULTURE 854, 855–66, 877–
78 (2010) [hereinafter Beauchamp, Who Invented the Telephone] (examining 
how patent law influenced the legal and cultural notions of who invented the 
telephone); see also Christopher Beauchamp, The Telephone Patents: Intellectual 
Property, Business, and the Law in the United States and Britain, 1876–1900, 9 
ENTERPRISE & SOC’Y 591 (2008) (using a case study of the early telephone 
industry in the United States and Great Britain to explore interactions between 
business strategies and national legal regimes). 
  40.  Indeed, historical inquiry comes with challenges for the researcher 
interested in assessing the impact of patent law on innovation. Quantitative 
data may not have been recorded and might be impossible to gather now. 
Participant  observation  and  interviewing  are  similarly  unavailable  as 
methodologies. 1906  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
understanding of patent law’s true impact. The benefits of patent 
protection  are  visible  immediately  in  the  form  of  enhanced 
research and development spending, cutting-edge technologies, 
and new products on market. The long-term costs to competition, 
access, and next-generation innovation may take place later, out 
of sight.41 
Taking a historic case study such as the light bulb allows us 
to examine the impact of patent law in the fullness of time—not 
just  at  the  initial  stage  of  research  and  development,  but 
throughout the term of protection and past the expiration of first-
generation  patents.  This  greater  perspective  can  allow 
researchers  to  observe  long-term  dynamics  that  would  have 
remained hidden in the future when studying a more current 
technology.  In  the  case  of  the  light  bulb,  these  long-term 
dynamics  included  massive  litigation,42  the  consolidation  of  a 
previously competitive industry,43 and a half-century lull between 
when incandescent-light technology was first patented and when 
it  finally  became  widely  accessible  to  the  American  public.44 
Perhaps it should come as no surprise, then, that patent scholars 
centrally concerned with  the  innovation  problem  have  heavily 
relied on the very limited historical research already at hand.45 
                                                                                                     
  41.  See Bernstein, supra note 16, at 2311 (distinguishing the first step of 
innovation from the second step of diffusion and concluding that intellectual 
property law has been insufficiently concerned with the latter). 
  42.  See, e.g., HAROLD C. PASSER, THE ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS 1875–
1900: A STUDY IN COMPETITION, ENTREPRENEURSHIP, TECHNICAL CHANGE, AND 
ECONOMIC  GROWTH  151–55  (1953)  [hereinafter  PASSER,  THE  ELECTRICAL 
MANUFACTURERS]  (describing  the  litigation  that  ensued  surrounding  the 
patenting of the light bulb). 
  43.  See id. at 155–62 (describing the consolidation of the incandescent lamp 
industry following the upholding of Edison’s light bulb patent). 
  44.  See generally DAVID E. NYE, ELECTRIFYING AMERICA: SOCIAL MEANINGS 
OF A NEW TECHNOLOGY, 1880–1940 (1992) (tracing the history of electricity’s 
spread across America from its initial development in the early 1880s to its 
broad spread to ordinary Americans only in the 1930s and 1940s). 
  45.  See, e.g., BESSEN & MEURER, supra note 15 (discussing patents as a form 
of property right and concluding that patents fail as property in rewarding 
innovators and encouraging investment in innovation); BOLDRIN & LEVINE, supra 
note 15 (analyzing the impact of intellectual monopolies created through patents 
and copyrights on the economic motivations for innovation); Mark A. Lemley, 
The Myth of the Sole Inventor, 110 MICH. L. REV. 709 (2012) [hereinafter Lemley, 
Sole Inventor] (examining the problem of simultaneous or near-simultaneous 
invention as it relates to patent law theory). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1907 
History remains the best evidence available to us, in a world 
where  controlled  experiments  are  impossible.  This  promising 
body  of  evidence  deserves  more  careful  and  extensive 
investigation. 
C. Law and the Light Bulb 
Many different technologies might have been the focus of an 
attempt to historically examine the innovation hypothesis. Why 
choose the light bulb? Robert E. Stake has distinguished three 
approaches to case study research: “intrinsic, instrumental, and 
collective.”46 First, a researcher may choose to undertake a case 
study  for  intrinsic  interest:  not  to  understand  a  general 
phenomenon or build theory, but because the case itself is of 
inherent interest.47 Alternatively, a case may be explored with 
the primary goal of gaining an understanding of larger questions 
removed  from  the  particular  instance—the  instrumental  case 
study.48  My  aim  in  undertaking  this  case  study  is  decidedly 
instrumental. My research is driven by the desire to understand 
how patent law impacts technological innovation and diffusion. 
Many different technologies could have served that instrumental 
purpose; the light bulb offered simply one convenient starting 
point.  In  the  future,  several  thoughtfully  selected  inventions 
might be explored through a collective case study.49  
For many Americans, however, the case of Thomas Edison 
and the light bulb holds substantial intrinsic interest. People are 
interested in knowing more about the invention of the light bulb, 
for its own sake. Choosing this particular case thus offered me a 
vehicle to explore the innovation hypothesis, with the hope of 
finding a wider audience. A second advantage of the enduring 
intrinsic interest in the light bulb and Thomas Edison is that a 
                                                                                                     
  46.  Stake, QUALITATIVE RESEARCH, supra note 26, at 438. 
  47.  See id. at 437 (noting that the case is undertaken not “because the case 
represents other cases or because it illustrates a particular trait or problem, but 
because, in all its particularly and ordinariness, [the] case itself is of interest”). 
  48.  See id. (“The case is of secondary interest, it plays a supportive role, 
and it facilitates our understanding of something else.”). 
  49.  See id. (defining the collective case study as an instrumental study 
extended to several cases, which are selected as a sample to be representative of 
a broader class of phenomena the researcher wants to understand). 1908  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
substantial body of scholarship already exists on this case. This 
Article draws significantly on that existing scholarship to look for 
answers  to  a  previously  neglected  research  question.  The 
availability of a wealth of primary and secondary materials on 
this case also means that researchers who share my interest in 
the  innovation  hypothesis  have  access  to  the  same  resources. 
Others may interpret these materials independently, critique my 
conclusions,  and  offer  alternative  explanations:  such 
“triangulation” is an important check on case study work that 
seeks to answer an empirical question. 
Discussion  of  Edison’s  work  seems  an  almost  inescapable 
element of any treatise on innovation.50 Yet the Great Inventor 
has so far attracted only a little attention from legal scholars.51 
The Supreme Court’s opinion in the Incandescent Lamp Patent 
case52  is  familiar  to  many  patent  attorneys,  students,  and 
scholars. It is excerpted in several patent casebooks and makes 
regular  appearances  in  law  review  footnotes.53  Yet  the  case’s 
                                                                                                     
  50.  See, e.g., HAROLD EVANS WITH GAIL BUCKLAND & DAVID LEFER, THEY 
MADE AMERICA 151–71 (2004); JONATHAN S. FEINSTEIN, THE NATURE OF CREATIVE 
DEVELOPMENT 565 (2006); ANDREW HARGADON, HOW BREAKTHROUGHS HAPPEN: 
THE SURPRISING TRUTH ABOUT HOW COMPANIES INNOVATE 249 (2003); THOMAS P. 
HUGHES, AMERICAN GENESIS: A CENTURY OF INVENTION AND  TECHNOLOGICAL 
ENTHUSIASM  517  (2004);  INVENTIVE  MINDS:  CREATIVITY  IN  TECHNOLOGY  345 
(Robert  J.  Weber  &  David  N.  Perkins  eds.,  1992);  ROBERT  W.  WEISBERG, 
CREATIVITY:  UNDERSTANDING  INNOVATION  IN  PROBLEM  SOLVING,  SCIENCE, 
INVENTION,  AND  THE  ARTS  261–75  (2006);  JOHN  ZIMAN,  TECHNOLOGICAL 
INNOVATION AS AN EVOLUTIONARY PROCESS 356 (2000). 
  51.  For  the  exception  that  proves  the  rule,  see  Barak  Y.  Orbach, 
Prizefighting and the Birth of Movie Censorship, 21 YALE J.L. & HUMAN. 251, 
251 (2009) (examining extensively Edison’s role in adopting self-regulation as a 
mode of content censorship in the early motion picture industry). Orbach’s 
interest was censorship and freedom of expression, yet his article’s insight into 
Edison’s business approach to motion picture technology is interesting from an 
intellectual property perspective as well. For instance, Orbach traces Edison’s 
tendency to publicly exaggerate the progress of an invention and his inability to 
accurately predict the profitability of a technology at the time of its invention. 
See  id.  at  275−76  (recalling  that  Edison  often  used  the  press  to  promote 
uncompleted inventions without foresight into the financial benefits of such 
publicity). Edison also receives several paragraphs of attention in recent works 
by Mark Lemley and Brian Love; these works are discussed in detail in Part III 
of this Article. 
  52.  Consol. Elec. Light Co. v. McKeesport Light Co., 159 U.S. 465 (1895). 
  53.  The case quickly became known by the subject matter of the patent, 
rather than the parties’ names. See, e.g., WALTER MALINS ROSE, NOTES ON THE 
UNITED  STATES  REPORTS:  A  BRIEF  CHRONOLOGICAL  DIGEST  OF  ALL  POINTS ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1909 
historical  context,  the  litigation’s  implications  for  the 
electrification of America, and the case’s potential larger lessons 
for innovation policy remain only dimly unappreciated. Indeed, 
the case name itself is a misnomer. There is no single patent 
corresponding to the incandescent lamp. Thomas Edison himself 
took out more than 100 patents on technical components of the 
incandescent  lamp;54  his  assistants  and  competitors  also  held 
many light bulb patents. Indeed, the patent at the center of the 
Supreme Court case was not Edison’s but that of a rival. More 
often, we invoke Thomas Edison and his light bulb in passing—
treating Edison as an icon, rather than as a subject of inquiry.55 
                                                                                                     
DETERMINED IN THE DECISIONS OF THE SUPREME COURT 776 (1901) (referring to 
the case by the name of “Incandescent Lamp Patent” and summarizing the 
holding as “the “[p]atent is void, where application is so vague that independent 
experimentation is necessary to construe it”); Dmitry Karshtedt, Limits on 
Hard-to-Reproduce  Inventions:  Process  Elements  and  Biotechnology’s 
Compliance with the Enablement Requirement, 3 HASTINGS SCI. & TECH. L.J. 
109,  138  (2011)  (citing  “the  venerable Incandescent  Lamp  Patent  case”  as 
indicative of the genus-species rule of patent claiming); Mark A. Lemley, The 
Economics of Improvement in Intellectual Property Law, 75 TEX. L. REV. 989, 
1002 (1997) [hereinafter Lemley, Economics of Improvement] (referring to the 
Incandescent Lamp Patent case as “a celebrated case” illustrating the principle 
that patent claim scope should be limited to embodiments actually enabled by 
the  disclosure);  Joshua  D.  Sarnoff,  The  Historic  and  Modern  Doctrines  of 
Equivalents  and  Claiming  the  Future,  Part  II  (1870-1952),  87  J.  PAT.  & 
TRADEMARK OFF. SOC’Y 441, 446 nn.121–27 (2005) (crediting the case with 
establishing the modern standard for enablement of claim scope, laying to rest 
earlier doctrine on pioneering patents). 
  54.  See Israel, Claim the Earth, supra note 2. 
  55.  See, e.g., Bernstein, supra note 16, at 2258 (“We adore genius and 
admire creators. We celebrate the achievements of Thomas Edison, and the 
extraordinary  talent  of  Wolfgang  Amadeus  Mozart.”);  John  S.  Leibovitz, 
Inventing a Nonexclusive Patent System, 111 YALE L.J. 2251, 2251–53 (2002) 
(using a slightly fictionalized account of the Edison-Swan invention race as a 
“paradigmatic patent parable” to illustrate the drawbacks of a winner-take-all 
approach to patent rights); Corey McCaffrey, The Virtues of Virtual Marking in 
Patent Reform, 105 NW. U. L. REV. 367, 367 (2011) (“The world is full of 
reminders that we are surrounded by inventions. When we see a light bulb, we 
remember Thomas Edison.”); Michael J. Meurer & Katherine J. Strandburg, 
Patent Carrots and Sticks: A Model of Nonobviousness, 12 LEWIS & CLARK L. 
REV. 547, 551−52 nn.12−15 (2008) (using Edison’s light bulb as a familiar 
invention to illustrate the argument that higher nonobviousness standards push 
inventors to pursue more ambitious projects); see also Lemley, Sole Inventor, 
supra note 45, at 710 (“Any elementary-school student can recite a number of 
canonical American invention stories. Thomas Edison invented the light bulb 
from his famous home laboratory in Menlo Park, New Jersey.”). Lemley’s article 
does not end with the icon, however, but goes on to explore Edison’s story in 1910  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
This  Article  seeks  to  go  further,  examining  the  invention, 
patenting,  marketing,  and  litigation  of  the  incandescent  light 
bulb through the close lens of patent racing theory. 
Before  beginning  this  deeper  inquiry,  however,  a  brief 
introduction is in order. Many of us were taught as children that 
Thomas Alva Edison invented the light bulb.56 The full story is 
more  complicated.  A  primitive  light  bulb  had  first  been 
demonstrated  more  than  seventy  years  before  Edison’s  work 
began.57  In  the  intervening  decades,  crucial  improvements  in 
vacuum  technology  and  electricity  generation  were  developed 
that  made  electric  light  a  newly  promising  technology.58 
Beginning in 1878, Edison led a team of engineers who worked 
together  to  produce  one  of  the  first  commercially  practical 
systems of interior lighting.59 This team, however, had serious 
competition  in  the  laboratory  and  the  marketplace.60  The 
competition was so intense, in fact, that for many years after 
                                                                                                     
greater depth, calling into question the iconic image. See id. at 722−23 (“It 
seems  clear,  however,  that  Edison  did  not  ‘invent’  the  lightbulb  in  any 
meaningful sense.”). Lemley also uses the Incandescent Lamp Patent case as an 
illustration of the doctrine of enablement in the context of follow-on innovation. 
See Lemley, Economics of Improvement, supra note 53, at 1002−03 (discussing 
the court’s decision to invalidate Sawyer and Mann’s patent infringement claim 
against Edison on the grounds that Sawyer and Mann’s patent for the use of any 
vegetable fiber as a filament did not preclude Edison from making further 
investigation using bamboo). 
  56.  A number of works aimed at children present Thomas Edison as an 
archetype of the heroic inventor See, e.g., LAURIE CARLSON, THOMAS EDISON FOR 
KIDS: HIS LIFE AND IDEAS: 21 ACTIVITIES (2006); INEZ NELLIE MCFEE, THE STORY 
OF THOMAS A. EDISON (1922); WILLIAM H. MEADOWCROFT WITH AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL 
NOTE BY MR. EDISON, THE BOY’S LIFE OF EDISON (1911); FRANCIS ROLT-WHEELER, 
THOMAS ALVA EDISON (1915). 
  57.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 36 (“One of the first demonstrations of 
electrically induced incandescence was made in 1802 . . . .”). 
  58.  See id. at 38−42 (discussing the contribution energy advancements and 
vacuum developments had on the ultimate success of incandescent lighting). 
  59.  See ROBERT FRIEDEL & PAUL ISRAEL WITH BERNARD S. FINN, EDISON’S 
ELECTRIC LIGHT: BIOGRAPHY OF AN INVENTION, 4−5 (1986) [hereinafter FRIEDEL & 
ISRAEL, ELECTRIC LIGHT]. 
  60.  At the exhibitions of the International Electrical Congress in Paris in 
1881—held after Edison had filed several patents in the field but before he had 
his first paying customers—incandescent lamps were displayed by Swan, Lane-
Fox,  Maxim,  and  Edison.  THOMAS  P.  HUGHES,  NETWORKS  OF  POWER: 
ELECTRIFICATION IN WESTERN SOCIETY, 1880–1930, at 50 (1983) [hereinafter 
HUGHES, NETWORKS OF POWER]. ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1911 
light  bulbs  began  to  be  widely  manufactured  and  sold,  it 
remained  unclear  who  had  won.  Even  today,  British 
schoolchildren are taught that Joseph Swan, not Thomas Edison, 
won the race to invent the light bulb.61 Once electric light was 
ready  for  commercialization,  many  companies  competed  with 
Edison’s in the marketplace.62 Compared to his rivals, however, 
Edison was particularly successful in litigating his portfolio of 
patents related to electric light technology. Edison leveraged his 
patent portfolio and courtroom successes to obtain mergers or 
market  sharing  agreements  with  most  of  his  competition.63  A 
fifteen-year  litigation  campaign  advancing  claims  based  on  a 
number  of  patents  produced  a  stunning  consolidation  of  a 
previously competitive market for light bulb manufacture.64 By 
1910, General Electric—the successor to Edison’s electric light 
companies—would control 97% of all light bulbs sold in the U.S. 
market.65 The remainder of this Article examines both the early 
patent race and the later patent war in greater detail. 
III. Dynamics of Inventive Races 
One contribution historical case studies can make is to test 
existing  theoretical  models  of  patents’  roles  in  incentivizing 
innovation. Part III of this Article uses the case study of the light 
                                                                                                     
  61.  This version of history is reflected in the Wikipedia entry for Joseph 
Swan.  See  Joseph  Swan,  WIKIPEDIA  (Sept.  12,  2012,  4:18  PM), 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Swan (last visited Nov. 14, 2012) (“He is 
most famous for inventing an incandescent light bulb before its independent 
invention by the American Thomas Edison.”) (on file with the Washington and 
Lee Law Review); see also KENNETH R. SWAN, K.C., SIR JOSEPH SWAN 15–39 
(1946) (denouncing at the outset “the somewhat pretentious and all-embracing 
claims which have from time to time been advanced on Edison’s behalf” and 
providing  a  detailed  account  of  Swan’s  own  claim  to  inventorship  of  the 
incandescent light bulb).  
  62.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 73 tbl.X (listing the “principal pioneer 
manufacturers of carbon-filament lamps in the United States”). 
  63.  See id. at 87−101 (illustrating Edison’s use of his patent to bring 
injunctions  against  competitors,  forcing  many  of  them  to  close  down  or 
consolidate their businesses). 
  64.  See  id.  (describing  the  “corporate  purchases,  consolidations,  and 
regulations,” mostly triggered by Edison’s legislation tactics, that ultimately 
resulted in two companies controlling the electrical-goods industry). 
  65.  Id. at 147–48. 1912  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
bulb to test, critique, and refine one theory of “patent racing,” 
which has been offered as one account of how patent protection 
may  incentivize  faster  innovation.66  As  articulated  by  Mark 
Lemley, patent racing theory centers on an underappreciated fact 
that proves problematic for other theories of patent-motivated 
innovation:  most  inventions  are  not  breakthroughs  at  all,  but 
ordinary engineering work that achieved its goal just a short time 
before the rest of the competition.67  
In using the light bulb case study to test this theory, this 
Article  draws  upon  a vast secondary  literature  describing  the 
development  of  incandescent  light.  These  historical  accounts, 
however, predate patent racing theory, tend to discuss patents 
and patent law only tangentially, and are generally authored by 
writers more interested in Thomas Edison as a personality than 
in theoretical questions of innovation policy. The process of sifting 
through this literature is thus one of searching for needles in a 
haystack—finding  those  snippets  of  relevant  information  here 
and there in the corpus, historical asides that now enjoy a second 
life  as  data  points  completely  unintended  by  their  original 
documenters.  In  all  cases,  I  have  made  a  point  to  critically 
question whether the original author’s account of the historical 
“facts” should be treated as reliable or not. As much as possible, 
this account relies only on data that can be confirmed through 
reference to more than one source.  
Held  up  to  the  empirical  light  of  Edison’s  bulb,  Lemley’s 
patent  racing  model  proves  to  have  substantial  merit  as  a 
descriptive account. The racing metaphor captures a significant, 
                                                                                                     
  66.  For a fuller picture of variations on the theory of patent racing and 
related models offered to explain how patents incentivize faster innovation, see 
John F. Duffy, Rethinking the Prospect Theory of Patents, 71 U. CHI. L. REV. 439, 
440–47 (2004) (“[T]he race to claim patent rights becomes a race to diminish the 
patentee’s rents by dedicating the invention to the public sooner.”); Mark F. 
Grady & Jay I. Alexander, Patent Law & Rent Dissipation, 78 VA. L. REV. 305, 
305–10 (1992) (identifying that the case law suggests that “patent protection 
applies  only  to  inventions  that  signal  large  possibilities  for  improvement 
relative to the rent that a patent gives to the inventor”) (emphasis omitted); 
Edmund W. Kitch, The Nature and Function of the Patent System, 20 J.L. & 
ECON. 265, 265–67 (1977) (arguing that the patent system increases the output 
from resources used for technological innovation). 
  67.  Lemley, Sole Inventor, supra note 45, at 710 (discrediting the “canonical 
story” of the individual inventor and suggesting that new technologies are 
oftentimes invented simultaneously by independent teams). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1913 
and often overlooked, reality about the dynamics of innovation in 
the shadow of patent law and is helpful to understanding the 
development  of  the  light  bulb.  In  its  present  form,  however, 
patent racing theory also has weaknesses. A closer look at the 
light bulb suggests that the better metaphor for understanding 
technological innovation may be neither a sprint nor a marathon 
but the board game Risk. Patent law does not provide clearly 
defined finish lines and criteria for judging winners, but rather a 
set  of  strategic  resources  for  waging  longer-term  corporate 
battles.68 Ultimately, the experience of the light bulb leaves me 
less  optimistic  than  Lemley  that  patent  racing  will  fare  any 
better as a normative justification for patent protection. Rather, a 
fuller understanding of the inventive race to control the light bulb 
should leave us even more skeptical of the innovation hypothesis. 
A. The Theory of Patent Racing 
In The Myth of the Sole Inventor, Mark Lemley explores the 
underappreciated dynamic of “simultaneous invention” and the 
problems it poses for the conventional economic justifications of 
patent protection.69 In case after case, Lemley’s article illustrates 
that  multiple  inventors  working  on  the  same  technological 
problem have arrived at the same solution at nearly the same 
time.70  The  archetypal  case  here  is  the  telephone:  Alexander 
Graham Bell and Elisha Gray reportedly filed their competing 
                                                                                                     
  68.  I am indebted to Robin Feldman at the UC Hastings College of the Law 
for  the  invitation  to  think  of  patent  rights  not  as  property  claims  in  the 
traditional sense but as chips to be presented at the bargaining table when 
shares  of  ownership  in  a  technology  are  eventually  being  resolved.  I  first 
encountered this presentation of patent law as an audience member when she 
gave  a  plenary  presentation  at  the  2009  Intellectual  Property  Scholars 
Conference, and it greatly shaped my thinking about this project and the 
present Article. That presentation has now evolved into an excellent book, see 
ROBIN FELDMAN, RETHINKING PATENT LAW (2012). My theory of patent warfare 
builds on Professor Feldman’s view of patent strategy, although the metaphor I 
have chosen—war, rather than bargaining—reflects my view of the dynamic as 
less collaborative and more destructive than her own. 
  69.  See Lemley, Sole Inventor, supra note 45, at 710−11 (arguing for a 
change in patent theory to accommodate the reality of simultaneous invention). 
  70.  See id. at 735 (concluding, after a historical analysis, that it is “rare” for 
one inventor to develop a “wholly new product that no one else achieved at 
roughly the same time”). 1914  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
patent  applications  on  the  very  same  day.71  Simultaneous 
invention may also take a less obvious form, wherein a single 
product builds on incremental inventive contributions by so many 
different parties that it truly has no identifiable inventor.72  
The  overwhelming  presence  of  simultaneous  invention, 
Lemley  argues,  calls  into  question  the  dominant  theoretical 
justifications for patent protection.73 If invention is the product of 
ordinary engineering work rather than extraordinary labors of 
genius, why do we award such an enormous prize to the party 
that  achieved  it  first,  if  only  by  a  few  days?74  Lemley  then 
proposes an alternative theory that might better justify patent 
protection,  which  begins  from  the  reality  of  simultaneous 
invention, rather than from the myth of the sole inventor.75 This 
“patent racing” theory proposes that patent incentives accelerate 
innovation by increasing the stakes of the race to invent.76 All 
parties in the competition know that the first-place winner will 
take away a great prize, and the runner-up may be shut out 
completely. The enhanced competition these heightened stakes 
engender, Lemley suggests, may motivate greater investment of 
resources and thus accelerate the overall pace of innovation.77 
The Myth of the Sole Inventor actually includes the light bulb 
among its historical examples of simultaneous invention, along 
the incremental model.78 Lemley correctly characterizes Edison’s 
                                                                                                     
  71.  See id. at 710, 720–22, 751. 
  72.  See id. at 714−15 (claiming that the incremental process of invention 
often leads to recognition of the “first person to make one significant step in the 
chain” and ignorance of “the developments that precede and follow it”). 
  73.  See  id.  at  737  (“The  overwhelming  presence  of  both  independent 
invention  and  incremental  contribution  calls  the  basic  incentive  story  into 
serious question.”). 
  74.  See id. at 752 (“If two or more putative investors invest that money in 
research and development in an effort to beat each other to the market, all but 
the first to invent will have wasted that money . . . .”). 
  75.  See  id.  at  750  (considering  a  patent  system  that  recognizes  the 
importance of cumulative innovation). 
  76.  See id. at 753−54 (describing the benefits of a patent race, including the 
quicker progress of inventions, the possibility of a wide variety of approaches to 
solving a problem, and the improved quality of inventions that a deadline might 
encourage).  
  77.  See id. at 753 (“[A] patent race should . . . cause inventions to be made 
sooner than they otherwise would be . . . .”). 
  78.  Id. at 722−23. ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1915 
inventive contribution as “an incremental one: one in a long chain 
of improvements.”79 Indeed, the contributions of Edison’s research 
team took the form of a chain of improvements as well, with 
multiple patents filed on various aspects of the light bulb and its 
related technology as they were developed, ultimately building a 
robust patent portfolio surrounding electric light technology. A 
closer  look  at  the  development  of  the  incandescent  light  bulb 
reveals strong support for some aspects of patent racing theory, 
and  also  suggests  ways  in  which  the  framework  requires 
complication and revision. 
B. Support for Patent Racing Theory 
First,  the  support:  Thomas  Edison  was  clearly  in  an 
inventive race. He had multiple contemporaneous rivals pursuing 
the exact same inventive goal: a commercially viable light bulb.80 
According to Conot, at least thirty-one U.S. Patents in the area of 
incandescent  light  had  already  been  granted  and  not  yet 
expired.81 Edison thus began work on the incandescent light bulb 
in  1878,  at  a  time  when  the  field  was  already  populated  by 
competing  inventors  and  prior  patents.82  This  competition 
continued after Edison entered the field, and multiple parties 
filed  important  patents  in  the  United  States  and  other 
jurisdictions.83 Edison ultimately began large-scale electric light 
                                                                                                     
  79.  Id. at 723. 
  80.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 44 (listing six other inventors working 
towards the development of incandescent electric lighting). 
  81.  See CHARLES BAZERMAN, THE LANGUAGES OF EDISON’S LIGHT 247 (1999) 
(“[I]n the 15 years before Edison was granted his first patent for incandescent 
light, 31 patents had already been granted in that area . . . .” (citing ROBERT E. 
CONOT, A STREAK OF LUCK 214 (1979))). 
  82.  See FRIEDEL & ISRAEL, ELECTRIC LIGHT, supra note 59, at 7–8 (“As early 
as 1841, Frederick De Moleyns, an Englishman, received a British patent for an 
incandescent lamp using both carbon and platinum. In 1845 an American, J.W. 
Starr, not only patented two forms of incandescent lamp . . . but also traveled 
around England giving exhibitions and promoting his inventions.”); see also 
William Sawyer, Elec. Lamp, U.S. Patent No. 235,459 (filed Sept. 20, 1880) 
(issued Dec. 14, 1880) (claiming a particular mechanism for fitting an electric 
lamp to a bracket).  
  83.  See BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 247 (“[I]n the 15 years before Edison 
was granted his first patent for incandescent light, 31 patents had already been 
granted in that area . . . .” (citing ROBERT E. CONOT, A STREAK OF LUCK 214 1916  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
service in New York City in September 1882.84 By that point, 
several other companies were also mass-producing electric light 
bulbs—and wielding their own patent portfolios.85  
Offering  further  support  for  the  validity  of  Lemley’s 
metaphor, these parties also perceived themselves to be in a 
race. They were acutely self-conscious about their competition, 
sought out every available bit of information about the other 
teams’ progress, and were generally quite concerned about who 
seemed  to  be  ahead  at  any  given  moment.86  So  were  their 
                                                                                                     
(1979))). 
  84.  Edison’s Electric Light, N.Y. TIMES, Sept. 5, 1882, at 8. 
  85.  See, e.g., PASSER, THE ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS, supra note 42, at 
191 (“Under [Hiram] Maxim, the [United States Electric Lighting Company] 
began production of incandescent-lighting plants for isolated use in 1880.”). In 
August 1881, various light bulb manufacturers, including the Swan, Maxim, 
and Lane-Fox teams, in addition to Edison’s, had demonstrated their wares at 
the Exposition Internationale de l’Électricité (Paris Exhibition). See Letter from 
Otto A. Moses, Edison Emp. (Aug. 26, 1881), in 6 THE PAPERS OF THOMAS ALVA 
EDISON: ELECTRIFYING NEW YORK AND ABROAD 144–45 (Paul Israel et al. eds., 
2007) [hereinafter PAPERS OF EDISON VOL. 6] (assuring the receiver of the letter 
that  the  Edison  exhibit  outshone  all  the  rest).  By  1882,  several  systems 
competed with Edison’s. See Letter from Charles Mott to Arnold White (July 5, 
1882), in PAPERS OF EDISON VOL. 6, supra, at 584–85 (referring to competing 
providers of incandescent light installations, including Siemens, Swan, “and 
others”); see also Letter from Frank J. Sprague, a member of Edison’s research 
team, to Edward Johnson, another Edison employee (Sept. 21, 1882), in PAPERS 
OF EDISON VOL. 6, supra, at 655–57 (“Crompton informed me privately that the 
[Swan] Company were turning out 15,000 lamps a week, and I am inclined to 
believe him.”); BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 247–48 (discussing the patents 
wielded by other manufacturers). 
  86.  This was true from the first months of Edison’s work on incandescent 
light.  See,  e.g.,  Letter  from  E.W.  Griffiths,  counsel  retained  by  Edison,  to 
Thomas A. Edison (Oct. 30, 1878), in 4 THE PAPERS OF THOMAS A. EDISON: THE 
WIZARD  OF  MENLO  PARK,  1878,  at  657–58  (Paul  Israel  et  al.  eds.,  1998) 
[hereinafter PAPERS OF EDISON VOL. 4] (“Mr. Lowrey directs me to send you a few 
hurried  notes  of  a  conversation  had  with  Mr.  Sawyer  this  morning.”  The 
enclosure  then  details  particular  technological  accomplishments  in  which 
Sawyer claims to have anticipated Edison’s team.) The very next day, Edison 
directed his attorney to conduct a thorough patent search. Letter from T.A. 
Edison to Lemuel Serrel (Oct. 31, 1878), in PAPERS OF EDISON VOL. 4, supra, at 
658 (“Please make out a list of all US patents from the earliest ages to the 
present time on Electric light and send them for me [sic] Want them right off.”).
Edison’s concern to keep apprised of his competition continued as the endeavor 
moved from the research stage to commercialization. A report from an Edison 
employee gives a sense of the competition research being conducted:  
The Swan Company is pushing forward, and in this connection let me 
say that Edison must not abate the work on the lamp, Swan is ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1917 
investors.87 The progress made by the team of William Edward 
Sawyer and Albon Man posed particular problems for Edison.88 
Between 1880 and 1883, the competitors were embroiled in a 
hard-fought priority battle at the U.S. patent office over which 
team had been first to achieve a key insight.89 The dispute went 
against Edison, and the issuance of the Sawyer and Man patent 
in 1885—along with Westinghouse’s entry in the industry—set 
the stage for a decade of extensive and expensive litigation.90  
Given the existence of other competitors, one very plausible 
interpretation of this history is that Edison’s participation in this 
race merely accelerated the arrival of a commercially practical 
light bulb. Gas lighting was an extremely lucrative industry,91 
and  arc  electric  lighting  was  already  finding  commercial 
                                                                                                     
making  continual  advance,  and  has  recently  commenced  making 
lamps by a new process, which are the finest lamps I ever saw. They 
are  not  yet  public, but  Crompton,  who  is  now one of  the  Swan 
Directors showed me one. . . . This new lamp is claimed to have 100 
ohm resistance hot, and it can easily be increased, and to require but 
.6 of an empere, and 36 vol-tamperes, for 20 candle power. I think 
perhaps this is a little high, but is a wonderfully fine lamp, and I 
think can be made more cheaply than Edison’s, and has fully as much 
life. He is making other lamps of 40 candle and has recently made 
lamps of 300 ordinary candle power. 
Letter from Frank J. Sprague, in PAPERS OF EDISON VOL. 6, supra note 85, at 
657. See also SWAN, supra note 61, at 19 (describing Swan’s response to the 
growing publicity afforded to the competing systems of electric lighting). 
  87.  See, e.g., FRIEDEL & ISRAEL, supra note 59, at 26–29 (describing growing 
pressure  from  Edison’s  investors  at  the  earliest  stages  of  his  research  to 
demonstrate some advantage over existing teams of researchers) 
  88.  See generally BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 247–49 (describing Edison’s 
practice of resolving conflicting patent claims over the incandescent light by 
combining forces with the businesses holding competing patents, but noting that 
this  was  not  successful  universally,  and  the  Sawyer Man  competition  was 
particularly vexing). 
  89.  See id. at 248–57 (detailing the patent interference proceedings and 
later litigation between the Edison and Sawyer-Man teams). 
  90.  See id. at 248 (discussing the beginning of multiple infringement suits 
involving Edison and his competitors); infra Part IV.A (same); see also Israel, 
Claim the Earth, supra note 2, at 20 (“Edison and his company used their strong 
patent position to enforce licensing agreements with customers of both central 
and isolated stations and to attack competitors. By 1885, they were involved in 
nearly one hundred patent office proceedings and lawsuits involving electric 
lighting.”). 
  91.  BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 20. 1918  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
application.92 The immense market potential of electric light in 
the household context was widely realized. For electric engineers 
of  the  day,  the  challenge  of  “subdividing  the  electric  light”—
adapting  it  for  domestic  use—was  an  obvious  goal,  attracting 
significant attention and effort even before Edison entered the 
field.93  From  the  perspective  of  market  incentives  and  of 
technological groundwork already laid, a commercially practical 
light bulb may have been a near inevitability. 
Edison’s participation, however, probably greatly increased 
the fervor of this race—at least between his 1878 entry and 1881, 
when Edison moved from Menlo Park to New York to oversee 
commercial  introduction.  Prior  to  Edison’s  entry,  limited 
resources were being invested in pursuit of the incandescent light 
bulb. The leading American competition was the Sawyer–Man 
team.94 William Sawyer was a journalist turned inventor funded 
primarily by New York lawyer Albon Man, who organized the 
Electro-Dynamic Light Company for this purpose.95 The company 
had allocated $4,000 to Sawyer’s research between March and 
June 1878.96 Edison’s talent for raising venture capital would 
produce a much bigger war chest: nearly $130,000 in research 
funds were directed to his electric lighting work between 1878 
and  1881.97  Edison’s  entry  into  the  field  not  only  attracted 
significant new investments to his own team, but also motivated 
increased investments to his competitors. In September 1878, the 
precise  month  that  Edison  threw  his  hat  into  the  ring,  the 
Sawyer–Man company set up a second workshop.98  
Indeed, Edison’s entry may have been the defining event that 
truly kicked off the race for the light bulb as a serious one. When 
Edison filed his first light bulb patent in September 1878, he gave 
                                                                                                     
  92.  See, e.g., id. at 32 (“Arc lighting was making commercial as well as 
technical progress in this country [the United States] by the time incandescent 
lighting appeared on the scene in 1880.”). 
  93.  HUGHES, NETWORKS OF POWER, supra note 60, at 31–32. 
  94.  PAUL ISRAEL, EDISON: A LIFE OF INVENTION 188 (1998) [hereinafter 
ISRAEL, A LIFE OF INVENTION]. 
  95.  Id. 
  96.  Id. 
  97.  Id. Adjusted for GDP deflation, Edison’s $130,000 in research expenses 
from 1878 to 1881 translates to more than $2.5 million in current dollars. Id. 
  98.  Id. ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1919 
an  interview  to  the  New  York  Sun  in  which  he  claimed 
definitively—if  not  accurately—to  have  solved  the  problem  of 
incandescent light.99 A brief excerpt serves to illustrate the effect: 
Mr. Edison says that he has discovered how to make electricity 
a cheap and profitable substitute for illuminating gas. Many 
scientific men have worked assiduously in that direction, but 
with little success. . . . It has been reserved for Mr. Edison to 
solve the difficult problem desired. This, he says, he has done 
within a few days . . . “I have obtained it through an entirely 
different process from which scientific men have ever sought to 
secure it. They have all been working in the same groove, and 
when it is known how I accomplished my object, everybody will 
wonder  why  they  have  never  thought  of  it,  it  is  so 
simple . . . .”100 
A  few  days  later,  Edison  began  financial  negotiations  for 
investments.101 A letter privately assured one potential investor 
that  “all  serious  difficulties  have  been  overcome  and  there  is 
every reason to believe that [Edison] has discovered the means of 
giving an electrical light suitable for every use at a vastly reduced 
cost as compared with the cost of gas.”102  
Edison thus claimed to not only be ahead of his competition 
in the inventive race for incandescent light, but to have already 
won. Stock prices in gas companies tumbled, indicating that at 
least  some  people  took  these  claims  seriously.103  More 
sophisticated  investors,  however,  knew  better  than  to  take 
Edison’s initial claims at face value.104 They suspected that the 
solution was not yet in hand and even doubted whether Edison 
                                                                                                     
  99.  Edison’s Newest Marvel, N.Y. SUN, Sept. 16, 1878, in THERESA M. 
COLLINS & LISA GITELMAN, THOMAS EDISON AND MODERN AMERICA: A BRIEF 
HISTORY WITH DOCUMENTS 83–85 (2002). 
  100.  Id. at 83. 
  101.  BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 10; FRIEDEL & ISRAEL, supra note 59, at 
14. 
  102.  Letter  from  G.P.  Lowrey,  Edison’s  representative  in  investment 
negotiations, to Hamilton McKay Twombly, representative of potential investor 
William H. Vanderbilt (Oct. 1, 1878), in PAPERS OF EDISON VOL. 4, supra note 86, 
at 658.  
  103.  See FRIEDEL & ISRAEL, supra note 59, at 23 (“[I]n early October the 
news from America caused a panic in gas shares in London, where Edison’s 
reputation for wizardry was unequaled.”). 
  104.  See  id.  at  14  (“[T]he  story  was  read  by  some  of  the  Wall  Street 
moneymen who had already learned to be wary of Edison’s technical genius.”). 1920  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
would  ultimately  be  the  first  to  achieve  it.105  Indeed,  the 
technique  Edison  claimed  in  U.S.  Patent  No.  214,636, 
“Improvement in Electric Lights,” was ultimately unsuccessful. 
The  line  of  research  reflected  in  this  first  patent  filing  was 
discarded entirely and the design never made it into an actual 
product.106 Edison would not be able to publicly demonstrate a 
successful  bulb—utilizing  a  different  underlying  technology—
until more than a year later, at the end of December 1879.107 
Although Edison’s claims were premature, they could not be 
ignored.  Lemley  suggests  that  patents  may  increase  the 
incentives in a race as both a carrot and a stick. From the carrot 
perspective,  runners  race  because  they  believe  that  they  will 
finish  first  and  obtain  a  patent  reward.108  From  the  stick 
perspective, runners are motivated to go faster because they fear 
that their competitors will win, obtaining patent rights that shut 
them out of a lucrative market.109 Looking at the race for the light 
bulb, the stick dynamic seems to be strongly in play. Edison’s 
1878 claims represented a threat that he would solve the problem 
of the light bulb in the near future. That threat seemed uniquely 
                                                                                                     
  105.  Potential investors in Europe asked to see a working model of the 
invention, which Edison promised to send through his agent George Gourad. See 
Letter from Thomas A. Edison to Theodore Puskas (Oct. 5, 1878), in THERESA M. 
COLLINS & LISA GITELMAN, THOMAS EDISON AND MODERN AMERICA: A BRIEF 
HISTORY WITH DOCUMENTS, at 85–86 (2002) [hereinafter A BRIEF HISTORY]. Two 
days later, however, a telegram from Gouraud himself to Edison vainly pleaded 
for a demonstration or some helpful detail of the breakthrough that could be 
publicly shared to bolster confidence before panicked British investors moved to 
support a rival system. See Telegram from George Gourad to Thomas A. Edison 
(Oct. 7, 1878), in A BRIEF HISTORY, supra note 105, at 86. Edison cabled back 
advising  Gourad  to  “let  them  go  ahead,”  as  he  could  not  yet  provide  the 
requested proof. Id.; see also FRIEDEL & ISRAEL, supra note 59, at 14 (describing 
the hesitancy of investors in financing Edison’s new invention). 
  106.  BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 186–89. Bazerman deftly provides a clear 
explanation of the technique claimed by Edison in this first patent, which even a 
non-engineer can understand, as well as reproducing the patent specification 
and claims, as issued. Id.  
  107.  See e.g., id, at 183–85; FRIEDEL & ISRAEL, ELECTRIC LIGHT, supra note 
59, at 111–14; ISRAEL, A LIFE OF INVENTION, supra note 94, at 187–88. 
  108.  See  Lemley,  Sole  Inventor,  supra  note  45,  at  755  (describing  the 
different  motivations  for  inventors  to  move  quickly  in  developing  their 
invention). 
  109.  See id. (describing the role a patent race can play as a “stick” by 
motivating inventors to move quickly to avoid “the risk of losing a race and 
being excluded from competition in that market”). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1921 
credible coming from Edison because of his public reputation as 
an inventor and because of his obviously passionate commitment 
to this particular technological challenge.110  
Edison’s entry into the race on these terms helped to create 
an  air  of  inevitability  surrounding  incandescent  lighting.  The 
perfection  of  the  technology  suddenly  seemed  close  at  hand. 
Investors scrambled to pick sides and stake claims in what now 
appeared poised to be an important new industry.111 Gas lighting 
companies stood to come out as losers no matter which team won 
the race. This made it all the more important for them to throw 
some of their great resources into backing a winning team in 
order  to  hedge  their  existing  investments.  The  race  was 
definitively  on  and  gathering  momentum.  The  key  points  of 
Lemley’s theory—the prevalence of simultaneous invention, the 
role of patent protection in raising the stakes, and the power of 
competition to motivate increased investments in research and 
development—all find support in the race to perfect the light 
bulb. 
C. Problems for Patent Racing Theory 
Despite  all  this support  in  the  historical  record,  Lemley’s 
theory of patent racing has been vehemently disputed by business 
professor John Howells and his co-author, Ron D. Katznelson.112 
These critics specifically take issue with Lemley’s use of the light 
bulb as an example of incremental invention.113 They argue that 
Edison’s contribution in fact “unlocked the field,” that it cannot 
be placed on par with contributions by any other inventor, and 
                                                                                                     
  110.  See FRIEDEL & ISRAEL, supra note 59, at 29 (suggesting that initially, 
Edison’s chief asset was self-confidence, largely shared by the world at large).  
  111.  See id. at 14 (examining the various investors who decided to finance 
Edison’s operation, including individuals associated with the telegraph and gas 
companies). 
  112.  See John Howells & Ron D. Katznelson, A Critique of Mark Lemley’s “A 
Myth of the Sole Inventor” 4–5 (Sept. 15, 2011) (unpublished manuscript), 
available at http://bitly.com/Lemley-Critique (on file with author). 
  113.  See id. (disputing Lemley’s claim that Edison was not a sole inventor by 
highlighting the distinct strengths of Edison’s invention in contrast with those 
of his competition). 1922  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
that  Edison  was  deserving  of  a  “pioneer”  patent.114  My  own 
examination of the light bulb case puts me on the side of Lemley 
rather than his critics. The central mistake made by Howells and 
Katznelson  is  to  treat  judicial  opinions  and  patent  claims  as 
reliable evidence of who really did what.115 These legal documents 
emphatically assert that Edison’s inventive contributions were 
without peer. Such assertions, however, should be treated with 
great  skepticism.  The  historical  claims  about  Edison’s 
contributions, which Howells and Katznelson present as fact, are 
better  understood  as  a  deeply  mythologized  “narrative  of 
invention”  that  Edison  himself  forged  in  preparation  for 
litigation.116  The  model  of  incremental  innovation  more 
accurately fits the true history of the light bulb’s development.  
Contrary to Howells and Katznelson’s position, my concern 
with Lemley’s patent racing theory is that the model may not go 
far  enough  to  reflect  the  reality  of  incremental  innovation. 
Lemley  describes  simultaneous  invention  as  existing  in  two 
models.117 The first model is when two inventors are working on 
the same technology, and the contest is to see who will produce it 
first.118 Lemley offers the telephone as the archetype of a patent 
race: two inventors almost literally racing to the patent office 
door.119 But the second model is probably more common. This is 
when  the  process  of  invention  is  characterized  by  roughly 
                                                                                                     
  114.  Id. at 6. The concept of a “pioneer patent” was popular in American 
patent doctrine at the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Proponents 
argued that when an inventor had made a “pioneering” contribution to a new 
field of technology, he should be entitled to broad claims covering not only the 
specific  embodiment  they  had  produced  but  also  later  generations  of  the 
technology that others developed. For a critique of this doctrine—and argument 
as to its enduring relevance—see Brian J. Love, Interring the Pioneer Invention 
Doctrine, 90 N. CAROLINA L. REV. 379, 389 (2012). 
  115.  See Howells & Katznelson, supra note 112, at 4–7 (describing the 
reasons that Edison’s patent for the incandescent light was superior to his 
competitors). 
  116.  See generally Lea Shaver, Patents, Publicity, and the Myth of Invention 
(2012) (unpublished manuscript) [hereinafter Shaver, Myth of Invention] (on file 
with author). 
  117.  See Lemley, Sole Inventor, supra note 45, at 731 (“[I]nventions . . . are 
in fact generally the products either of simultaneous independent invention or of 
incremental development from multiple sources, or both.”). 
  118.  Id. at 712–15. 
  119.  Id. at 720–22. ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1923 
contemporaneous contributions by so many different parties that 
it  becomes  impossible  to  declare  any  one  true  “father”  of  the 
technology.120 The race for the light bulb, at least, best fits this 
pattern  of  incremental  innovation.121  Even  in  the  case  of  the 
telephone, the narrative of the race to the patent office may be 
more a product of litigation stance than of the underlying reality 
of technological development.122 
If  the  pattern  of  incremental  innovation  is  indeed  the 
prevailing one, as I suspect, we need a reconceptualization of 
racing theory that deemphasizes the patent office door as the 
finish line. Doing so, however, destabilizes the metaphor. Central 
to the concept of a race is the existence of a clearly defined finish 
line, at which point the winners and losers are declared based 
upon a simple and objective measure of performance. Indeed, the 
very purpose of the race as an athletic convention is to enable this 
objectivity by clearly defining the terms of the contest in advance. 
A political campaign also meets these two criteria of a traditional 
race: a clearly defined endpoint (election day) and an objective 
methodology  for  determining  the  winner  (tabulating  votes). 
Inventive races, however, may not conform to this model. The 
race  for  the  light  bulb,  at  least,  lacked  these  two  key 
characteristics.123  
                                                                                                     
  120.  Id. at 715–16. 
  121.  For  a  comprehensive  account  of  innovations  in  electrical  lighting 
between 1880 and 1890, well situated in their economic and political context, 
see generally HUGHES, NETWORKS OF POWER, supra note 60. 
  122.  See Beauchamp, Who Invented the Telephone, supra note 39, at 877 
(highlighting the difficulty of “the question of where, on the continuum of 
conceptualization,  experimentation,  ‘reduction  to  practice,’  and 
commercialization, the invention of the telephone should be rightly marked”). 
  123.  The inventive race for the light bulb has one other similarity with 
political races, however: the dynamics of self-fulfilling prophecies. In a political 
campaign, contenders seek to create the perception that they are in the lead, in 
order to win over those potential supporters who simply want to throw in their 
lot with the likely winner. Edison thus cultivated the media and exaggerated his 
own progress to discourage investors from backing his rivals. See FRIEDEL & 
ISRAEL, supra note 59, at 13. Similar to a political campaign, impressions about 
which inventive team is ahead can translate into additional resources helpful 
for getting ahead, making such prophecies self-fulfilling. Mercifully, even the 
longest political campaign finds its end within eighteen months, and a victor is 
clearly anointed. Not so with an inventive race, in which it may take more than 
a decade for courts to declare the winner. 1924  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
Indeed,  this  particular  race  was  so  closely  and  fiercely 
contested that for many years—even years after light bulbs were 
widely being manufactured in the United States—there was no 
clear winner. Throughout the 1880s, multiple companies, each 
holding patent portfolios from different inventive teams, claimed 
strenuously that their champions had prevailed.124 Ultimately, 
these conflicting claims had to be settled by the law.125 In doing 
so, the patent office and the courts had to apply legal criteria that 
are infinitely more complex and subjective than those commonly 
used to judge athletic and political races. Courts also had to make 
this determination, not immediately after the relevant finish line, 
but  many  years  later,  upon  an  imperfect  evidentiary  record 
developed by deeply interested parties. In one crucial trial, for 
instance, Edison’s attorneys persuaded the judge that William E. 
Sawyer had in fact never made the lamp claimed in the disputed 
patent.126  Because  ten  years  had  passed  between  the  claimed 
experiments and the Incandescent Lamp Patent trial, Mr. Sawyer 
was no longer alive to testify personally as to the events. 
Beyond mere problems of evidence, Robin Feldman argues 
persuasively  that  subjectivity  and  indeterminacy  are  inherent 
features  of  patent  interpretation.127  In  Feldman’s  words, 
“[p]atents cannot possibly delineate the boundary of an inventor’s 
rights  because  those  rights  will  be  established  in  relation  to 
products that have yet to be created at the time of the patent 
grant.”128  Patent  lawyers  face  the  daunting  task  of  choosing 
words to capture the essence of a technology that by definition 
                                                                                                     
  124.  See, e.g., BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 247–48 (describing the uncertain 
and overlapping claims of ownership over the light bulb technology and the 
increasingly  competitive  production  of  light  bulbs  based  on  these  various 
patents). 
  125.  See id. at 248–50 (describing the interference battle between Edison 
and  the  Sawyer-Man  team  at  the  patent  office  in  1881–1883  and  later 
litigation); PASSER, THE ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS, supra note 42, at 151–59 
(describing the beginning of patent litigation over the incandescent lamp in 
1885  and  its  continuation  for  many  years);  Consol.  Elec.  Light  Co.  v. 
McKeesport Light Co., 159 U.S. 465 (1895) (invalidating a Sawyer-Man patent 
under which any light bulb with a filament of carbonized vegetable matter 
would have been deemed infringing). 
  126.  Consolidated Elec. Light Co. v. McKeesport Light Co., 40 F. 21, 28–29 
(C.C.W.D. Pa. 1889), aff’d, 159 U.S. 465 (1895). 
  127.  See generally FELDMAN, RETHINKING PATENT LAW, supra note 68. 
  128.  Id. at 3. ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1925 
has never before been described, in order to compare it in the 
future  to  other  technologies  that  do  not  yet  exist.129  “Taken 
together, this set of circumstances ensures that a patent could 
never  grant  a  definitive  and  clearly  bounded  set  of  rights.”130 
Feldman concludes that a patent must be understood not as a 
clear  marking  of  the  “metes  and  bounds”  of  one  party’s 
intellectual property, but rather as an invitation to bargain with 
others over the scope and value of the patent rights.131 In the end, 
“the extent of the rights cannot truly be known until the day that 
the patent expires.”132 Keeping Edison’s experience in mind, we 
might also characterize this inherent uncertainty of patent claims 
as not just “an invitation to bargain,” but also as an invitation to 
litigate. 
Because  of  problems  of  evidence,  indeterminate  claim 
language,  and  shifting  standards  of  legal  interpretation,  the 
nature of the competition in a patent race may be much less 
objective and meritocratic than the metaphor initially suggests. 
Are inventive races meaningfully similar to the 100-meter dash 
or a presidential primary? Or are they more like an Olympic 
gymnastics competition, in which the American and Soviet judges 
may arrive at wildly different conclusions?133 Whether we view 
the patent race as a fair and objective contest or not has great 
implications for the degree of confidence we place in the patent 
system to pick winners and losers, and therefore, to structure the 
proper incentives for technological innovation. Lemley’s patent 
racing  model  lessens  the  power  of  the  myth  that  inventions 
appear out of thin air, and would not have existed but for the 
contributions of the credited inventor, a misperception that too 
easily favors very strong patent rights. Without great caution, 
however, the patent racing model might replace an old myth with 
a new one: that of the patent race as a fair and clean contest. 
Patent law on the ground is not so neat and tidy. 
                                                                                                     
  129.  Id. 
  130.  Id. 
  131.  Id. 
  132.  Id. at 5. 
  133.  After all, American courts picked Thomas Edison, and British courts 
picked Joseph Swan. 1926  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
The patent racing model also carries a second risk: it tells 
only part of the story and leaves out what might be the most 
important part, from the perspective of innovation. Patent racing 
theory best describes the early stages of development of a new 
technology.  In  the  latter  stages  of  commercialization, 
improvement, and diffusion of that technology, the nature of the 
competition  shifts  very  distinctively.134  This  latter  dynamic, 
which  I  term  “patent  warfare,”  can  also  be  understood  as  a 
contest or game. But its nature is quite different from the patent 
race described by Lemley, and its implications for innovation are 
not nearly so positive. A look at what happens next in the story of 
the  light  bulb—after  the  technology  was  perfected  enough for 
Edison and others to begin to commercialize it—will make this 
point crystal clear. 
IV. Learning from the Light Bulb 
A. From Patent Racing to Patent War 
In Part III, the early contest to develop and bring to market 
an incandescent light bulb was used to test the theory of patent 
racing. The history largely supports the theory of patent racing, 
albeit with skepticism as to any implication of a clear finish line. 
After the light bulb came to market, however, the dynamics of the 
competition among inventive teams shifted dramatically. Here, 
the more accurate metaphor is neither a sprint nor a marathon, 
but the strategic board game Risk.135 In this game, the board 
resembles a map of the world, with varying territories. In the 
early  stages  of  the  game,  players  amass  tokens  representing 
armies and position them strategically on the board to fortify their 
positions.  Eventually,  the  game  shifts  into  attack  mode,  as 
                                                                                                     
  134.  I  am  indebted  to  Gaia  Bernstein  for  highlighting  an  important 
distinction between innovation and diffusion of new technologies. See, e.g., 
Bernstein,  supra  note  16,  at  2290–91  (distinguishing  the  innovation  and 
diffusion stages of a technology’s introduction and arguing that intellectual 
property law neglects the latter). 
  135.  See  Risk  (game),  WIKIPEDIA,  (Sept.  14,  2012,  4:45  PM),  https://en. 
wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk_(game)  (last  visited  Nov.  14,  2012)  (offering  a  full 
description of the game of Risk) (on file with the Washington and Lee Law 
Review). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1927 
players vie to conquer each other’s territories. Ultimately, one 
party pushes out all the competitors and achieves the goal of the 
game: world domination.  
Similarly, industrial contenders may spend years amassing a 
patent portfolio and income streams that will eventually fund 
their litigation war chest. At a certain point, when one party 
thinks it is the right amount ahead, it begins to close in on its 
opponents.  Both  in  Risk  and  in  patent  warfare,  the  strategic 
campaigner should begin by confronting its weakest competitors 
because those victories will be easiest. The victor may also amass 
strength by absorbing the assets—patent portfolio and market 
share—of  the  vanquished  foe.  Finally,  the  two  strongest 
competitors confront each other, as the Edison and Westinghouse 
companies faced off in the litigation that reached the Supreme 
Court in the Incandescent Lamp Patent case. 
To  paraphrase  the  classical  military  theorist  Clausewitz: 
Patent litigation is the continuation of business strategy by other 
means.136 Patent racing is helpful for understanding how patents 
impact innovation leading up to the patent filing. But the long-
term impact of patent law on industrial competition requires a 
very different metaphor. Patents acquired in the racing stage 
become  pawns  in  a  battle  to  achieve  market  dominance  and 
secure competitive position. Contrary to the metaphor of the race, 
it is not who is first to the patent office that wins, but who is last 
left standing at the end of litigation.  
In the early days of the light bulb’s commercial use, patents 
proliferated but did not pose a barrier to competition. Economic 
historian  Harold  C.  Passer  points  out  that  Edison  had  a 
significant share of the market early on, but not anything like 
exclusive control.137 In Passer’s words: “In the beginning, very 
little  attention  was  paid  to  patents,  and  manufacturers  could 
make the entire incandescent system. The dynamo could not be 
                                                                                                     
  136.  See CARL PHILIPP GOTTFRIED VON CLAUSEWITZ, ON WAR 87 (Michael 
Howard & Peter Paret eds., trans., Princeton University Press 1976) (“War 
is . . .  a  continuation  of  political  activity  by  other  means.”).  Carl  Philipp 
Gottfried von Clausewitz was a Prussian General and writer in military theory. 
See id. at 3–25 (describing the background and history of Carl Philipp Gottfried 
von Clausewitz). 
  137.  See PASSER, THE ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS, supra note 42, at 206 
(“Of the 250,000 [incandescent lights] in use in 1885, over 200,000 were Edison 
lights on Edison equipment.”). 1928  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
patented,  and  lamp  patents  were  not  respected.”138  By  1890, 
however, Edison’s market share had fallen to less than half.139 
Patent warfare was crucial to reversing that trend and securing 
Edison’s  control  of  the  light-bulb  market.  In  the  first  year  of 
litigation, Edison’s company was involved in nearly one hundred 
patent  disputes,  including  administrative  proceedings.140 
Between 1885 and 1895, more than twenty major opinions were 
issued in U.S. cases disputing Edison’s claims to control of the 
incandescent light bulb.141 By 1901, Edison’s side had spent about 
$2,000,000  on  more  than  two-hundred  lawsuits  related  to  its 
lighting patents.142 The Sawyer–Man infringement suit against 
Edison alone generated more than 5,000 pages of documents, not 
including the patent application and interference stages.143 Nor 
was  the  litigation  confined  to  the  American  shores.  Foreign 
patents  and  litigation,  especially  in  Great  Britain  and  in 
                                                                                                     
  138.  Id. 
  139.  Id. 
  140.  Israel, Claim the Earth, supra note 2, at 20. 
  141.  See, e.g., Edison Elec. Light Co. v. Waring Elec. Co., 59 F. 358 (C.C.D. 
Conn. 1894) (granting preliminary injunction against infringement of Edison 
Patent No. 223,898), aff’d, 69 F. 645 (2d Cir. 1894) (per curiam); Edison Elec. 
Co. v. Boston Incandescent Lamp Co., 62 F. 397 (C.C.D. Mass. 1894) (granting 
preliminary injunction against infringement of Edison Patent No. 223,898); 
Edison Elec. Co. v. Bos. Incandescent Lamp Co., 62 F. 397 (C.C.D. Mass. 1894) 
(granting preliminary injunction against infringement of Edison Patent No. 
223,898); Edison Elec. Light Co. v. Beacon Vacuum Pump & Elec. Co., 54 F. 678 
(C.C.D. Mass. 1893) (granting preliminary injunction against infringement of 
Edison Patent); Edison Elec. Light Co. v. Elec. Mfg. Co., 57 F. 616 (C.C.E.D. 
Wis. 1893) (upholding the validity of Edison Patent No. 223,898 and finding 
infringement), aff’d, 61 F. 834 (7th Cir. 1894); Edison Elec. Light Co. v. U.S. 
Elec. Lighting Co., 52 F. 300 (2d Cir. 1892) (upholding the validity of Edison 
Patent No. 223,898 and finding infringement), decree modified sub. nom. Edison 
Elec. Light Co. v. Sawyer–Man Elec. Lighting Co., 53 F. 592 (2d Cir. 1982); 
Edison Elec. Light Co. v. Westinghouse, 40 F. 666 (C.C.D.N.J. 1889) (upholding 
the validity of Edison Patent No. 264,642 and finding infringement); Consol. 
Elec.  Light  Co.  v.  McKeesport  Light  Co.,  40  F.  21  (C.C.W.D.  Pa.  1889) 
(invalidating Sawyer–Man Patent No. 317,676, erroneously referred to in the 
opinion as No. 317,076), aff’d, 159 U.S. 465 (1895). Paul Israel estimates Edison 
was involved in nearly 100 patent disputes involving electric light by 1885. 
Israel, Claim the Earth, supra note 2, at 20.  
  142.  BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 136–37. 
  143.  See BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 239–40 (“The conflict . . . moved to the 
courts, where it produced eight volumes of documents totaling more than 5000 
pages.”). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1929 
Germany, formed  an  important part of  Edison’s transnational 
litigation strategy.  
As companies in the field of incandescent light technology 
negotiated cross-licensing deals and takeovers, patents on many 
aspects  of  the  electrical  lighting  system  played  important 
roles.144 But in U.S. litigation one of Edison’s many patents on 
the light bulb would ultimately play the most important role. 
Issued  on  January  27,  1880,  U.S.  Patent  No.  223,898  (’898 
Patent)  recognized  Thomas  Alva  Edison’s  “improvement  in 
electric  lamps,”  including  a  claim  on  “[a]n  electric  lamp  for 
giving light by incandescence, consisting of a filament of carbon 
of high resistance, made as described, and secured to metallic 
wires,  as  set  forth.”145  The  ’898  Patent  was  just  one  among 
dozens  of  patents  that  Edison  sought  on  the  light  bulb 
technology, and it was not initially clear that it would prove so 
central.146  Competitors  in  the  industry  strongly  doubted  the 
validity  of  its  claims.147  That  changed  crucially  when  a 
Pennsylvania court, in the course of invalidating a rival patent 
held by Sawyer and Man, and in dicta, gave Edison’s ’898 Patent 
a  new  interpretation  so  broad  as  to  render  virtually  every 
incandescent  light  bulb  infringing.148  Subsequent  litigation 
produced  a  stunning  consolidation  of  the  previously  very 
competitive  American  electric  industry.149  After  the  Supreme 
                                                                                                     
  144.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 86. See generally Israel, Claim the Earth, 
supra note 2. 
  145.  Thomas Alva Edison, Elec. Lamp, U.S. Patent No. 223,898 (filed Nov. 
11,  1879)  (issued  Jan.  27,  1880).  The  patent  contains  three  additional 
independent claims, which are omitted here for the sake of brevity. Id. 
  146.  See BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 86–89 (explaining that, despite the 
large number of Edison patents, only the ’898 Patent was deemed “crucial”). 
  147.  See PASSER, THE ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS, supra note 42, at 153–
54. 
  148.  See Consol. Elec. Light Co. v. McKeesport Light Co., 40 F. 21 (C.C.W.D. 
Pa. 1889), aff’d, 159 U.S. 465 (1895) (invalidating the Sawyer–Man Patent); 
PASSER, THE ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS, supra note 42, at 155 (“The meaning 
of the decision seemed to be that the Edison patent could be the basis for an 
absolute monopoly of incandescent-lamp manufacture in the United States.”); 
see also BAZERMAN, supra note 81, at 250–57 (offering an insightful account of 
the McKeesport trial). 
  149.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 84–93; see also BAZERMAN, supra note 81, 
at 239–40 (explaining that, after the litigation with its industry competition, the 
Edison  companies  and  their  successor,  General  Electric,  emerged  as  “the 
primary owner of light technology as the industry expanded”). 1930  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
Court’s  1895  decision,  all  U.S.  producers  either  purchased 
licenses from General Electric or merged with it.150 
Passer’s economic study documents the transformation of the 
light bulb market before and after the patent litigation. In the 
early years of the electrical industry, he writes: 
Patents  were  not  significant  in  either  the  product  or  the 
manufacturing process. In these conditions—a standardized 
product sold mainly to business firms, relatively free entry, 
many  buyers,  and  more  than  fifteen  sellers—the  market 
closely  approached  the  economist’s  concept  of  pure 
competition. The competition was almost entirely in prices, 
and these were driven down to cost by the additional supply 
from new firms. But these freely competitive conditions did not 
prevail  for  long.  The  year  1888  marked  the  end  of  pure 
competition  in  arc  carbons,  and  1896  [the  year  after  The 
Incandescent Lamp Patent was decided] saw the termination 
of pure competition in incandescent lamps.151 
By  1897,  General  Electric  was  the  undisputed  leader,  and 
Westinghouse was its only serious rival.152 The two companies 
agreed to a truce in the form of patent cross-licensing and product 
pricing agreements.153 Smaller competitors were invited to join 
                                                                                                     
  150.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 136–37 (explaining that the combination of 
“patent victory, consolidations, and patent and marketing agreements” made 
Edison the indisputable leader of the domestic incandescent-lamp industry). 
  151.  PASSER, THE ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS, supra note 42, at 350. Passer 
details forces contributing to the demise of competition including both non-
patent and patent factors. Of the latter, he writes:  
Patents also influenced competitive conditions. They were a prime 
cause  of  the  numerous  consolidations  and  mergers  which  finally 
resulted  in  only  two  full-line  producers.  Furthermore,  patents 
permitted competition to take place on a system basis instead of with 
reference to single items of equipment. Manufacturers could refuse to 
allow the use of particular patented apparatus except as a part of a 
complete lighting or power system.  
Id. at 352. 
  152.  See  BRIGHT,  supra  note  2,  at  144  (“In  1987  the  General  Electric 
Company was unquestionably the leader of the American electric-lamp industry. 
It had recently entered into a general cross-licensing arrangement with the 
Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Company, its largest competitor . . . .”). 
  153.  See id. at 12 (“A general patent-licensing arrangement between General 
Electric and Westinghouse in 1896 and subsequent specific licenses established 
a  pattern  in  the  lamp  industry  which  was  substantially  maintained  until 
1945.”); see also W. BERNARD CARLSON, INNOVATION AS A SOCIAL PROCESS: ELIHU 
THOMSON AND THE RISE OF GENERAL ELECTRIC 271–301 (1991).  ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1931 
the Incandescent Lamp Manufacturers Association, organized by 
General Electric. These members agreed to divide up the markets 
and avoid price competition.154 The result was that G.E. sold half 
of  the  bulbs  in  the  U.S.  market,  and  the  smaller  companies 
divided the other half.155 These smaller companies, dependent on 
G.E.  patent  licenses  for  their  existence,  put  no  downward 
pressure on prices and were discouraged from contributing their 
full potential to next-generation innovation.156 In Bright’s words: 
“They  gave  only  the  appearance  of  competition.”157  Through 
incorporation, patent litigation, licensing deals, and eventually 
purchases of stock, by 1910, G.E. controlled 97% of the market.158 
Only then could Edison finally rest, his empire secure.  
History  remembers  Edison  as  a  workshop  inventor,  a 
tinkerer—an image established, in no small part, by Edison’s own 
efforts.  A  more  accurate  historical  portrait  begins  with 
recognizing  Edison  as  an  entrepreneur  and  empire  builder.159 
                                                                                                     
  154.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 144 (explaining that General Electric 
organized the Incandescent Lamp Manufacturers Association, obtaining the 
cooperation of a large proportion of the industry, including six “formerly bitter 
rivals,” who joined to avoid intense price competition). 
  155.  See id. (“The members of the association agreed among themselves to 
fix lamp prices, both wholesale and retail, to divide business and customers, and 
to set terms of sale.”). 
  156.  See  id.  at  457.  (“The  role  of  the  licensees  was  largely  passive . . . 
add[ing] little to the vitality of the lamp industry; and they aided General 
Electric in retaining its hold over the industry. They did not provide any real 
downward pressure on prices. They gave only the appearance of competition.”). 
  157.  Id. 
  158.  Id.  at  147–48.  An  antitrust  investigation  subsequently  found 
misconduct, but the remedies did not require the company to seriously change 
its business model. General Electric would continue to dominate the light bulb 
market for decades longer. See id. at 253–56. 
  159.  In an unguarded moment, Edison’s voice was captured on his own 
phonograph in an exchange suggesting Edison saw himself as a “hustler.” Stross 
tells the story best: 
One occasion when Edison cast off the expectations of others in his 
middle age was when he met Henry Stanley, of “Dr. Livingston, I 
presume” fame, and Stanley’s wife, who had come to visit him at his 
laboratory in West Orange, N.J. Edison provided a demonstration of 
the  phonograph,  which  Stanley  had  never  heard  before.  Stanley 
asked, in a low voice and slow cadence, “Mr. Edison, if it were 
possible for you to hear the voice of any man whose name is known in 
the history of the world, whose voice would you prefer to hear?” 
“Napoleon’s,” replied Edison without hesitation. 1932  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
Among his contemporaries working on the light bulb, Edison had 
a unique focus on commercialization of the emerging technology, 
rather  than  merely  securing  patents.160  Edison  was  no  mere 
inventor,  but  a  different  breed  altogether:  the  inventor-
entrepreneur.161 From the beginning, Edison intended not merely 
to  license  his  light-bulb  patents,  but  to  commercialize  the 
technology  himself;  indeed,  much  of  his  energies  would  be 
consumed  in  supervising  the  rollout  of  his  products  in  the 
marketplace.162 In this way, he had much more in common with 
Steve Jobs or Bill Gates than with the average patent seeker. 
As an entrepreneur, Edison understood that he would have 
to confront his competition in the marketplace sooner or later, no 
matter  how  advantageous  his  patent  portfolio.163  He  likely 
recognized the business advantages that come with being the first 
                                                                                                     
“No, no,” Stanley said piously, “I should like to hear the voice of our 
Savior.” 
“Well,” explained Edison, “You know, I like a hustler.” 
Randall Stross, Edison the Inventor: Edison the Showman, N.Y. TIMES, Mar. 11, 
2007, at B1. Strictly speaking, Edison’s use of the word “hustler” describes 
Napoleon, not himself. But Edison’s selection of Napoleon as the historical voice 
he would most like to hear strongly suggests that the inventor considered the 
empire-maker a personal role model. In describing Napoleon as a hustler, I 
believe Edison was also describing his vision of himself. It was a self-image 
successfully conveyed to others. Edison collaborator Francis Jehl would later 
celebrate Edison as the Napoleon of the team’s efforts.  
  160.  See PASSER, supra note 42, at 83 (“From the economist’s viewpoint, the 
most significant aspect of Edison’s activities in electric lighting was his concern 
at every step with economic factors.”); see also HUGHES, NETWORKS OF POWER, 
supra note 60, at 29 (“From the start, he clearly realized . . . that his system 
would have to be economically competitive, and thus he conceived of the problem 
to be solved by invention as inseparably technical and economic.”). 
  161.  See HUGHES, NETWORKS OF POWER, supra note 60, at 18–22 (describing 
Edison’s  work  as  an  inventor-entrepreneur).  Harold  C.  Passer  had  earlier 
written of the engineer-entrepreneur, of which Edison was a leading example. 
See PASSER, supra note 42, at 356–60. “Edison was an engineer-entrepreneur on 
a full-time basis when he turned to the electric light. He made the move 
consciously and chose electric lighting as the best of a number of alternatives.” 
Id. at 357. 
  162.  See HUGHES, NETWORKS OF POWER, supra note 60, at 39–42 (explaining 
Edison’s strategic design and location of the Pearl Street Station of the Edison 
Electric Illuminating Company in the financial district of New York City). 
  163.  See PASSER, supra note 42, at 83 (“Nearly all of [Edison’s] inventive 
activities were directed toward making his system as efficient as possible. If his 
system were to be successful . . . it would have to survive the market test that 
every product in a free economic system has to meet.”). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1933 
to bring a product to market. Moreover, Edison was not just an 
experienced  inventor  and  entrepreneur,  he  was  also  an 
experienced  patent  litigator,  having  participated  in  patent 
disputes related to many of his earlier inventions. Because of this 
past experience, Edison likely appreciated how difficult a task the 
courts would ultimately face in sorting out the competing patent 
claims surrounding incandescent light and realized that the party 
with greater market share and greater income would hold an 
important strategic advantage in the very expensive process of 
litigation.  
Perhaps Edison ultimately won the patent war over electric 
light because, uniquely among the parties, he understood the true 
nature  of  the  contest.  Throughout  the  inventive  race  to  the 
marketplace, each patent filing was merely a mile marker in an 
ultra-marathon of uncertain length. No one knew at the time of 
filing which patent claims would turn out to be key, once the 
market and the litigation began to take shape.164 This is not to 
say that patents were unimportant. They were stockpiled for the 
future, when the competition ultimately shifted from an inventive 
race to patent war. This battlefield was the true finish line, and 
the competition here took place as much on the dimensions of 
litigation and business strategy as on the technical merits. In 
retrospect, the initial patent race was not an athletic competition 
with a clearly defined finish line, allowing judges to objectively 
declare the winner. It was an arms race.165 
B. The Current Smartphone Patent War 
This  Article’s  model  of  patent  litigation,  as  resembling  a 
game  of  Risk,  was  inspired  by  historical  evidence.  But  the 
                                                                                                     
  164.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 86 (detailing the situation before the 
patent war began, stating that by 1887 the “validity of the patents granted in 
1880 had not yet been tested”). See generally FELDMAN, RETHINKING PATENT 
LAW, supra note 68, at 40–74 (suggesting that this tremendous uncertainty as to 
future meaning and value at the time a patent is filed and granted is inherent to 
the nature of patent law). 
  165.  For a more sophisticated exploration of the “arms race” metaphor in 
patent law, see Colleen V. Chien, From Arms Race to Marketplace: The Complex 
Patent Ecosystem and Its Implications for the Patent System, 62 HASTINGS L.J. 
297, 303–11 (2011)  1934  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
metaphor  of  patent  warfare  has  also  recently  been  used  to 
describe  emerging  litigation  in  the  IT  industry.  According  to 
competition  and  antitrust  law  scholar  Michael  Carrier,  “The 
smartphone  industry  today  is  characterized  by  a  thicket  of 
patents and wars based on those patents. Every day brings a new 
lawsuit or development between Apple, HTC, Microsoft, Motorola 
Mobility (MMI), Nokia, and Samsung.”166 Carrier is neither the 
first nor the last to refer to the developing pattern of smartphone 
litigation as patent “warfare.”167 Journalists appear to have taken 
the  cue  for  this  military  metaphor  from  the  litigants 
themselves.168 As the metaphor suggests, the goal of this patent 
litigation is to crush the opponent and force surrender. 
Ironically, this new patent war is breaking out in the very 
sector  of  the  economy  where  patents  may  have  played  the 
smallest  role  in  incentivizing  innovation.  When  the  computer 
industry first emerged in the 1960s, the United States Patent and 
Trademark Office (USPTO) resisted software patent applications 
as  a  matter  of  policy,169  and  computer  companies  themselves 
                                                                                                     
  166.  Carrier, supra note 4, at 1. 
  167.  See, e.g., McMillan, supra note 4 (“But in practice, patents are weapons. 
Technology companies load up on patents like Cold War nations stockpiling 
nuclear bombs, hoarding them for use when an important market is at stake.”); 
Oberlander, Stabe & Bernard, supra note 4 (“Patent wars are raging in the 
smartphone industry. What began as Apple v. Google Android conflict has 
turned into a vast legal quagmire involving everyone from Amazon to ZTE.”); 
Vascellaro & Ramstad, supra note 4 (“Chief executives . . . will meet in San 
Francisco  Monday  in  a  court-directed  session  aimed  at  settling  their 
smartphone patent war. But a deal seems unlikely, people familiar with the 
matter and others tracking the battle say.”). 
  168.  Software industry participants long spoke of defensive patenting; more 
recently,  Steve  Jobs  famously  invoked  the  metaphor  of  nuclear  war  in 
threatening a competing phone system. Peter Burrows, Apple Seen Hurting 
Shareholders Pursuing Jobs’s Patent War: Tech, BLOOMBERG (Dec. 28, 2011, 
12:01  AM),  http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-12-28/apple-seen-hurting-
shareholders-with-jobs-s-thermonuclear-patent-war-tech.html (last visited Nov. 
14, 2012) (“Steve Jobs, the co-founder of Apple (AAPL) Inc., told his biographer 
that he’d rather wage ‘thermonuclear war’ with Google Inc. than make deals to 
share its technology with the maker of the Android operating system.”) (on file 
with the Washington and Lee Law Review). 
  169.  See Pamela Samuelson, Benson Revisited: The Case Against Patent 
Protection for Algorithms and Other Computer Program-Related Inventions, 39 
EMORY L.J. 1025, 1038–39 (1990) (“It was the [Patent Office] Commission’s 
judgment that patent protection for computer program innovations was not 
desirable.  The  Commission’s  1966  report . . . recommended  legislation  that 
expressly excluded computer programs from patent protection.”).  ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1935 
supported  this  approach.170  Even  in  the  1990s,  some  leading 
software firms opposed the granting of patents in their field.171 
Software engineers also overwhelmingly expressed the view that 
patents  were  unnecessary  and  potentially  harmful  in  their 
field.172 Nevertheless, the patentability of software has now been 
firmly  established  in  the  United  States,  and  the  number  of 
software patent applications filed and granted has dramatically 
increased.173 Europe has been even slower than the U.S. to grant 
patent  protection  to  software  but  is  moving  in  the  same 
direction.174  It  is  unclear  whether  the  modern  availability  of 
                                                                                                     
  170.  See  id.  at  1028  n.3  (describing  industry  input  to  the  presidential 
commission in 1966); see also id. at 1143 (providing an overview of the early 
legal changes regarding the patentability of software). 
  171.  See James Bessen, A Generation of Software Patents 2 (Bos. Univ. Sch. 
of Law, Working Paper No. 11-31, 2011), [hereinafter Bessen, Software Patents], 
available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1868979 (“Major software firms opposed 
software patents through the mid-1990s.” (citing Transcripts of the 1994 USPTO 
Software  Patents  Hearings,  U.S. PATENT & TRADEMARK  OFFICE,  http://www. 
uspto.gov/web/offices/com/hearings/index.html (last visited Nov. 14, 2012))). 
  172.  See Effy Oz, Acceptable Protection of Software Intellectual Property: A 
Survey of Software Developers and Lawyers, 34 INFO. & MGMT. 161, 161–73 
(1998); Pamela Samuelson et. al., Developments on the Intellectual Property 
Front, COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM, June 1992, at 33, 38 (stating that the 
responses to a 1989 survey taken by software developers suggested that there 
was  “a  significant  opposition . . .  concerning  patent  protection  for  software 
innovations”).  
  173.  See James Bessen & Robert M. Hunt, An Empirical Look at Software 
Patents, 16 J. ECON. & MGMT. STRATEGY 157, 169 (2007) (stating that the 
number of patent applications granted per year has grown dramatically, and 
now “almost 15% of all patents granted are software patents”); Stuart J.H. 
Graham  &  David  C.  Mowery,  Intellectual  Property  Protection  in  the  U.S. 
Software Industry, in PATENTS IN THE KNOWLEDGE-BASED ECON. 219, 226–47 
(Wesley A. Cohen & Stephen A. Merrill eds., 2003) (examining judicial opinions 
and the shift to support the use of patents in software); Julie E. Cohen & Mark 
A. Lemley, Patent Scope and Innovation in the Software Industry, 89 CAL. L. 
REV. 1, 7 (2001) (“[S]oftware’s status as patentable subject matter was first 
doubted, then grudgingly admitted, and finally embraced.”). 
  174.  The  European  Patent  Convention  states  that  methods  of  “doing 
business[] and programs for computers” are not eligible for patent protection. 
European Patent Office [EPO], European Patent Convention art. 52(3), Oct. 5, 
1973, 13 I.L.M. 268. That prohibition has been significantly modified, however, 
by more recent legal sources. The European Patent Office routinely grants 
software patents. See EPO, Guidelines for Examination in the European Patent 
Office,  Part  C,  Chapter  IV,  §§ 2.1,  2.2  (June  2005)  (indicating  that  the 
prohibition on the patentability of items under Art. 52(2) should be narrowly 
construed); see also Computer Program Product/IBM, T 1173/97-3.5.1 (EPO Bd. 
of  App.  July  1,  1998)  (noting  that  “a  computer  program  product  is 1936  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
patent  protection  has  produced  any  greater  innovation  in  the 
software industry.175  
Even  under  the  newer  pro-patenting  rules,  the  prevailing 
dynamic of patenting in the software industry was “defensive”—
with companies seeking patent portfolios as leverage to protect 
themselves against suits by others.176 Strong patterns of cross-
licensing  and  a  “gentleman’s  agreement”  not  to  sue  kept  the 
major firms from litigating their patents.177 In this context, it 
seemed that the major corporations had relegated patent law to 
an  incidental  role  in  the  industry’s  business  models.  Mobile 
telephony  was  built  upon  collaborative  industry  standards 
relying on voluntary patent pooling. The Internet was built upon 
nonproprietary  protocols.  These were  understood as  deliberate 
choices made by industry consensus to limit the power of patent 
law and thereby avoid its negative consequences.178  
Industry insiders and patent scholars alike assumed that the 
peace was secured by the logic of mutually assured destruction. 
Alex Blumberg and Laura Sydell summed up the conventional 
                                                                                                     
not . . . excluded under all circumstances” under Article 52(2) and (3)). This 
leaves it up to each nation’s courts to judge the validity of such patents in 
subsequent litigation. For a current overview of U.K. and German case law on 
the validity of software patents, see Susan J. Marsnick & Robert E. Thomas, 
Drawing a Line in the Patent Subject-Matter Sands: Does Europe Provide a 
Solution to the Software and Business Method Patent Problem?, 34 B.C. INT’L & 
COMP. L. REV. 227 (2011). 
  175.  See generally Bessen, Software Patents, supra note 171 (drawing on 
empirical research to conclude that the spread of software patents has not 
produced  greater  innovation,  only  greater  litigation).  It  should  be  noted, 
however, that software has long enjoyed copyright protection. The important 
difference  is  that  copyright  protection  does  not  prevent  competitors  from 
reverse-engineering the same function, so long as they write original code. 
  176.  See, e.g., Chien, supra note 165, at 303–10 (discussing the tendency of 
companies  in  the  current  software  industry  to  pursue  defensive  patenting 
strategies);  see  also  Baio,  supra  note  4  (recounting  his  participation  in  a 
software patenting effort he believed at the time was defensive, only to later 
find his firm at the center of offensive use of such patents). 
  177.  Matt Macari, FRANDS Forever: How the Smartphone Industry Turned 
a Gentleman’s Agreement into a Full-Scale Patent War, VERGE (Feb. 16, 2012, 
4:01  PM),  http://www.theverge.com/2012/2/16/2786970/FRAND-smartphone-
industry-apple-motorola-samsung (last visited Nov. 14, 2012) (on file with the 
Washington and Lee Law Review). 
  178.  See id. (discussing the patent-licensing arrangements in the technology 
industry that sought to avoid patent law’s negative impact). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1937 
wisdom of industry insiders and followers when they reported in 
2011: 
All the big tech companies have started amassing troves of 
software  patents—not  to  build  anything,  but  to  defend 
themselves. If a company’s patent horde is big enough, it can 
essentially say to the world “If you try to sue me with your 
patents,  I’ll  sue  you  with  mine.”  It’s  mutually  assured 
destruction. But instead of arsenals of nuclear weapons, it’s 
arsenals of patents.179 
By 2012, however, it became clear that the truce had broken 
down. What is less clear as this Article goes to press is what the 
consequences of this patent war will turn out to be. Will it indeed 
be mutual destruction? Or will one party emerge victorious, and 
with what damage to each side? And what will be the collateral 
damage to the public interest?  
The smartphone patent war might be viewed as simply one 
more episode in the inevitable dynamics of economic uncertainty 
in  a  competitive  marketplace.  We  might  choose  to  remain 
confident in the legal system to sort things out properly, and in 
the markets to rebalance themselves. The lesson of the light-bulb 
war, however, cautions against such confidence. If history repeats 
itself in the smartphone patent war, we could once again see the 
consolidation of an important high-technology industry, with the 
attendant decline of competition.180 If one company establishes 
dominance in the smartphone sector, it will not only control the 
device  itself  but  also  have  a  market-dominant  position  from 
which  to  influence  the  markets  for  related  services:  mobile 
telephony, software, social networking, online advertising, mobile 
banking, and online retail. Smartphone dominance could be used 
to extract rents from and consolidate those related industries, 
subject only to the limits imposed by effective enforcement of 
antitrust law.181 
                                                                                                     
  179.  Alex Blumberg & Laura Sydell, When Patents Attack, NPR (July 22, 
2011, 8:04 PM), https://www.npr.org/blogs/money/2011/07/26/138576167/when-
patents-attack (last visited Nov. 14, 2012) (on file with the Washington and Lee 
Law Review). 
  180.  See supra Part IV.A (noting that the electric industry, following the 
patent warfare involving the light bulb, consolidated into General Electric, thus 
effectively preventing competition). 
  181.  See Carrier, supra note 4 (discussing the role that antitrust law has 
begun to assume in limiting market dominance in the high-technology industry, 1938  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
To  be  sure,  the  fact  that  patent  warfare  led  to  effective 
monopoly in the early electrical industry is no guarantee that the 
same result will occur in the smartphone sector. The light bulb 
and  the  smartphone  are  different  technologies,  and  these 
differences may produce different outcomes in the two industries. 
It is also possible that reforms in patent and antitrust law since 
the turn of the century have lowered the risks for this kind of 
patent-precipitated consolidation of a market. Nevertheless, the 
very fact that a similar pattern of patent warfare is exhibited in 
two very different industries, at two very different points in time, 
suggests significant commonalities. Rather than adopt a wait-
and-see approach when so much may be on the line, what can be 
done proactively to reduce the risk of consolidation and loss of 
competition in the smartphone industry?  
At least one federal judge has already flagged the risk that 
patent  litigation  poses  to  industry  competition  and  consumer 
welfare in the smartphone sector.182 In June 2012, Judge Richard 
A.  Posner  issued  a  remarkable  ruling  in  a  particularly  high-
profile  smartphone  patent  suit  between  Apple  and  Motorola 
(which was acquired by Google in August 2011).183 Judge Posner 
indicated his intention to dismiss the suit with prejudice without 
granting a jury trial, on the grounds that, even if the disputed 
patents were valid and infringed, there was insufficient evidence 
to support damages, and injunctive relief would be counter to the 
public  interest.184  This  holding  may  be  interpreted  as  clever 
procedural handling by Judge Posner to squash a case in which 
one  or  both  parties were  attempting  to misuse  patent  law  to 
damage  its  competitor  company  out  of  proportion  to  any  real 
harm done. On the heels of the decision, Judge Posner—acting in 
his capacity as a law professor—also initiated a media effort to 
                                                                                                     
both in the United States and in Germany). 
  182.  See Posner, Too Many Patents, supra note 4 (noting the potential risks 
of certain patenting tactics). 
  183.  Judge  Posner  is  one  of  a  number  of  Article  III  judges  specially 
designated as volunteers to hear patent disputes at the trial court level, having 
received special training in the handling of these complex cases.  
  184.  Apple, Inc. v. Motorola, Inc., No. 1:11-cv-08540 (N.D. Ill. June 7, 2012), 
available  at  http://www.scribd.com/doc/96427053/Posner-Order,  Opinion  and 
Order of June 7, 2012 (on appeal Fed. Cir.). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1939 
highlight the potential of patent law to damage competition 
and innovation, calling for dramatic patent reform.185  
The  suit  before  Judge  Posner,  however,  was  just  one 
among many. In August 2012, Judge Lucy Koh presided over a 
highly  publicized  trial  brought  by  Apple  in  the  Northern 
District  of  California.186  The  lawsuit  targeted  Samsung,  the 
leading  manufacturer  of  smartphones  running  Android 
software, which were increasingly overtaking the Apple iPhone 
in popularity.187 After just three days of deliberation, the jury 
found  Samsung  to  have  infringed  Apple’s  utility  patents, 
design patents, and trade dress.188 The jury awarded over $1 
                                                                                                     
  185.  See,  e.g.,  Posner,  Too  Many  Patents,  supra  note  4  (discussing  the 
negative consequences of patent law). 
  186.  Apple Inc., v. Samsung Elecs. Co., No. 11-CV-01846-LHK, 2012 WL 
3627731 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 21, 2012). 
  187.  Apple had an early advantage in the smartphone market because of 
lead-time  and  network  effects.  Apple  encouraged  independent  software 
developers  to  produce  “apps”  that  could  run  on  Apple’s  iOS  system.  The 
availability of these apps became a major feature driving consumers to purchase 
the  iPhone.  None  of  the  competing  smartphone  manufacturers  commanded 
sufficient market penetration to attract similar app development, until Google 
introduced the Android operating system. Google widely licensed the Android 
software to a number of smartphone manufacturers, including Samsung. The 
emergence of the Android platform enabled other manufacturers to effectively 
compete with the iPhone. By mid-2011, Android phones were outselling iPhones 
more than two-to-one. See IDC, Android and iOS Surge to New Smartphone OS 
Record  in  Second  Quarter  (Aug.  8,  2012),  http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp? 
containerId=prUS23638712  (last  visted  Oct.  21,  2012)  (reporting  Q2  2011 
shipments of 50.8 million Android phones and 20.4 million iOS phones) (on file 
with the Washington and Lee Law Review). By the middle of 2012, however, the 
gap had widened; four Android phones were being sold for each iPhone. See id. 
(reporting Q2 2012 shipments of 104.8 million Android phones and 26.0 million 
iOS phones.) At the time of the trial, Samsung was the leading producer of 
Android phones. See id. (“Android’s success in the market can be traced directly 
to  Samsung,  which  accounted  for  44.0%  of  all  Android  phones  shipped 
[worldwide] in [the second quarter of 2012] and totaled more than the next 
seven Android vendors’ volumes combined.”). 
  188.  See Amended Verdict Form, Apple Inc., v. Samsung Elecs. Co., No. 11-
CV-01846-LHK (N.D. Cal. Aug. 21, 2012) [hereinafter Amended Jury Verdict 
Form], available at http://cand.uscourts.gov/filelibrary/1079/Amended%20Jury% 
20Verdict.pdf; Dan Levine, Jury Didn’t Want to Let Samsung Off Easy in Apple 
Trial: Foreman, REUTERS (Aug. 25, 2012, 3:51 PM), http://www.reuters.com/article/ 
2012/08/25/us-apple-samsung-juror-idUSBRE87O09U20120825  (last  visited  Nov. 
14, 2012) [hereinafter Levine, Apple Trial] (“A nine-member jury found the 
Korean  company  had  infringed  on  several  Apple  features  and  design 
patents . . . .”) (on file with the Washington and Lee Law Review).  1940  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
billion in damages.189 Having tested the appeal of their claims 
before one jury, Apple has probably gained a stronger hand to 
negotiate  concessions  from  other  smartphone  manufacturers 
running the Android system. This case was unique, however, in 
that the accused products not only incorporated software features 
described by Apple’s utility patents but were also very similar in 
external appearance. This latter fact led to infringement claims 
based on Apple’s design patents and on a theory of trade dress 
dilution.190  The jury was not asked to distinguish the damages it 
attributed to each theory of infringement.191 A different result 
might thus be reached in another case in which the products were 
not similar in external appearance.  
The Federal Circuit has also shown an inclination to lower 
the  stakes  of  the  smartphone  patent  war  by  making  it 
increasingly difficult to block a competitor’s phone on the basis of 
a  minor  software  patent.  For  many  years,  courts  routinely 
awarded  not  only  monetary  damages  but  also  an  injunction 
against  future  sales  of  the  infringing  product,  whenever  the 
patent holder prevailed on the merits.192 This created a problem 
of “patent holdup,” whereby patents on minor features could be 
used  to  block  the  sale  of  an  entire  product.193  The  Supreme 
                                                                                                     
  189.  See Amended Jury Verdict Form, supra note 188, at 15 (stating the 
damages awarded to Apple); Levine, Apple Trial (awarding a jury verdict of 
$1.05 billion dollars, which could be tripled because the jury found the company 
acted willfully). 
  190.   The San Jose jury concluded that the iPhone trade dress (registered 
and unregistered) was famous and was willfully diluted by Samsung’s products. 
See Amended Jury Verdict Form, supra note 188, at 10–12, 14. 
  191.  See Amended Jury Verdict Form (asking jurors to answer “yes” or “no” 
for whether each accused product violated each patent and the trade dress, and 
also “[w]hat is the total dollar amount that Apple is entitled to receive from 
Samsung on the claims on which you have ruled in favor of Apple?”). 
  192.   See, e.g., MercExchange, L.L.C. v. eBay Inc, 401 F.3d 1323, 1339 (Fed. 
Cir. 2005) (granting an injunction and restating the “general rule that courts 
will  issue  permanent  injunctions  against  patent  infringement  absent 
exceptional circumstances”), rev’d, 547 U.S. 388 (2006). 
  193.  See Colleen V. Chien & Mark A. Lemley, Patent Holdups, the ITC, and 
the  Public  Interest,  98  CORNELL  L.  REV.  105–06  (forthcoming  Nov.  2012), 
available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2022168 
In a common patent infringement case, for example, the patent covers 
a small part of a larger product, and the defendant infringes it 
inadvertently. If an interoperability standard covers the infringing 
feature, removing the feature may disable the product. Eliminating a ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1941 
Court’s 2006 decision in Ebay v. MercExchange194 questioned the 
routine grant of injunctive relief in patent cases and called for a 
more demanding inquiry into the equities of each case.195 In the 
wake of this case, lower courts have been more inclined to deny 
injunctive  relief,  even  where  a  patent  holder  seems  likely  to 
prevail on the merits.  
In  the  Apple–Samsung  case  described  above,  Judge  Koh 
refused to enjoin the sale of four Samsung products in December 
2011, despite holding that Apple was likely to prevail in proving 
patent infringement.196 Koh reasoned that Apple had failed to 
prove a sufficient “nexus” between the patent Samsung infringed 
and  the  alleged  harm  of  lost  iPhone  sales.197  On  appeal,  the 
                                                                                                     
big  product  from  the  market  because  of  a  small  patent  harms 
consumers, and blocking a large number of lawful components and 
features  from  the  market  along  with  the  infringing  one  distorts 
competition. 
In another common situation, a patent holder sues a large number of 
companies, threatening to hobble an entire industry. An injunction 
would  exclude  many  participants  from  the  marketplace  and 
dramatically reduce competition. 
In both these scenarios, the harm to consumers and competition from 
an exclusion order is greater than the contribution made by the 
individual infringing component. 
  194.  eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388 (2006). 
  195.  See id. at 393–94 (holding that injunctive relief was inappropriate 
based on a case-specific analysis of four equitable factors); see also Winter v. 
Natural  Res.  Def.  Council,  Inc.,  555  U.S.  7,  20  (2008)  (applying  the 
MercExchange standard to deny a preliminary injunction in a case not related to 
patent law). 
  196.  Apple, Inc. v. Samsung Elecs. Co., No. 11-CV-01846-LHK, 2011 WL 
7036077, at *40 (N.D. Cal. 2011) (“For the forgoing reasons, the Court DENIES 
Apple’s motion to preliminarily enjoin the sale in the United States of the 
Samsung Infuse 4G, the Samsung Galaxy S 4G, the Samsung Tab 10.1, and the 
Droid Charge phone.”), aff’d in part, vacated in part, remanded, 678 F.3d 1314 
(Fed. Cir. 2012). 
  197.  See id. at *20–21, *39–40. Judge Koh explained her decision with 
reference to the “leveraging” reasoning offered in eBay:  
Even though Apple has shown Samsung’s products likely infringe 
Apple’s valid ’381 patent, and that Apple and Samsung compete in 
the  same  market  for  new  smartphone  customers  and  for  tablet 
computer consumers, Apple has offered no evidence that Samsung’s 
infringement  of  the  ’381  patent  is  likely  to  cause  irreparable 
harm. . . . Indeed, Apple has failed to establish a relationship between 
any alleged loss of market share, customers, or goodwill, and the 
infringement of the ’381 patent.  1942  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
Federal Circuit endorsed Koh’s articulation and application of a 
nexus requirement.198 Following this guidance, Judge Koh again 
conducted  a  nexus  analysis  in  June  2012,  in  the  second  case 
brought by Apple against Samsung in her court.199 This time, Koh 
found  the  nexus  requirement  to  be  satisfied  and  granted  an 
injunction  barring  sales  of  Samsung’s  Galaxy  Nexus 
smartphone.200 Judge Koh held that Apple had met its burden of 
proof  with  respect  to  one  particularly  important  patent,  U.S. 
                                                                                                     
Justice Kennedy, in his concurring opinion in eBay, instructed courts 
to be cognizant of the nature of the patent being enforced and the 
economic function of the patent holder when applying the equitable 
factors: 
When the patented invention is but a small component of the product 
the companies seek to produce and the threat of an injunction is 
employed simply for undue leverage in negotiations, legal damages 
may well be sufficient to compensate for the infringement and an 
injunction may not serve the public interest. 
The Court finds this argument persuasive. While Apple undoubtedly 
uses the patent and produces goods in the same market, Apple has 
neither  alleged,  nor  established,  that  the  ’381  patent  is  either 
necessary to, or a core functionality of, the products that it seeks to 
enjoin. Nor has Apple shown that consumers’ purchasing decisions 
are based on the existence of a snap back feature protected by the 
’381 patent.  
Id. at *39–40 (citations omitted). 
  198.  See Apple, Inc. v. Samsung Elecs. Co., 678 F.3d 1314, 1324 (Fed. Cir. 
2012) 
We hold that the district court was correct to require a showing of 
some causal nexus between Samsung’s infringement and the alleged 
harm to Apple as part of the showing of irreparable harm. To show 
irreparable  harm,  it  is  necessary  to  show  that  the  infringement 
caused harm in the first place. Sales lost to an infringing product 
cannot irreparably harm a patentee if consumers buy that product for 
reasons other than the patented feature. If the patented feature does 
not drive the demand for the product, sales would be lost even if the 
offending feature were absent from the accused product. Thus, a 
likelihood of irreparable harm cannot be shown if sales would be lost 
regardless of the infringing conduct. 
  199.  See Apple Inc., v. Samsung Elecs. Co., No. 12-CV-00630-LHK, 2012 WL 
257203 (N.D. Cal. July 1, 2012), rev’d, No. 2012-1507, 2012 WL 4820601 (Fed. 
Cir. 2012).  
  200.  See id. The “Nexus” phone was thus saved by the “nexus” requirement. 
This may not be a complete linguistic coincidence. Although other courts had 
previously articulated this concept, Judge Koh appears to be the first to use the 
term “nexus” to describe it. ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1943 
Patent No. 8,086,604, which was related to the iPhone’s “Siri” 
personal assistant feature.201  
In  October  2012,  however,  the  Federal  Circuit  ruled  on 
appeal  that  the  Galaxy  Nexus  injunction  was  improperly 
granted.202  The  Federal  Circuit  insisted  that  the  nexus 
requirement be applied even more stringently. According to the 
circuit-level opinion, Apple had failed to demonstrate that the 
infringement  drove  consumer  demand  for  the  Galaxy  Nexus 
because Samsung’s feature incorporating the ‘604 patent was not 
among the top five reasons that consumers choose that phone.203 
Articulated  in  this  way,  the  Federal  Circuit’s  “causal  nexus” 
standard  seems  extremely  difficult  to  satisfy,  at  least  in  the 
context of smartphones. This ruling may signal the end of the 
injunction as a weapon in the smartphone patent war.  
Even as the Federal Circuit has made it more difficult to 
block a competitor’s phone through the courts, however, litigants 
are looking to other venues. Colleen Chien and Mark Lemley 
point out that patent holders are increasingly circumventing the 
new higher standards for injunctive relief by taking their cases to 
the International Trade Commission (ITC) instead.204 The ITC is 
a  U.S.  administrative  agency  that  is  empowered  to  issue 
“exclusion  orders”  blocking  products  it  deems  to  be  infringing 
from  entering  the  U.S.,  achieving  the  same  result  as  an 
injunction.  According  to  Chien  and  Lemley,  the  ITC  is 
increasingly the battleground of choice in the smartphone patent 
war and continues to be liberal in granting exclusion orders.205  
Given  the  myriad  of  patents  relevant  to  smartphone 
technology,  an  aggressive  and  persistent  litigator  can  launch 
                                                                                                     
  201.  See id. at *55–56. 
  202.  See  Apple  Inc.,  v.  Samsung  Elecs.  Co.,  No.  2012-1507,  2012  WL 
4820601 (Fed. Cir. 2012). 
  203.  See id. at *10–11 (“Apple’s own survey evidence shows that unified 
search is not one of the top five reasons consumers select Android smartphones. 
In this light, the causal link between the alleged infringement and consumer 
demand for the Galaxy Nexus is too tenuous to support a finding of irreparable 
harm.”). 
  204.  See Chien & Lemley, supra note 193, at 102–03. (“[T]he ITC is busier 
with patent cases than it ever has been before.”). 
  205.  See id. at n.15 (citing individual cases involving Apple, Samsung, Sony, 
LG, HTC, Motorola, Nokia, and RIM). “In 2011, every major smartphone maker 
was embroiled in an ITC dispute.” Id. at 104. 1944  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
many  volleys  and  advance  through  attrition.  Edison’s  own 
litigation  campaign  met  with  modest  success  for  many  years, 
until he achieved a surprising victory in a German court, which 
then formed the basis for the next round of decisive litigation in 
the  U.S.  Similarly,  the  smartphone  patent  war  is  now  being 
waged on many fronts, with suits active in England, Germany, 
South Korea, Japan, and elsewhere, and is far from over.206  
C. Implications for Innovation 
Supplementing the theory of patent racing with a theory of 
patent warfare casts a more skeptical light on the innovation 
hypothesis. The initial fervor to claim patent rights in the early 
electrical  industry  stimulated  greater  investment  in  first-
generation research.207 This is consistent with the predictions of 
Lemley’s patent racing theory.208 Over the long term, however, 
patent protection also led to a dramatic reduction of competition 
in the electrical industry.209 As the industry matured, the more 
well-funded  companies  used  patent  warfare  to  target  and 
eliminate their competition.210 Regardless of who emerges as the 
winner  in  Risk,  the  endgame  is  always  the  same:  one  party 
controls the entire board. In the real-life version, there may also 
be a détente where two parties agree to tolerate each other in 
separate spheres—as General Electric and Westinghouse divided 
the U.S. and British markets. Either way, the very competition 
that  stimulated  faster  innovation  during  the  racing  stage  is 
ultimately brought to an end. 
                                                                                                     
  206.  See Carrier, supra note 4, at 3 (noting the importance of the German 
courts with respect to patent law). 
  207.  See supra Part III.B (supporting the proposition that the initial fervor 
to claim patent rights stimulated substantial investment in first-generation 
research). 
  208.  See supra Part III.A–B (noting Lemley’s predictions and discussing how 
the historical record of the beginnings of light bulb inventing is consistent with 
Lemley’s predictions). 
  209.  See supra Part IV.A (noting the negative effects of patent law on 
industry research). 
  210.  See supra Part IV.A (discussing the tactics of well-funded companies to 
use patent litigation to eliminate competition). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1945 
Patent warfare may harm innovation in at least three ways. 
First, litigation is a resource-intensive distraction of capital and 
human resources. The Edison interests, for example, spent $2 
million on litigation211 at a time when the company’s net worth 
was  only  $12  million.212  These  financial  resources,  as  well  as 
Edison’s  own  talents,  might  otherwise  have  been  invested  in 
improving  the  product  and  delivering  it  more  efficiently  to 
consumers. Second, a litigious environment can discourage the 
risk-taking  of  investing  in  next-generation  innovation  because 
would-be  innovators  fear  they  will  be  legally  prevented  from 
producing the newer technology. Third, as the pressure to stay 
one  step  ahead  of  the  competition  is  eased,  the  competitive 
motivation  to  keep  improving  the  technology  is  diminished. 
Bright notes this dynamic in the early electrical industry: as the 
light  bulb  litigation  heated  up,  technological  innovation 
dimmed.213 In the aftermath of patent warfare, General Electric 
was  able  to  prevent  any  other  light  bulb  manufacturer  from 
exerting downward pressure on prices; the only real competitive 
pressure came from further advances in the substitute technology 
of gas lighting.214 This is not to say that light bulb innovation 
ground to a halt. General Electric still had profit-based incentives 
to  cut  its  own  production  costs  by  introducing  more  efficient 
technological improvements.215 But the company no longer risked 
                                                                                                     
  211.  See BRIGHT, supra note 2, at 86 (estimating that “[b]etween 1885 and 
1901 the Edison company and its successors spent about $2,000,000 on well over 
two  hundred  infringement  suits  under  its  lamp  and  lighting  patents”). 
Defendants of the lawsuits probably had to spend nearly the same amount. 
  212.  See id. (“The final step in the transition of the Edison companies from 
domination by Thomas A. Edison to domination by financiers took place in 1889 
[merging]  the  remaining  separate  Edison  development  and  manufacturing 
companies  into  the  Edison  General  Electric  Light  Company. . . .  The  new 
company had a capitalization of $12,000,000 . . . .”). 
  213.  See id. at 138 (indicating that “[t]he lengthy and expensive patent 
struggle in the lamp industry from 1885 to 1894 was a serious damper on 
progress in lamp design, although process improvement continued”). 
  214.  See id. at 457 (discussing the realities surround General Electric’s 
dominance, including the volume of the market controlled by General Electric, 
the lack of developmental work available to competitors, and the generally 
passive role licensees).  
  215.  See id. at 455 (noting that General Electric “possessed immense ability 
to achieve technological advances . . . [and] . . . had strong incentives to make 
improvements in lamp design and production methods”). 1946  69 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1891 (2012) 
being  overtaken  by  a  competitor  if  it  lagged  behind  in  the 
innovative  endeavor.  As  competition  in  the  electric  industry 
slowed  and  prices  for  equipment  and  service  remained  high, 
millions of Americans literally waited in the dark. More than a 
half-century  would  pass  after  Thomas  Edison  filed  his  first 
patents before electric light would find its way into the average 
American home. 
Importantly,  the  potential  long-term  damage  to  next-
generation innovation is not limited to the twenty years of the 
modern patent term. By the time first-generation patents become 
obsolete, newer patents already exist to take their place. When 
Edison’s patents expired, General Electric was able to use newer 
ones to extend its dominance.216 The result in the case of the light 
bulb was that General Electric would control the electric lighting 
industry for many decades longer.217 Even as Arthur A. Bright 
published  his  thesis  on  the  electric-lamp  industry  in  1949, 
General Electric’s monopolization of the electric lighting industry 
remained  a  problem.  Once  patent  warfare  produces  the 
consolidation of an industry, reintroducing competition is not a 
simple matter.  
This anticompetitive endgame is my central concern with the 
use  of  patent  racing  theory  as  a  new  justification  for  patent 
protection. The racing metaphor paints a picture of objectivity 
and fair competition. In the case of the light bulb, however, the 
race was merely a prelude to the war. Patents almost certainly 
add fervor to inventive races at a certain stage of research and 
development. But at a later stage, patents also become weapons 
that competitors use to threaten and dominate their competition, 
long before the public policy goal of wide diffusion of the new 
technology  has  been  fully  attained.  This  may  also  have  the 
perverse effect of ultimately limiting next-generation innovation. 
In the end, enthusiasm for the competitive advantages of races 
may be an argument against patent protection, rather than an 
argument in its favor. 
                                                                                                     
  216.  See id. at 458 (noting General Electric’s ability to exert control over the 
patent market). 
  217.  See id. at 458–60 (noting General Electric’s ability to exert control until 
World War II “with the aid of a strong patent position, commercial and technical 
aggressiveness,  strong  control  over  lamp  parts  and  machinery,  extensive 
advertising, and good public relations”). ILLUMINATING INNOVATION  1947 
The story of the light bulb thus turns out to be a cautionary 
tale  against  reliance  on  the  innovation  assumption.  The 
downsides  of  patent  protection  are  probably  systematically 
underappreciated. Partly this has to do with our methodology of 
study. Empirical study of recent fields of technology is best at 
highlighting the initial, short-term impacts of patent protection. 
These include assistance in recruiting capital to fund research 
and product development, and in outsourcing production chains—
both of which are positives for innovation. Only historical study 
can  reveal  the  longer-term  impacts  that  patent  litigation 
produces  on  an  industry.  These  may  be  systematically  more 
negative as patents become weapons in attempts to monopolize a 
field.218 Further research is needed to determine whether patent 
wars  are  typical  or  exceptional  features  of  technological 
development in the shadow of patent law, identify what factors 
motivate  different  outcomes  in  patent  wars,  and  clarify  the 
impact of industrial consolidation on next-generation innovation 
as well as diffusion. 
V. Conclusion 
Although  patent  law  is  founded  on  the  assumption  that 
patent protection encourages innovation, there is little empirical 
support  available  to  test  this  “innovation  hypothesis.”  This 
Article has argued that historical case studies can offer a stronger 
empirical basis for patent scholarship by illuminating the true 
impact of patent law on innovation throughout the life of a patent 
term. The present case study demonstrates this potential, both by 
suggesting refinements to one theory of patent racing, and by 
proposing a new theory of patent warfare resembling the board 
game Risk. Patent warfare transformed the electrical industry at 
the close of the nineteenth century and has now erupted in the 
smartphone sector. The case study of the light bulb shows that 
patent  law  can  have  both  positive  and  negative  impacts  on 
technological innovation, and we ignore the complexity of these 
dynamics at our own peril.  
   
                                                                                                     
  218.  See supra Part II.B (noting case studies of patenting that support the 
proposition that patent law harms industry and innovation). 