JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:3 SESS:4 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
1. Understanding access to things: a
knowledge commons perspective
MichaelJ.Madison
1. INTRODUCTION: THE SEVERAL CHALLENGES OF
ACCESS AND THINGS
This chapter describes a problem concerning things of different sorts, a
problem of law and public policy that we call access. The chapter
explores the related ideas of access to things characterised as knowledge
resources and shared governance of those resources, often known as
commons. Access to knowledge resources is, in one central sense, a
question of knowledge sharing. Knowledge resources consist of many
types and forms. Some are old; some are new. Some are tangible or
material; some are intangible or immaterial. Some are singular; some are
reproduced in copies. Some are individuated or unique; some are
collectedorpooled.Someareviewed,usedorconsumedonlybyasingle
person; for some resources, collective or social consumption is the norm.
In any of these settings, having access to the resource means somehow
participating in creating, using or transferring the knowledge embedded
in or represented in the resource. Knowledge is shared.
Any given resource, or thing, often has multiple attributes along the
dimensions described above, depending on whether one examines the
resource’s physical properties, its creative or inventive properties, or its
natural, factual or ideational properties. Access questions are, accord-
ingly, diverse. That diversity is compounded by the fact that access is
itself a property of a resource, in the sense that resource characteristics
are, to a substantial extent, socially and culturally constructed, and in the
sense that those properties may change over time, or may vary or be
blurred depending on context. Boundaries among resources may likewise
be blurred, or may evolve, or may vary with context.
By virtue of that diversity, investigating access to knowledge resources
creates the risk of producing a conceptually fragmented and unhelpful
landscape of theory and application on a resource-by-resource basis.This
17
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:1/ Date:18/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:4 SESS:5 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
18 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
chapter suggests that the investigation of access to knowledge resources
may be unified under the umbrella concept of knowledge commons, the
study of governance of shared knowledge resources. It presents a
framework for understanding knowledge commons and illustrates its
application to several questions of access to the material and immaterial
dimensions of specific knowledge resources. It offers, in short, a
preliminary way into systematically answering the question: in this day
and age, what are things?
2. ACCESS TO THINGS AS GOVERNANCE
The concept of “access” is meaningful only with respect to some person
or people attempting to interact with some resource, which may be a
space, a place or some material or immaterial “thing”. We tend to think
of things and humans as distinct, and this chapter will accept that
division. But things may be subjects as well as objects in the equation
above. Not only do people interact with things, but a thing may interact
with another thing, or one resource with another. In attempting to
understand the character of access, therefore, one must simultaneously
attempt to understand the situated character of both its object and its
subject. Put differently, the subject/object distinction, or the social/
technicaldistinction,isworthnotingbutnotworthpreservingatallcosts.
Both in general, from a theoretical perspective, and specifically, in any
concrete context, one should ask not only “access by whom? (or by
what?)”, “access on what conditions?”, “access relying on what capabil-
ities?” and “access for what purpose?”, but also “access to what?”,
“access where?” and “access when?”Access is a form of participation in
the resource; the resource and its uses are mutually constitutive.
The overlapping and intertwined character of questions about access
and resources suggests that access is not a concept that stands alone,
independent of a resource as such, but instead exists as an attribute of
that resource. Related concepts describing the intertwining of behaviours
and things have been referred to as “entanglements”1 and as “structures
of participation”.2 The character of access inheres in definitional and
interpretive questions that surround the provision of a resource and its
distribution, consumption, re-use and preservation. To ask “what is a
1 Ian Hodder, Entangled: An Archaeology of the Relationships between
Humans and Things (John Wiley & Sons 2012).
2 Joe Karaganis (ed.), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture (Social
Science Research Council 2007).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:2/ Date:15/6JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:5 SESS:5 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 19
resource?” or, somewhat more concretely, “what is a thing?” is simul-
taneously to ask “who participates in construction of the resource?”, “for
what purpose?” and “on what conditions?”
Law and public policy concerns are central to fully and fairly framing
those questions, and legal frameworks grounded in chattel property, real
property or intellectual property (IP) may guide responses. But those
responses may also depend wholly or in part on extra-legal normative
frameworks, on history, custom and on physical properties of the
resource. The combination of those frameworks that are deemed relevant
to construction of a resource (that is, constitution and interpretation of
that resource and its physical, social, cultural and legal properties) is
termed governance.
In this preliminary and provisional account of governance, little
depends on clear or necessary distinctions between land or other natural
resources and goods, or between immaterial and material goods in
particular, or between intangible and tangible things in general. Little
depends on distinctions noted in the Introduction between singular and
pooledgoods,betweenuniquegoodsandthosethataremass-producedor
copied, or between individual creation and consumption, or social and
shared use. And little depends on distinctions between “natural” things,
which exist in the social and/or natural worlds, and “legal” things, such
as patentable inventions, which exist to provide rough correspondence
between those phenomenal worlds and the world of legal practice.3 A
book is a material object that is subject to a governance investigation
with respect to its sources and its impacts;4 a copyrighted work of
authorship is an immaterial object that calls for a similar and related but
distinct inquiry. In each instance, the idea of governance provides a
commonframeworkforinvestigatingthespecificattributesofaparticular
resource and later synthesising the results of those investigations into a
broader understanding of access and resources in general.As in the case
of the book and the work of authorship embedded in that book, the
relationship between material aspects of a resource and immaterial
aspects of that resource is often a central question.
It is entirely possible and appropriate to ask governance questions with
respect to any and all resources, but in this chapter I am concerned only
with what I call knowledge resources, legal and natural “things” that
comprise the worlds of innovation (including science and technology)
3 See Michael J Madison, ‘Law as Design: Objects, Concepts, and Digital
Things’ (2005) 56 Case W Res L Rev 381, for an elaborate account of the
constitution and construction of legal “things”.
4 At least, that is the historical and conventional understanding of the book.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:3/ Date:15/6JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:6 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
20 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
and creation (including literature, music, visual arts and the like), and
their legal analogues, primarily the patentable “invention” and the
copyrightable “work of authorship”. I have previously unified these fields
under the broad heading of knowledge law,5 and I rely on that framework
here as well. It is tempting to treat knowledge or information as
immaterial or intangible things, but both to give full credit to the
governance concept and to appreciate the nuanced character of know-
ledge and information in the world, the intangible/tangible distinction
should be and is treated as a governance question to be asked and
investigated rather than as a dichotomy to be assumed. In practice,
knowledge may take important material forms.6
Moving from the abstract to the concrete, consider the following
governance-based critique of a specific problem of resource production
and access in the domain of copyright law. In a well-known and widely
circulated investigation of a case of social norms guiding the production
of creative work, to the exclusion of a possibly applicable set of formal
IP norms, Dotan Oliar and Christopher Sprigman described a robust
system of norms of production, distribution and access of jokes among
stand-up comedians in the US.7 Oliar and Sprigman observed that jokes
developed and told by stand-up comedians could be characterised as
copyrighted works of authorship. They further observed that stand-up
comedians almost never assert formal copyright claims against one
another with respect to those works, despite abundant and legitimate
concerns that “joke stealing” by competitor comedians might lead to the
underproduction of new, creative jokes.
Investigating further, they documented the emergence and evolution of
a pattern of strong social norms among stand-up comics that counselled
strongly against “joke stealing”. Ideas for jokes were freely and fully
shared among comics (who often toured and performed in the same
5 See Michael J Madison, ‘Knowledge Curation’(2011) 86 Notre Dame L
Rev 1957; Michael J Madison, ‘Beyond Invention: Patent as Knowledge Law’
(2011) 15 Lewis & Clark L Rev 71; Michael J Madison, ‘Beyond Creativity:
Copyright as Knowledge Law’ (2010) 12 Vanderbilt J Ent & Tech L 817; and
MichaelJMadison,‘NotesonaGeographyofKnowledge’(2009)77FordhamL
Rev 2038.
6 See Nathalie Jeremijenko, ‘Delusions of Immateriality’, presentation at
Doors 6 Lightness (November 2000), available 30 March 2016 at http://museum.
doorsofperception.com/doors6/doors6/transcripts/jeremijenko.html (describing “tan-
gibleinformationstrategies”).
7 Dotan Oliar and Christopher Sprigman, ‘There’s No Free Laugh (Any-
more):TheEmergenceofIntellectualPropertyNormsandtheTransformationof
Stand-Up Comedy’(2008) 94Va L Rev 1787.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:4/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:7 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 21
venues, facilitating the sharing); the specific forms of jokes were off
limits to competitors. Oliar and Sprigman observed that the evolution of
social norms among comedians was intertwined with the evolution of the
content of stand-up comedy itself. During the twentieth century, they
concluded, stand-up comedy shifted from an earlier focus on “jokes” to
“humorous stories”, often told from the perspective of the comedian
himself8 or about the comedian, or both. The shift from joke-based
comedy to narrative comedy reduced the risk of “joke piracy”, because a
competing comedian would usually find that audiences would not laugh
at the same story told “inauthentically”.
Framed in this way, Oliar and Sprigman’s research on stand-up comics
poses a conventional question about production of and access to creative
works and knowledge (how will new creative things be produced if the
producers cannot limit access to their works and appropriate returns via
conventional IP tools?). They emerge with a novel response. Social
norms of a copyright-ish sort offer a substitute for formal copyright law.
I have argued that this framing, while extremely useful as an antidote
to the normative ubiquity of formal copyright law, is incomplete as an
accountoftheproductionanddistributionofcreativethings.Myquestion
concerning stand-up comedy is not whether formal IP law is doing the
work that public policy assumes that it does, but instead how the
production and distribution of stand-up comedy is governed. This
re-framing introduces several additional questions and responses, one of
which is particularly noteworthy in the context of the present interest in
“things”, whether material or immaterial. How did stand-up comics make
their money?
In earlier work,9 I argued that formal IP rights may nonetheless have
played a key role in creating markets for stand-up comedy, and norms
may have been relatively unimportant as incentives to create. The early
1960s, which saw the beginning of narrative and perspective-oriented
comedy, also witnessed comics starting to do what authors have done for
centuries, using the tools that copyright has long recognised as intrinsic
to markets for creativity. They sold copies of their works.And they sold
lots of them.
LPs by a wide variety of comedians earned gold record recognition
during the 1960s and 1970s (“gold” meaning certified by the Recording
8 Stand-up comedians have long been and mostly remain overwhelmingly
male.
9 The following five paragraphs appeared previously in substantially similar
form in Michael J Madison, ‘Of Coase and Comics, or the Comedy of
Copyright’(2009) 95Va L Rev in Brief 27 (footnotes omitted).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:5/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:8 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
22 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
Industry Association of America as having sold 500,000 units). The first
comic gold record was The Button-Down Mind of Bob Newhart, which
was released in 1960 and was certified “gold” in 1962. Newhart’s
follow-up release, The Button-Down Mind Strikes Back, went gold in
1967. Other comics with gold records during the 1960s and 1970s
included the Smothers Brothers (1966 and 1967), Bill Cosby (four gold
recordsin1966,twomorein1967,andonein1968),FlipWilson(1970),
Cheech and Chong (four gold records during the 1970s), George Carlin
(also with four gold records), Richard Pryor (four), and Steve Martin
(two). This parade of top-selling records does not account for the many
other LPs released by comics during the 1960s, including notable
releases by Nichols and May, Stan Freberg, Carl Reiner and Mel Brooks,
Dick Gregory and Jonathan Winters. In the 1970s, Robert Klein, David
Steinberg and Lily Tomlin also released successful comedy albums.
The comedy recordings of the 1960s and 1970s, virtually all of which
werecharacterisedbythenarrativecomedythatemergedatthebeginning
of that era, were grounded partly in technology. The LP format that
emerged as a technological standard in the late 1940s gave comics more
time to talk. They took advantage of that opportunity by telling stories
rather than one-liners. Oliar and Sprigman situate that development in a
loose Demsetzian propertisation argument. Identifying and punishing
thieves became easier. Story-telling discouraged commodification of
comedy and discouraged theft. Yet comics may have turned to story-
telling not to avoid appropriation of their work by others but to enable
appropriation for themselves. Story-telling was not only technologically
feasible; it also sold extremely well.
What may be referred to as “the comedy album phenomenon of the
1960s” was also grounded solidly in economics. The copyright system
imagines that creators will appropriate the value of their work by
charging consumers to access it; it imagines that the work gets shared via
distribution of copies. Selling records worked for comics as it worked for
musicians, and as selling books worked for authors. Higher-tier comics
made a decent living. Lower-tier comics were stirred to emulate their
more famous and successful colleagues. Top-selling comedians were
offered starring roles on television programmes and in Hollywood
movies. By the late 1970s, comedy stars “had become the popular
equivalent of rock stars”. From the standpoint of comedy fans, records
made comedy accessible to audiences that could not afford to attend live
shows or did not want to.
Thisgoldenerafadedduringthe1980swiththeriseofcabletelevision
and pre-recorded videocassettes. That means that the hypothetical market
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:6/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:9 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 23
failure on which There’s No Free Laugh is premised either has long been
solved via conventional property mechanisms (if successors to LPs
offered equal or better appropriability mechanisms), or that the specific
combination of conventional property mechanisms and social norms that
Oliar and Sprigman describe emerged more recently than they hypoth-
esise (if appropriability declined). As with a re-assessment of the
public-goods argument regarding jokes, this change in the historical
account of markets does not make the emergence of a normative regime
unimportant. But setting a system of social norms side by side with a
conventional copyright-based appropriation regime colours the signifi-
cance of both. Copyright markets may have served comics well.
Note, in short, that a full account of questions of production and
distribution of this creative content and access to it – governance –
requires taking into consideration not only the immaterial dimensions of
communicative behaviour among comics themselves, but also the mate-
riality of the production of LP (and later cassette) copies of comedy
recordings. It is tempting to suppose that the widespread availability of
therecordingsmatteredlittletothecomics,becausetheyhadlittletofear
from possible appropriation of their work by ordinary consumers. But it
is equally fair to suppose that generations of future comics were inspired
to perform and may even have pursued their early careers precisely by
emulating the performers whose work they heard on vinyl recordings.
Access to the immaterial version of jokes, and re-use of that content, was
governed – that is, limited – by an informal but robust system of social
norms. Access to the material copy was governed by a market-based
system of IP law together with chattel property law. Under that latter
system, re-use of the jokes was at least tacitly encouraged, and such
re-use may have been central to the propagation and production not only
of specific jokes and funny stories but also of genres of stand-up comedy
themselves.Anyone of a certain age in the 1960s and 1970s can probably
recall telling and re-telling stories that they heard exclusively on LPs.
Governance of this material – jokes – means that production, access to
and use of expressive content was constituted by a blend of social
norms, by which stand-up comics participated in the production of the
(immaterial) jokes themselves, and exchange-based and copyright-
regulated markets for material things (LPs), by which both consumers
and next-generation comics participated in the production of comedy as a
genre and laughter as a social good. The case signifies an important and
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:7/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:10 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
24 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
unexpectedly complex example of the changing construction and
constitution of overlapping resources via law and social norms.10
To be clear, the argument in the preceding paragraphs is at least
somewhat speculative. It does not follow directly from Oliar and Sprig-
man’s work, and it is not the basis of my own independent research. At
best, it is a single and possibly non-representative case illustrating the
governance of certain knowledge resources.There is no reason to assume
that the specific patterns of interaction among comedic joke creators,
consumers and future comics laid out in those paragraphs are replicated
elsewhere, and there is no reason to propose that those patterns them-
selves justify either preserving the current law and policy environment
that sustains them now (or that sustained them in the past),11 or
modifying that environment to ensure that comparable patterns are
sustained in the future.
Law preservation and/or law reform require broader foundational
sources of understanding. One should understand governance in a broad
sense; that is, what access means with reference to knowledge resources
in general, before moving forward with guidance regarding law and
policy. One needs a method of integrating research and learning of a
specific, contextual character with research from other, similar but
distinct domains. One such method is described in the next section.
3. KNOWLEDGE COMMONS: A RESEARCH
FRAMEWORK FOR UNDERSTANDING
GOVERNANCE AND THINGS
The point of any research framework is to permit research and data
collection to proceed under a common set of assumptions and questions,
even if specific research methods and disciplinary foundations may vary
10 One could and perhaps should go further and note the construction of
“spillover”resourcesinthisprocess,suchaspersonalprivacy,viatheblendingof
the immaterial and the material. During the 1960s and 1970s, many a listener
relied on LPs of provocative comics to obtain access to “forbidden” material in
the privacy of the home, away from parents and the broader community. That
privacy fuelled continued demand for new material. Cf Julie E Cohen, ‘A Right
to Read Anonymously: A Closer Look at “Copyright Management” in Cyber-
space’(1996) 28 Conn L Rev 981.
11 This would include copyright laws and policies that draw distinctions
between ideas and expression, that limit protection to the intangible work of
authorship, and that enforce rules of first sale and/or exhaustion with respect to
lawfully produced tangible copies of those works.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:8/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:11 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 25
from researcher to researcher or field to field. The framework is neither
theory nor model; strong theorising and modelling may follow the
research but only light and tentative theorising, if any, should precede it.
The point of the knowledge commons framework described below is that
access to knowledge, in both material and immaterial forms, is an issue
of knowledge sharing in institutional context.12 The question of access
may begin with questioning the participatory, governance relationship
between the individual and the thing (or the relationship between one
thing and another thing), but it evolves quickly into questions about
institutional character.
The framework as described is borrowed from a recent book entitled
Governing Knowledge Commons.13 That book presents the framework
and applies it to a set of case studies of institutions defined in part by
knowledge-sharing practices with respect to one or more knowledge
resources. While the framework is designed for application at the
institutional level, referred to as commons, the intuitions and preliminary
investigation that animated its development are applicable more broadly.
Knowledge resources come in many forms – immaterial, material, flows
as well as forms, and labour and skill and time as well as embodied
creation.14 Knowledge sharing and knowledge retention are as acute and
12 The point of this chapter is primarily descriptive, but the claim about
knowledge sharing in institutional context can be and has been adapted for
normative purposes. See Gaëlle Krikorian andAmy Kapczynski (eds), Access to
Knowledge in the Age of Intellectual Property (MIT Press 2010).
13 Brett M Frischmann, Michael J Madison, and Katherine J Strandburg
(eds), Governing Knowledge Commons (OUP 2014).
14 Tangible things might themselves constitute copyrightable works. See
Michael J Madison, ‘Creativity and Craft’ in Shubha Ghosh and Robin Paul
Malloy (eds), Creativity, Law, and Entrepreneurship (Edward Elgar 2011).
Moreover, knowledge resources might be constituted from flows of meaning
among and within groups rather than from artefacts: “The personal vision of an
author or creator, and the response of a reader or audience, may be best seen as
part of a flow of meaning embedded in various intangible and tangible forms,
including objects, rhetorics, and social and business practices. In many fields,
subject matter favored by outsiders, amateurs, and hobbyists evolves into new
domains of professionalism.” Madison, ‘Beyond Creativity’(n 5) 843. See also
MartinSenftleben,‘CopyrightandCreators’Interests–RightsandRemuneration
in the Light of Bourdieu’s Analysis of the Field of Literary and Artistic
Production’ (2014), available 30 March 2016 at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2522855(advocatingforare-interpretationofexceptions
and limitations in copyright law as a law of creators’ rights, derived from
Bourdieu’s theory of fields). A world in which knowledge is embedded in and
via multiple and overlapping flows of meaning, instantiated in both material and
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:9/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:12 SESS:4 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
26 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
important a set of law and policy problems as knowledge production.
Access to knowledge resources is a fundamental part of governance
solutionstothatproblem.Thenextsectionofthischapterappliespartsof
the framework, briefly, to a handful of examples and illustrations of
access problems at the boundary of materiality and immateriality with
respect to knowledge resources. The balance of this section gives a fuller
account of the framework itself.
The knowledge commons framework builds on a series of related
intuitions. Commons governance means knowledge and information
management characterised by domains of managed openness and sharing
of relevant resources, and the first intuition is that commons governance
is in broad use in day-to-day practice in a variety of domains and across
a variety of scales. Documenting evidence to justify that intuition is the
first goal of the framework. The second intuition is that such structured
openness in the management of both natural and cultural resources is
likely to lead to socially beneficial and/or socially productive outcomes.
Salient among the class of cases where commons governance is success-
ful and sustainable are contexts where social interest in positive spill-
overs from bilateral, market transactions is high. Commons may sustain
the production of spillovers when the market may otherwise not. Testing
that intuition by applying the framework in a series of case studies is the
second goal. The final intuition is that a standard framework for
identifying and assessing commons across a variety of domains can
support the development of more sophisticated tools for realising the
potential for commons solutions in new institutional settings and for
distinguishing commons solutions from other solutions in settings where
some other approach, such as an approach grounded in proprietary rights,
might be preferred. Applying the knowledge commons research frame-
work is an exercise in analysing colloquial commons institutions, such as
“scientific research” taken in the aggregate, in a nuanced way via
comparative institutional analysis.
Examining constructed commons in the cultural context builds on the
Institutional Analysis and Development (IAD) framework pioneered by
immaterial forms, may be a creative and innovative world. See Mihaly Csik-
szentmihalyi, Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention
(HarperCollins 1996) (describing the psychology of creativity); and John Seely
Brown and Paul Duguid, The Social Life of Information (Harvard Business
Review Press 2000) (describing “ecologies” of innovation and innovation in
firms). This note is intended only to be suggestive; the relationship among
resources and outcomes is an empirical question.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:10/ Date:18/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:13 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 27
Elinor Ostrom and her colleagues, but it adds some important modifi-
cations. The IAD framework has been used principally to structure
analysis of solutions to collective-action problems in natural-resource
contexts (so-called action arenas, or action situations) such as forests,
fisheries and irrigation systems. IAD analysis is premised largely on
choice-processing, goal-oriented behaviour by self-interested individuals.
It looks to explain sustainable collective action that produces measurable,
productive results. The insight from applying the IAD framework to a
large number of governance institutions and resources is that commons
solutionscanbeasrobustasmarket-orientedsolutionstoclassic“tragedy
of the commons” overconsumption dilemmas involving depletable nat-
ural resources. Shared governance can lead to sustainable fisheries and
forests and to regular supplies of usable water.
The knowledge commons framework differs from the IAD framework
in certain key respects. It does not assume the agency of rational,
choice-selecting, self-interested individuals. It accepts the role of histori-
cal contingency and of inward-directed agents in the evolution of
collective or commons institutions. At the front end of the analysis, it
also requires understanding the contingency of the underlying resources
themselves. Natural-resource commons largely take the existence of their
resources for granted: fish, trees, water and the like. Knowledge com-
mons identify resource design and creation as variables to be analysed.
As cultural resources (that is, as forms of knowledge and information),
patents, copyrights and underlying inventions, creations and data are
shaped by a variety of institutional forces rather than by nature.
Critically, the knowledge commons framework does not assume that
the relevant resources are rival and depletable. The knowledge commons
framework generally assumes precisely the contrary: that intangible
information and knowledge resources are non-rival, non-excludable pub-
lic goods. The dilemma to be solved is not primarily a classic “tragic
commons” overconsumption problem. Instead, it is more likely (in part)
an underproduction problem and (in part) a coordination problem. In the
absence of a governance mechanism to moderate consumption, producers
of resources will fail to invest in creating new goods or in preserving
them, either on their own or in combination with others, because of
uncertainty regarding their ability (either individually or collectively) to
earn returns that justify the investment.
Against that background, the knowledge commons framework pro-
poses to undertake comparative institutional analysis by evaluating cases
of commons resources via a series of questions, or clusters, to be applied
in each instance. Several of these are borrowed or adapted from Ostrom’s
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:11/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:14 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
28 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
IAD framework. Some are developed specifically for the knowledge
commons context.15
The case study investigation begins with a general description of the
history and character of the problem that is being addressed by govern-
ance in the specific case or context. This may be an explanation that is
internal to the governed institution(s) (the problems and explanations
may emerge from stories told by participants, either today or historically
or both), or an explanation that is external to the governed institution
(such as the public-goods accounts of the rise of IP law).
One should ask whether the relevant resource or case is characterised
from the outset by patent rights or other proprietary rights, as in the case
of a patent pool, or by a legal regime of formal or informal openness, as
in the case of public-domain data or information collected in a govern-
ment archive. A particular regime might involve sharing data and
information, or sharing rights in information, or sharing both. The
character of the commons solution might involve coordinating holders of
different IP interests or holders of different public-domain knowledge
resources, for example.
Answering that question sets a default baseline against which a
commons governance regime has been constructed. Within that regime,
one next asks definitional questions. What are the relevant resources –
taking into account both tangible and intangible things; what are the
relationships among these resources, the baseline and any relevant legal
regime (for example, what a scientist considers to be an invention, what
patent law considers to be an invention, and the boundaries of the patent
itself are three related but distinct things); and what are the boundaries
and constitution (membership) of the community or communities that
manage access to and use of those resources? How is membership
acquired (this may be informal, formal, or a blend of the two) and how is
membership governed?What is good behaviour within the group, what is
bad behaviour, who polices that boundary and how?
Next are questions concerning explicit and implicit goals and object-
ives of commons governance, if any such goals and objectives exist (it is
possible that commons governance regimes emerge from historical
contingency rather than via planning). Is there a particular resource
development or management dilemma that commons governance is
15 A brief overview and schematic of the framework is available at http://
knowledge-commons.net/publications/gkc/research-framework/ (accessed 30
March 2016).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:12/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:15 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 29
intended to address, and what commons strategies are used to address
that dilemma?
How “open” are the knowledge and information resources and the
community of participants that create, use and manage them? Governing
Knowledge Commons argues that commons governance regimes involve
significance measures of resource and community sharing and openness.
Their details, however, should be specified, along with their contributions
to the effectiveness of commons. Some commons and commons
resources have precise and fixed definitions of both resources and
community membership. Or, either resources or membership or both may
be more fluid, with boundaries defined by flexible standards rather than
by rules.
A large and critical cluster of questions concerns the dynamics of
commons governance, or what Ostrom refers to as the “rules-in-use” of
commons: the interactions of commons participants and resources.
Included in this cluster of questions are (1) details of stories of the
origins, histories and operations of commons; (2) formal and informal
(norm-based) rules and practices regarding distribution of commons
resources among participants, including rules for appropriation and
replenishment of commons resources; (3) the institutional setting(s),
including the possibility that regimes are “nested” in larger-scale insti-
tutions and are dependent on other, adjacent institutions; (4) relevant
legal regimes, including but not limited to IP law; (5) the structure of
interactions between commons resources and participants and institutions
adjacent to and outside the regime; and (6) dispute resolution and other
disciplinary mechanisms by which commons rules, norms and partici-
pants are policed.
At this point it becomes possible to identify and assess outcomes. In
Ostrom’s IAD framework, outcomes are typically assessed in terms of
the resources themselves. Has a fishery been managed in a way that
sustains fish stocks over time? Do commons participants, such as the
members of a fishing community, earn returns in the commons context
that match or exceed returns from participation in an alternative govern-
ance context? In knowledge commons, resource-based outcome measures
may be difficult to identify and assess. Sustaining the resources and their
uses, individually or in combination, may be the point. In a patent pool,
pooled resources may constitute components of larger, complex products
that could not be produced but for the pooling arrangement that reduces
transaction costs among participants. Outcomes take different forms. It
may be the case that patterns of participant interaction constitute relevant
outcomes as well as relevant inputs. Agency, in a manner of speaking,
may be less important than identity; the group and its participants, in a
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:13/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:16 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
30 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
particular institutional setting, may be ends as well as means. Levels of
interaction and combination matter. Participant interaction in the context
of a shared resource pool or group may give rise to (or preserve or
modify) an industrial field or a technical discipline. In that specific case,
such spillovers may be treated as relevant outcomes.
Having identified relevant outcomes, it becomes possible to look back
at the problems that defined commons governance in the first place. Has
the regime solved those problems and, if not, then what gaps remain?
How do the outcomes produced by commons governance differ from
outcomes that might have been available if alternative governance had
been employed? On the other side of the assessment ledger, has com-
mons governance created costs or risks that should give policy makers
and/or institution designers pause? Costs of administration might be
needlessly high; costs of participation might be high; and commons
governance might offer a risk of negative spillovers that offsets the initial
instinct that commons produce positive spillovers.A collection of indus-
trial firms that pool related patents in order to produce complex products
may produce those products but may also engage in anti-competitive,
collusive behaviour. Commons governance may facilitate innovation; it
may also facilitate stagnation, or worse.
4. ACCESS TO THINGS FROM THE KNOWLEDGE
COMMONS PERSPECTIVE: APPLICATIONS
The knowledge commons framework directs questions to governance
strategies with respect to those resources (and to the nature of openness
and other resource attributes, for example) and to the character of
individuals, groups and the state in navigating and implementing those
strategies. Understanding the intertwining of people and resources in a
specific setting, but in a way that learning from one case can be
aggregated with learning from other cases, is precisely the point of the
framework. But the framework as just presented may appear to be
unhelpfully abstract. This section draws out some of its tools and themes
in the context of specific applications, with a focus on elements of
particular interest in the context of access to knowledge resources: the
character of those resources themselves. The discussion does not attempt
to apply the framework in all its details.
As specific cases are discussed, identifying and understanding the
creation and governance of boundaries of various sorts, and movement
(flows) of resources and people, become central. Access to knowledge
resources generally presumes some degree of permeability or porosity
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:14/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:17 SESS:4 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 31
with respect to a given resource, to relationships between one resource
and another, and between one resource and a person or group.These may
be examples of what Julie Cohen recently referred to as “semantic
discontinuities”16 and what I described long ago as examples of the
“discontinuous” world of analogue knowledge and information.17Access
and governance mean the intertwining of people and resources; resource
identification and description mean the intertwining of what “is” and “is
not” the resource. That intertwining may be represented by gaps, by
overlaps, or by both.
Thethreecasessummarisedbeloweachconcernwhatmaybethemost
problematic “thing” or resource in the landscape of knowledge law and
policy: the work of authorship, known in some national copyright
systems as the copyright work. Each of the cases below is just that, a
report of a litigated dispute. The knowledge commons framework is not
intended to be applied in detail at this level; it is intended to capture
insights about institutional governance. Litigated cases, the bread
and butter of the legal scholar’s method, are used here for the sake of
brevity and ease of illustration. Institutional lessons can be discerned by
implication.
4.1 KelleyvChicagoParkDistrict:“Works”amongHuman-created
andNaturalResources
Works in the copyright context are unquestionably things or resources,
and they are both intended to be shared and designed to be shared. They
are, therefore, a prototypical resource for knowledge commons govern-
ancepurposes.Worksmaybecharacterisedindifferentwaysattimesand
over time,18 but the idea of the work in any particular instance remains
fundamentally the same. This is true both in the general sense that the
ideaoftheworkismeanttobethesameacrossartisticdisciplines,media
and eras, and in the specific sense that, once a work has been created, it
cannot (or at least should not) change. The work itself is static, even if
the law permits authors, courts and others to re-characterise what it is.
But, of course, things change.Art changes. Do works change?And if so,
how?
16 Julie E Cohen, Configuring the Networked Self: Law, Code, and the Play
of Everyday Practice (Yale UP 2012).
17 Michael J Madison, ‘Complexity and Copyright in Contradiction’ (2000)
18 CardozoArts & Ent L J 125.
18 See Brad Sherman, ‘What is a Copyright Work?’(2011) 12 Theor Inq L
99.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:15/ Date:18/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:18 SESS:5 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
32 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
Courts wrestle, in this sense, with the idea of the work as a boundary
between static and stable works, on the one hand, and dynamic and
changing works, on the other hand. This wrestling represents a blurry
boundary between knowledge resources as creative form and creative
flow, sometimes expressed as a boundary between culture and nature and
as copyright’s distinction between idea and expression. In each respect,
governance of knowledge sharing animates and frames the questions and
responses. For an illustration, consider a recent case involving gardens
and landscapes.
In Kelley v Chicago Park District,19 the plaintiff, without question an
established and successful artist, designed an elaborate and formal public
flower garden known as “Wildflower Works” with the permission and
participation of relevant public authorities. After a long period of
maintenance of the garden and then disputes between the designer and
the owner of the garden space, the owner, the Chicago Park District,
made substantial modifications to the garden over the objection of the
designer. The designer, claiming that the landscape design was an
original work of authorship protected in copyright, sued for violations of
the right to integrity of the work under the American Visual Artists
Rights Act (VARA). Among the questions faced by the Court was
whether the designed public garden was a “work of visual art”, or a work
of any kind, covered by the statute. The federal Court ofAppeals for the
Seventh Circuit, rejecting the plaintiff’s claim, concluded in dicta that it
was not.
The Court began by accepting (as the parties had) that the landscape
design consisted of a painting or a sculpture, the categories of copyright-
able expression that it most resembled, that is, a kind of artistic work,
and then considered whether that work met the requirements of the
statute as to originality and fixation.
The Court concluded that it did not. The Court worried that copyright
here was asked to recognise a work that was “infinitely malleable”. The
Court concluded (in a questionable part of its reasoning) that the garden
did not rise to the level of originality or stable fixation required by the
law, because the living garden was subject to inevitable changes over
time, and the changes were not the product of the plaintiff’s authorship.
So, while the Court itself gave little weight to the idea of “the work” as
a thing in itself aside from the statute’s other subject-matter require-
ments, originality and fixation, there is a boundary principle in play.That
principle appears to depend on what I have called governance, and in
19 635 F. 3d 290 (7th Cir 2011).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:16/ Date:15/6JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:19 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 33
particular on ideas concerning how the different forms of knowledge
represented in this landscape design are shared.
In dicta the Court expressed scepticism that Wildflower Works should
be treated as a painting or a sculpture, as the plaintiff argued; that is, that
the design should be treated as a work in the first place. The Court’s
attention was directed to the material and physical elements of the
garden, which are by definition open not only to human interaction
(subject to possible restrictions on access to the park in which the design
was set) but, more important, to interaction with other “things”, leading
necessarily both to change in the appearance of the design itself and to
the emergence of new, natural things. The resource – the landscape
design – is shared with another resource: nature. The malleability of the
physical resource in those circumstances gives the work itself a fluid
character that exceeds the limits accepted by copyright law.20 The Court
wrote: “The Park District suggests that Wildflower Works is an un-
copyrightable ‘method’ or ‘system.’”21 It continued: “Although Wild-
flower Works was designed to be largely self-sustaining (at least
initially), it’s not really a ‘method’or ‘system’at all. It’s a garden.”22
Unpacking that last statement (“It’s a garden”; therefore, by impli-
cation, it cannot be a work), the Court identifies a boundary between, yet
also connects, multiple resources: static works and dynamic things,
betweenstaticthingsanddynamic“processes”or“systems”,betweenthe
static created work and the dynamic natural idea, and between the
intangible “design” of this landscape and its material realisation. Trad-
itional copyright law and its focus on the independent, intangible creative
thing contrasts with deeper, organic processes that are revealed by nature,
evenwhilebothperspectivesonlandscapedesignandgardensthemselves
are literally and physically present in one and the same place and space.
The Court’s answer to the challenge of distinguishing these things – “It’s
a garden” – is clearly inadequate, because it simply re-states the issue.
Why is a garden not a work? Perhaps for the following reason: A work
20 One could analogise the landscape design not to a painting or to a
sculpture but instead to an elaborate meal prepared by a trained chef. The chef,
we know, is a kind of creator, working with natural and prepared ingredients,
blendingtheminoriginalandevenexpressiveways,anticipatingtheirinteraction
withnaturalprocesses(suchasheatandcold),and“fixing”theresultintheform
ofthemealaspresentedattable.Yetitiswidelyunderstood(thoughnotwithout
some controversy) that neither the chef’s techniques, the chef’s recipes, nor the
resulting meals are protected by copyright.
21 Kelley v Chicago Park District (n 19) 303.
22 Ibid.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:17/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:20 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
34 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
qua work is communicative and expressive, not simply functional. A
work shares itself with humans. A work expresses the author’s creativity
and the audience’s response; a work communicates the fact that humans
produced it.23 A work is therefore governed, precisely because it is
shared. Anything else – plants, flowers, animals and prepared food –
communicates (or may communicate) the fact that organic processes are
primarily driving what we see and experience; the material character of
the resource dominates its communicative, intangible character. One
cancelsouttheother,ratherthanonecomplementingtheother.Nature,in
its physical state, is given.
Gardeners and landscape designers know that what appears to be
“natural” often reflects deep and thoughtful engagement by humans. The
vocabulary of giving is far from univocal: we may say that we receive
gifts (from God, from nature, from others), that we have gifts (special
skills) and that we share them. Often, the conceptual linkages embedded
in those phrases go unrecognised and unexplored, as do linkages between
gifts and agency. Characterising nature as a gift and as a source of gifts
does not exclude human agency.To exclude gardening categorically from
copyright amounts not only to excluding the effort and ingenuity of a
particular author, but also the knowledge, practices, traditions and
expectations of an entire field. That field may be human-directed and
cultural; that field may be scientific and technological; that field may be
spiritual and only partly known or knowable by humans. In the case of
natural things and processes the work is therefore the locus of a
governancedebateaboutwhatisincopyrightandwhatisbeyondit,what
is owned and marketable and what is accessible by others or by all, and
on what terms. Nature no less than culture is a product of and part of
processes of human engagement.24 Kelley may be critiqued on the merits
of its legal analysis and result; it is useful nonetheless for its introduction
to questions of access and governance.
23 SeeAbrahamDrassinower,‘CopyrightInfringementasCompelledSpeech’
in Annabelle Lever (ed.), New Frontiers in the Philosophy of Intellectual
Property (CUP 2012) (arguing that a work subject to copyright is a communica-
tive act).
24 See William Cronon, ‘The Trouble with Wilderness; or, Getting Back to
theWrong Nature’inWilliam Cronon (ed.), Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the
Human Place in Nature (WW Norton & Co 1995).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:18/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:21 SESS:5 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 35
4.2 MassachusettsMuseumofContemporaryArtFoundation,Incv
Büchel:FinishedandUnfinished“Works”
The idea of “the work” can tell us when a work is a “work” worthy of
copyright contemplation, or is instead a draft, sketch or idea. In this
sense, the work defines the trigger of copyright; it shifts the frame of
governance. Before something becomes a work, copyright law does not
apply;thematerialispreliminaryandthereforefreelyshareable,usedand
experienced. Justin Hughes pursues this reasoning, in part, when he
argues that copyright law should not protect tiny “microworks” because
they are not works.25 In a related sense, a creative thing may emerge as a
work from early or unformed effort, and in doing so it crosses a kind of
copyright boundary. A copyright work sits at an intersection between
complete control of both immaterial and material dimensions of the
unfinished thing vested in its creator, on the one hand, and governance of
the finished thing managed by a complex that includes not only the
creator but also other individual, institutional and collective interests, on
the other.
An art-world case illustrates. In Massachusetts Museum of Contempor-
aryArt Foundation, Inc v Büchel,26 the plaintiff Christophe Büchel was a
conceptual artist who commissioned the defendant, the Massachusetts
Museum of Contemporary Art (MassMoCA), to install a large, complex
and expensive conceptual sculpture entitled Training Ground for Democ-
racy. MassMoCA agreed to bear the expense of the installation. The
parties’contract failed, however, to provide sufficient detail regarding the
project’s final scope. During installation, Büchel made substantial
changes to the project. Fearing that it would never recoup its installation
expense via admission charges or otherwise, MassMoCA eventually
suspended additional effort and opened the incomplete installation to
public viewing. Training Ground for Democracy was intended to be an
immersive experience; museum patrons would walk through the sculp-
ture. MassMoCA included signage making it clear to patrons that the
sculpture on display was not the completed work of the artist. Büchel
nonetheless sued, both under the relevant provisions ofVARA, §106A of
the US Copyright Act,27 for violations of his rights to integrity and
25 Justin Hughes, ‘Size Matters (or Should) in Copyright Law’ (2005) 74
Fordham L Rev 575.
26 593 F. 3d 38 (1st Cir 2010).
27 17 USC §106A (2012).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:19/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:22 SESS:4 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
36 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
attribution, and also under the public display portion of §106 of the
Copyright Act.
With respect to both claims, MassMoCA argued that Büchel had not
proved the existence of a “work” that triggered any obligations under
copyright law. As Büchel himself acknowledged, from the artist’s point
ofviewtheworkofarthereconsistedofaspecifickindofpatrons’visual
andphysicalexperienceofthecreation.28ToMassMoCA,thepresenceor
absence of a work was a kind of jurisdictional boundary. Until an author
is done creating, copyright law is irrelevant.29 On this reasoning, an
unfinished sculpture is not a work. The federal District Court for the
District of Massachusetts agreed, but the Court of Appeals for the First
Circuitdidnot.Thelattercourtreliedonthecopyrightstatute’sdefinition
of “created”, which applies, it held, to unfinished works.30 It held that
Büchel’s work fell within the scope of VARA as a “work of visual art”,
despite its unfinished state.
Form matters, one might simply say. Yet what remains unclear from
the outcome of the case is whether what matters is the state of the
intangible or immaterial – the artist’s creation – or the state of the
tangible or the material – the physical space, partly occupied by elements
of the sculpture. The shape of the governance applicable here is murky.
On a purely formal reading, the Appellate Court’s interpretation of the
statute almost certainly is incorrect if the idea of the work is to be
independent of fixation, and if there is any jurisdictional boundary
between creativity to which copyright attaches and creativity that lies
outside it.31 Of course, such a boundary may not exist, which means that
the Court was correct after all; a broader governance approach, which
relates the immaterial and material dimensions of the artist’s vision and
effort, the museum’s investment and the audience’s experience, teaches
(perhaps) that the Court came to the appropriate conclusion.
The fact that Büchel sued under VARA, the limited version of moral
rights protection available under US copyright law, is the clue that
unlocks the overlapping and shared character of these relationships. US
28 See ‘MassMoCA’s Lawsuit’(TheART Law Blog, 27 May 2007), available
30 March 2016 at http://theartlawblog.blogspot.com/2007/05/mass-mocas-
lawsuit.html (blog post written by Büchel’s counsel).
29 Beforethe1976CopyrightActtookeffect,thiswasindeedthecaseinthe
US. With few exceptions, copyright applied only to published works.
30 17 USC §101 (2012) (defining “created”).
31 The statute clearly applies to things that are completed in pieces, such as
movements of a symphony or chapters of a novel. It is less clear that the statute
applies, or should apply, to every successive stroke of a pen or brush.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:20/ Date:18/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:23 SESS:5 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 37
copyright law only reluctantly accommodates authors’ rights, preferring
instead to emphasise economic rights according to the presence or
absence of a work. Governance in such a context is often linear and
formal; the question is simply whether the intangible character of a work
has been exploited inappropriately in the market, and usually commer-
cially. But authors’ rights (or droit moral) more fully manage inter-
sections between the practices and expectations of artists and authors, on
the one hand, and the practices and expectations of other claimants and
institutions, on the other, and that management, or governance, is
expressed largely through control of the physical manifestation of the
author’s vision. The fact that droit moral extends control over physical
resources is ironic, perhaps, given the fact that justification for those
rights originates in the idea of the vision of a work that derives from an
author’s (intangible) identity or personality. The governance expressed in
this case, therefore, and endorsed by the Court of Appeals, derives from
that irony. Governance of Büchel’s work is, via its incomplete material
form, a form of governance of Büchel himself.
Note, then, the contrasting lessons of the cases reviewed so far. The
materiality of the garden in Kelley dominated the Court’s construction of
governance of that resource; the immaterial “work” all but disappeared.
The materiality of the sculpture in MassMoCA was, by contrast, purely
an extension of the immaterial being of the sculptor. To recognise an
(intangible) work in Büchel’s unfinished (material) sculpture was to
recognise the whole of Büchel himself. One could no more imagine
shared governance of the sculpture than one could imagine shared
governance of a human being. To be sure, in the US context, treating
individual identity as part and parcel of a regime of shared governance
may strike the reader as a bit of unorthodox framing but not conceptually
alien. “Who we are” is not entirely a matter of pure self-definition.
Nonetheless, initially, at least, just that approach seems to be the kind of
impermeable boundary imposed by the Court, and the kind of imperme-
able boundary sometimes present in other non-VARA moral rights cases
in the US. In Gilliam v American Broadcasting Companies,32 the
integrity of the work qua work stands in for the integrity of the authors
themselves. The clarity of the Court’s reasoning in MassMoCA makes
that case a more compelling illustration.
That summary accounts for the Court’s reasoning in the case but does
not exhaust questions concerning governance in this context. For
example, it should not be forgotten that, despite the Court’s express
32 538 F. 2d 14 (2d Cir 1976).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:21/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:24 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
38 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
reasoning, the participatory elements that constitute the work in Mass-
MoCAandaccesstotheworkincludenotonlytheartistandtheaudience
but also the interests and claims of the institutions of the art world,
embodied in the particular case by MassMoCA itself. The knowledge
commons research framework teaches that one must be careful not to see
the world via an author/audience duality. Here, curators, museum direc-
tors, board members, investors, donors and museum patrons all have
interests in the collection, curation and presentation of the art works that
make up each museum’s collection. Those interests, and the legal and
normative duties that accompany them, attach when works are formally
part of the museum’s collection and not before.33
Many of those interests are represented legally and normatively in
property terms. Art institutions ordinarily are bound not to de-accession
works of art from their collections except under specific circumstances.
Museums and their agents may not act purely in market terms. Having
accepted these works as gifts, in many cases, museums undertake to care
for them in part according to a trust relationship with society as a
whole,34arelationshipthatalignstheseinstitutionswiththenormsofgift
exchange. Once a gift, always a gift, in a manner of speaking; to convert
a gift into a marketable commodity is to violate the norms of gift-giving.
When a work becomes formalised in the collection of a museum,
therefore, the author’s interest is not erased, but it is recontextualised in
the context of the institution. The materiality of the sculpture represents
not only the artist but also, at times, those whose financial and organ-
isational support makes possible production, presentation and curation of
the sculpture. The concept of the work in MassMoCA and in the context
of the art world in general permits those two communities – artists, on
the one hand, and art institutions, on the other hand – to participate
constructively in the constitution of the resource, if not always without
disagreeing, via a form of knowledge sharing.
4.3 BridgemanArtLibrary,LtdvCorelCorp:IsDigitalDifferent?
Little in this chapter so far has touched on problems specifically
associatedwithdigitaltechnology,whichisoftenassociatedwiththeidea
that knowledge or information works have progressed to the state of
33 For more on the intersection of copyright law and curatorial interests, see
Madison, ‘Knowledge Curation’(n 5) 1957.
34 SeeSueChen,‘ArtDeaccessionsandtheLimitsofFiduciaryDuty’(2009)
14ArtAntiquity & L 103.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:22/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:25 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 39
being “purely” intangible. Practice teaches otherwise: digital works are
neithernecessarilymoreorlessmaterialthantheiranaloguecounterparts.
But governance problems associated with digital creations are distinct,
which means that conveying a fuller picture of access problems with
knowledge resources should account for the different character of their
digital versions. A challenging example is Bridgeman Art Library, Ltd v
Corel Corp,35 in which exact reproductions of public-domain paintings,
marketed as transparencies and CD-ROMs, were held not to be copy-
rightable in a case brought against a commercial copyist. The Court
concluded that works produced by the plaintiff, Bridgeman Art Library,
as perfect digital copies of the original art works, did not manifest the
requisite originality to be protected in copyright as derivative works,
because there was no evident distinguishable variation between the
source and the reproductions:
In this case, plaintiff by its own admission had labored to create “slavish
copies” of public domain works of art. While it may be assumed that this
required both skill and effort, there was no spark of originality – indeed, the
point of the exercise was to reproduce the underlying works with absolute
fidelity.36
The plaintiff’s reproductions were, in effect, so good that they reflected
supreme technical skill, but no creativity or artistic judgement.
Bridgeman has been the subject of extensive commentary, the best of
which has expressed strong sympathy for all the multiple interests at
stake: museums and other art-historical institutions that have both com-
mercialandscholarlyinterestsinproducinganddistributingartreproduc-
tions, and scholars and the public who ought not to have their ability to
view and participate in the continuing construction and interpretation of
public-domain works foreclosed because of modern copyrights claimed
in exact reproductions.37 That matrix of interests, and the knowledge
sharing that it represents, constitutes governance. The structure of gov-
ernance in this instance is closely related to the structure of governance
in MassMoCA, although the purposes and outcomes of governance in the
two situations are quite different. In MassMoCA, managing access to the
35 25 F Supp 2d 421 (SDNY 1998) [hereafter Bridgeman I].
36 BridgemanArt Library, Ltd v Corel Corp, 36 F Supp 2d 191, 197 (SDNY
1999) [hereafter Bridgeman II].
37 See RAnthony Reese, ‘Photographs of Public Domain Paintings: How, if
atAll, ShouldWe ProtectThem?’(2009) 34 J Corp L 1033 (proposing a limited
sui generis property right applicable to art reproductions, but expressing scepti-
cism that such a right would pass constitutional muster).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:23/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:26 SESS:5 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
40 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
original physical work was deemed by the Court to be the chief goal of
the governance structure implemented by its interpretation of copyright
law. In Bridgeman, access to the original physical work was deemed to
be less significant than ensuring access to the creative knowledge
contained within it, whether that creative knowledge was manifested to
an audience via analogue or digital structures (the original paintings, or
digital copies).
Even while the outcome in Bridgeman is defensible on the merits, its
rhetoric and argumentative structure are discomforting, in large part
because the formal structure of the law disregards some key attributes of
that governance framework. For example, the rejection of “slavish
copying” as a basis for a copyright claim has support in precedent. The
reference stems in part from the rejection of a claimed copyright on that
ground in an earlier appellate case, L Batlin & Son, Inc v Snyder38 – but
isbothoddlymoralistic(inthesensethatitexpressesamoraljudgement)
and inconsistent with credible artistic interests.39 Even a “slavish” copy
representsaninvestmentofsociallyproductiveartisticvisionandeffort.40
The Court presented the case as follows. The plaintiff began with
two-dimensional works of fine art: paintings, which were in the public
domain.41 Despite their public-domain status, copyright law commands a
conceptual distinction of intangible idea from intangible expression in
each of those paintings. The latter constitutes the creative knowledge
produced by each painting’s author. By creating high-quality reproduc-
tions of the paintings, Bridgeman copied that intangible expression
verbatim. The author’s creativity was entirely unchanged in the move
from canvas to photograph and CD-ROM. The change of medium made
no creative difference. As the Court noted, “production of a work of art
in a different medium cannot by itself constitute the originality required
38 536 F. 2d 486 (2d Cir 1976).
39 Themoralistictonecarriedbythephrase“slavishcopying”isnoaccident.
The first reported use of the phrase took place in a District Court opinion that
granted an injunction on unfair competition grounds against the producer of a
“return post card folder” that copied an identical product originated by the
plaintiff. See Correct Printing Co v Ramapo River Printing Co, 16 F Supp 573,
575 (SDNY 1936).
40 See Madison, ‘Beyond Creativity’(n 5) 817.
41 Presumably, most, if not all, of these paintings were never protected by
copyright in the first place. The plaintiff relied in part on a certificate of
registration in a work collecting its digital images entitled “Old World Masters
I”. Bridgeman I (n 35) 424.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:24/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:27 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 41
for copyright protection”.42 That proposition is consistent with a bedrock
copyright concept, that the copyright exists independent of any material
form in which the work is fixed.43 With no creativity, there was no
originality; with no originality, there was no copyright. Because the
public-domain character of the original paintings was preserved, anyone
in possession of relevant digital technology could see and perhaps make
some use of the creative knowledge that they contain. But that creative
knowledge was itself static and unchanged; to the extent that it was
shared, the intangible thing did not flow from one person or place to
another. Audiences who saw the original paintings in person and who
saw digital reproductions of the work on screens were seeing “the same
work”.
In practice, are these really “the same work”?This shifts the ground of
the question from law to culture; copyright law may treat these as
identical even as it accepts that culture may not. But governance
investigations need not honour that distinction. The knowledge commons
research framework counsels taking an expansive view of resource
governance, beginning with an expansive view of the relevant
resource(s). The Court’s story of knowledge sharing might be reframed,
then, as follows, beginning with the idea (suggested above) that the
physical paintings themselves might be treated as works of authorship,
and that the creative knowledge in the original paintings was modified in
some relevant way in the transfer to a digital format. One could treat the
original paintings as knowledge objects, and reorient the knowledge
sharing or governance surrounding those objects as implicating the
related but distinct question of governance of their digital counterparts as
a new set of knowledge objects. There were two sets of knowledge
objectsorresources,inotherwords,notjustone,eachwithitsownsetof
participant creators, audiences, critics, funding and distribution insti-
tutions, re-users and so on. One who views a digital reproduction of a
painting experiences a different thing than one who views the original of
that painting in a gallery.
42 Bridgeman II (n 36) 196 (quoting Past Pluto Prods v Dana, 627 F Supp
1435, 1441 (SDNY 1986)).
43 17 USC §202 (2012) (“Ownership of a copyright, or of any of the
exclusive rights under a copyright, is distinct from ownership of any material
object in which the work is embodied.”).
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:25/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:28 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
42 Intellectualpropertyandaccesstoim/materialgoods
The difference is not simply a matter of enchanted originals and the
aura of the unique work of art.44 The difference lies as much in the fact
that the knowledge shared via a screen can never equal the knowledge
shared via a canvas.The screen conveys a pristineness and purity that the
canvas cannot; the canvas conveys a texture and intimacy that the screen
cannot match. The composition of the audiences is, almost by definition,
different. Relatively few people can experience the original painting on
canvas. More can experience it on screen, but they require technology
and facility with the technology, and may have to submit to contractual
or other restrictions on subsequent use. Neither mode of participation in
theworkisinherentlysuperiortotheother;theflowofknowledgeshared
is simply different. Note that, as presented by the Court, Bridgeman
begins a question of knowledge governance. The Court’s opinion does
not conclude it. What the governance question reveals is that different
framings yield not “less access” or “more access” to the works in
question, but different forms of access, probably for different purposes
and with meaning for different actors, constructed via reinterpreting the
character of the works themselves. “What is the thing?”, or, in this
instance, “what is the work?” turns not on ontological or on legal
considerations, but instead on considerations of the modes of partici-
pation that one focuses on.
5. CONCLUSION
The emergence of new modes of digital production of knowledge has
neither changed nor provided clear answers to the underlying and
long-standing challenges posed by cultural systems devoted to things,
referred to here as resources, namely, how to comprehend the creation,
preservation and circulation of things, and their material and immaterial
dimensions,inwaysthatbothrespecttheiridiosyncrasiesandalsopermit
theirsystematicintegrationintolawandpolicy.Whatarethings?Howdo
things work? The questions are simultaneously conceptual and empirical.
This chapter has focused on their empirical dimensions, suggesting a
research framework grounded in the concept of knowledge commons, or
the study of institutionalised sharing of knowledge resources. Institution-
alised sharing is, of course, a mode of governance. The chapter offers
44 See Walter Benjamin, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction’(1936) in HannahArendt (ed.) and Harry Zohn (trans), Illumina-
tions (Schocken Books 1968) 217.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:26/ Date:13/5JOBNAME:Lai PAGE:29 SESS:3 OUTPUT:WedJun2213:24:292016
Understandingaccesstothings 43
three preliminary sketches of knowledge commons governance, drawn
from problematic cases from US copyright law.
Governance, and its concerns with documenting and describing know-
ledge sharing in various forms, does not necessarily lead to clear, logical,
well-delineated outcomes or rules. “Structures of participation” and
“entanglement”, the non-legal metaphors for interactions among humans
and things that I noted at the outset of this chapter, hint at the messiness
thatunfoldsintheillustrationsprovided.Theillustrationsareonlyastart;
no one of these cases tells us anything generalisable about things or
resources or their material or immaterial dimensions. With sufficient
space, the knowledge commons framework may be applied at greater
length to each of these cases and, with a sufficiently large collection of
cases, one could hope to discern patterns and therefore generalisable
propositions regarding law and culture.
Jessica C. Lai and Antoinette Maget Dominicé - 9781784716615
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 08/02/2016 09:15:55AM
via free access
ColumnsDesignXMLLtd / Job:Lai-IP_and_access_to_im-material_goods / Division:08_Chapter1 /Pg.Position:27/ Date:13/5