 
 
 
 
       DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
THE EXPANDING ROLE  
AND IMPORTANCE OF STANDARDS IN  
THE INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS  
TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY 
 
Brad Biddle, Frank X. Curci,  
Timothy F. Haslach, Gary E. Marchant,  
Andrew Askland, and Lyn Gaudet* 
 
ABSTRACT: Standards play a particularly critical role in the information and com-
munications technology (ICT) industry: they facilitate important interoperability goals. 
Standards development processes in the ICT industry are extraordinarily complex, and 
many aspects of these processes are not well understood. Inspired by discussions at a 
workshop that included leading practitioners, academics, and policymakers specializing 
in standards, the authors identify factors that explain both the growing importance and 
the growing complexity of standards in the ICT industry. The authors provide a frame-
work for understanding how standards development efforts are structured, with a 
particular focus on the more informal specification development groups known as 
Consortia. The authors also explore two particular challenges in standard setting: the 
development of intellectual property policies that adequately balance different stake-
holder interests, and the potential for ethical conflict issues. 
 
CITATION: Brad Biddle, Frank X. Curci, Timothy Haslach, Gary E. Marchant, 
Andrew Askland, and Lyn Gaudet, The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in 
the Information and Communications Technology Industry, 52 Jurimetrics J. 177–208 
(2012). 
 
                                                                                                           
  *Brad Biddle is Standards Counsel with Intel Corporation and an Adjunct Professor at the 
Sandra Day O’Connor College of Law, Arizona State University. Frank X. Curci is a Shareholder 
with Schwabe, Williamson, and Wyatt, Portland, Oregon. Timothy F. Haslach is a Shareholder 
with Schwabe, Williamson, and Wyatt, Portland, Oregon. Gary E. Marchant is Lincoln Professor 
of Emerging Technologies, Law & Ethics and Faculty Director, Center for Law, Science & 
Innovation, Sandra Day O’Connor College of Law, Arizona State University. Andrew Askland is 
Director, Center for Law, Science & Innovation, Sandra Day O’Connor College of Law, Arizona 
State University. Lyn Gaudet received her J.D. in 2011 from the Sandra Day O’Connor College of 
Law, Arizona State University. The paper reflects the authors’ personal views, and should not be 
attributed to their respective organizations or institutions. 
 
WINTER 2012  177 Biddle et al. 
 
  Standards adopted by various types of private and quasi-governmental 
standards-setting organizations (SSOs) play a critical and growing role in the 
development and commercialization of many technologies.1 No industry is 
more dependent upon and affected by such standards than the information and 
communications technology (ICT) industry, which encompasses computer, 
telecommunication, and personal entertainment technologies and products. 
Standards are critical to the interoperability of different products and technol-
ogies developed by different ICT companies and are of growing importance at 
a time of globalization because, unlike government regulation, private stan-
dards can be international in their application. Yet, in some situations, stan-
dards can be an impediment to technology innovation and implementation. For 
example, standards can be counterproductive if they are duplicative or incon-
sistent with other standards, fail to properly understand and anticipate technol-
ogy  trajectories,  are  anticompetitive,  or  have  been  designed  to  further 
parochial commercial or political interests.  
Despite the growing importance of standards in an increasingly globalized 
world, surprisingly little scholarly analysis and discourse addresses this im-
portant field. As one pair of authors recently lamented somewhat tongue in 
cheek, “standards quite often fall into the category of ‘boring things’ that fail 
to elicit much attention or scrutiny.”2 This attention deficit may be due in part 
to the complexity and lack of transparency of standard-setting activities, which 
are currently accessible primarily to experts within the ICT companies directly 
affected by such standards. To help address that gap, in January 2010, the 
Center for Law, Science & Innovation at Arizona State University’s Sandra 
Day O’Connor College of Law convened the first meeting of an intended 
series of annual workshops on standards that bring together leading practition-
ers, scholars, and other stakeholders to discuss current issues and controversies 
in standard setting.  
This article grows out of that first workshop (the ASU Workshop). Part I 
begins with a discussion of the role and importance of standards in the ICT 
industry and includes a framework for understanding the wide variety of SSOs 
employed in this industry. Part II explores two particular challenges in the 
current  standard-setting protocol: the development of  intellectual property 
policies that adequately balance different stakeholder interests, and the poten-
tial for ethical conflict issues in standards development. 
 
                                                                                                           
  1. U.S.  STANDARDS  STRATEGY  COMM.,  AM.  STANDARDS  INST.,  UNITED  STATES 
STANDARDS  STRATEGY  4  (2010),  available  at  http://publicaa.ansi.org/sites/apdl/Documents/ 
Standards%20Activities/NSSC/USSS_Third_edition/USSS%202010-sm.pdf  (“[S]tandards  are 
more essential today than at any time in our nation’s history.”); see also OFFICE OF TECH. 
ASSESSMENT, TCT-512, GLOBAL STANDARDS: BUILDING BLOCKS FOR THE FUTURE 3 (1992) 
(stating that standards are ever present and affect our lives in multiple ways). 
  2. Stefan Timmermans & Steven Epstein, A World of Standards but not a Standard World: 
Towards a Sociology of Standards and Standardization, 36 ANN. REV. SOC. 69, 71 (2010). 
 
178  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
I. THE ROLE AND IMPORTANCE  
OF STANDARDS IN THE ICT INDUSTRY 
 
  This Part describes the importance and role of standards in the ICT indus-
try, the variety of SSOs and specification-development groups, and compli-
cating  factors  in  creating  standards  in  the  ICT  industry.  It  suggests  a 
framework for understanding different organizational approaches to standard-
setting.  
A. Basic Importance, Role, and Posture of Standards  
     in the ICT Industry 
Standards are critically important in the ICT industry. ICT products con-
sist of a variety of equipment, devices, and components that work only if they 
can connect to, and operate with, other equipment, devices, and components 
often made by other manufacturers. Examples of such equipment include 
computer hardware, computer chips, software, printers, modems, scanners, 
Internet networks, wireless communication devices, and many others. Tech-
nology standards provide an interface between these various devices to ensure 
that they are compatible and can function together. Many of these interopera-
bility standards are now terms in daily use by the public. WiFi has transformed 
how we go online. USB cables enable us to connect our computers, phones, 
cameras, music players, and countless other devices. We send text messages 
using SMS. New devices and new ways to communicate are enabled by 3G 
and 4G telecommunication networks. We listen to MP3-formatted music and 
view DVDs and Blu-Ray discs. We browse the Internet, viewing web pages 
rendered in HTML.  
These well-known standards barely scratch the surface of important ICT 
industry standards. Standards such as PCI and PCI-Express, for example, are 
relatively unknown to consumers but have played a crucial role in the ICT 
hardware industry. Large ICT companies like Intel, Microsoft, and Oracle are 
involved in hundreds of different standards development efforts at any given 
time.  
The convergence of computing and communications has magnified the 
importance of standards. Consider a single device that enables phone calls 
over a cellular network and over the Internet (VOIP), sends and receives text 
and multimedia messages, connects to WiFi access points, browses the Inter-
net, plays music and video, and takes photos and transfers them to a PC. The 
development and operation of this device would use potentially hundreds of 
different standards.3  
                                                                                                           
  3. See Brad Biddle et al., How Many Standards in a Laptop? (And Other Empirical 
Questions) 2010 INT’L TELECOMM. UNION SEC. TELECOMM. STANDARDIZATION KALEIDOSCOPE 
ACAD. CONF. PROC. 123 (empirical study which identifies 251 technical interoperability standards 
implemented in a modern laptop computer, and estimates that the total number of standards 
relevant to such a device is much higher).  
 
WINTER 2012  179 Biddle et al. 
 
ICT standards are usually developed by SSOs in which various industry 
representatives actively participate to represent novel and diverse models of 
governance and a form of self-regulation.4 The format, process, participation, 
and outputs of different SSOs vary considerably.5 Important issues may in-
clude the question of whether a particular technology is standardized, the cost 
and performance tradeoffs associated with the standards, whether particular 
intellectual property (IP) is included, and licensing terms associated with IP.6 
Accordingly, many ICT industry companies devote substantial resources to 
standards development.7 
Even though most standards are developed by private SSOs, government 
regulators and policymakers are also key stakeholders in connection with 
standards.8 Antitrust regulators frequently scrutinize standards development 
efforts to ensure that standardization efforts promote innovation and consumer 
welfare and do not enable collusion or other kinds of anticompetitive beha-
viors.9 Policymakers may also have special concerns when private-sector-
driven standards are adopted into public regulations, or when standards affect 
significant matters of public policy.10 Additionally, policymakers in some 
regions of the world increasingly appear to be using standards as a tool of 
industrial policy to advance particular national interests. Notably, there is no 
global consensus on the right governmental approach to standards policy: the 
United States generally embraces a “bottom-up” private sector-driven model 
of  standards  development,  whereas  the  European  Union  and  increasingly 
China have a more government-centric “top-down” approach.11 
                                                                                                           
  4. Kevin Werbach, Higher Standards: Regulation in the Network Age, 23 HARV. J.L. & 
TECH. 179, 179 (2009) (“standardization is regulation.”); Jane K. Winn, Standard Developing 
Organizations as a Form of Self-Regulation (July 25, 2006) (manuscript at 1), http://papers.ssrn. 
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=924008. 
  5. See infra Part I.B. 
  6. See Joseph Scott Miller, Standard Setting, Patents, and Access Lock-in: RAND Licensing 
and the Theory of the Firm, 40 IND. L. REV. 351, 352 (2007); see generally Brian Kahin, Common 
and Uncommon Knowledge: Reducing Conflict Between Standards and Patents, in OPENING 
STANDARDS: THE GLOBAL POLITICS OF INTEROPERABILITY 177 (Laura DeNardis, ed., 2011) 
(describing the importance of standards in the information technology field and reconciling patent 
enforcement and standard rights).  
  7. Brian DeLacey et al., Strategic Behavior in Standard-Setting Organizations, at 1, 2 
(Harvard NOM Working Paper No. 903214, 2006), available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=903214. 
  8. See generally Stacy Baird, The Government at the Standards Bazaar, 18 STAN. L. & 
POL’Y REV. 35 (2007) (stating that government regulators should step in and offer standards when 
there is a critical public interest in the subject or the matter is vital to national security, defense, 
public safety, or general health). 
  9. U.S. DEP’T. OF JUSTICE & FED. TRADE COMM’N, ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT AND 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS: PROMOTING INNOVATION AND COMPETITION 6–7 (2007), 
available at http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/hearings/ip/222655.pdf; David J. Teece & Edward 
F. Sherry, Standards Setting and Antitrust, 87 MINN. L. REV. 1913, 1934 (2003). 
  10. Teece & Sherry, supra note 9, at 1918.  
  11. See  Christopher  S.  Gibson,  Globalization  and  the  Technology  Standards  Game: 
Balancing Concerns of Protectionism and Intellectual Property in International Standards, 22 
BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 1403, 1410–18 (2007) (comparing U.S., Chinese, and E.U. standards-setting 
approaches); Jane K. Winn, US and EU Regulatory Competition in ICT Standardization Law & 
 
 
180  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
Consumers are also key stakeholders in standards.12 As any owner of a 
Betamax player or an orphaned mobile phone power adapter can attest, stan-
dards (or the lack thereof) can have real-world impacts. Consumers benefit 
from  product  interoperability,  increased  product  choices,  and  competition 
between vendors.  
Notwithstanding the importance of standards, the standards-development 
process is not well understood. Few people, including practicing lawyers and 
graduating law students, have a comprehensive view of standards develop-
ment. Some ICT company representatives (and their associated consultants 
and service providers) are experts at standards development, but this expertise 
tends to be narrowly focused on achieving immediate business objectives in 
particular technology areas. Knowledge is rarely shared in a systematic way 
outside of a particular company. Regulators and policymakers have some 
insight into standards development (for example, in the course of investigating 
a problematic standardization activity, or when participating in government-
driven efforts) but they have relatively little insight into private-sector-driven 
efforts and rarely capture or share knowledge in a comprehensive way. Stan-
dards are a black box for consumers; they blissfully enjoy the benefits without 
any knowledge of the operations or development. And academic analysis of 
standards development has been sparse. A recent paper by four economists at 
the Harvard Business School noted, “[I]t is striking how little work has ad-
dressed the question of how standards-setting organizations work in prac-
tice.”13 A discussion of the variety of SSOs is warranted. 
B. The Variety of Standards-Setting Organizations 
The ASU Workshop described in the introduction to this article brought 
together leading practitioners, scholars, and other stakeholders with extensive 
experience in standards development. Given the level of expertise of the work-
shop participants, the authors of this paper were struck by the observation that 
the participants did not share a common vocabulary or conceptual framework 
for describing different standards-development structures and methodologies. 
Here, the authors explore a framework for understanding the variety of ways 
SSOs  are  organized,  with  a  particular  focus  on  less  formal  standards-
development methodologies.14 For context, some examples of standards and 
the organizations that created them are:  
                                                                                                           
Policy, 2005 INST. ELECTRICAL ELECTRONIC ENGINEER SEC. STANDARDIZATION INNOVATION 
INFO. TECH. PROC. 283–84 (comparing European and American regulatory standards). 
  12. Jane K. Winn & Nicolas Jondet, A “New Approach” to Standards and Consumer 
Protection, 31 J. CONSUMER POL’Y 459, 464 (2008).  
  13. Delacey et al., supra note 7, at 3. 
  14. During the workshop participants discussed a framework based in part on a “SSO Tax-
onomy” described in a white paper published by the Intellectual Property Owners Association 
(IPO). INTELL. PROP. OWNERS ASSOC. STANDARDS SETTING COMM., INTELL. PROP. OWNERS 
ASS’N, STANDARDS PRIMER: AN OVERVIEW OF STANDARDS SETTING BODIES AND PATENT-
RELATED ISSUES THAT ARISE IN THE CONTEXT OF STANDARD SETTING ACTIVITIES 3–9 (2009) 
[hereinafter STANDARDS PRIMER], available at http://www.ipo.org/AM/Template.cfm?Section= 
 
 
WINTER 2012  181 Biddle et al. 
 
  WiFi: 802.11 specifications developed by the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics  Engineers  (IEEE),  a  large  member-driven  501(c)(3)15 
nonprofit SSO.16 The Wi-Fi Alliance, a 501(c)(6) industry association 
made  up  of  400  company  members,  provides  compliance  testing 
(including a “WiFi Certified” logo program) and marketing services.17 
 
  USB: The USB Promoters Group, a contractual arrangement between a 
small group of major ICT companies, acts as steward for the USB 
specifications; the USB Implementers Forum, a 501(c)(6) body with 800 
members, distributes the specifications and provides compliance testing 
and marketing.18  
 
  SMS: SMS was developed as part of the Global Systems Mobile (GSM) 
telephony protocol, which was initially created by a consortium of 13 
European  governments  and  then  later  transferred  to  the  European 
Telecommunications  Standards  Institute  (ETSI),  an  independent 
nonprofit SSO.19 
 
  3G  and  4G:  3G  and  4G  are  families  of  standards  for  wireless 
communications defined by the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU), a Geneva-based U.N. body run by government member states.20  
 
  MP3: Created by the Moving Picture Experts Group, a working group of 
the International Standards Organization (ISO).21 ISO is a Geneva-based 
international-standard-setting body composed of representatives from 
various national standards organizations.22  
 
  DVD and Blu-Ray: The DVD and Blu-Ray optical disc formats were 
established through private negotiations between commercial parties and 
are  managed  by  the  DVD  Forum  and  Blu-ray  Disc  Association, 
                                                                                                           
Search&section=Standards_Setting_Webinar_10_21_09&template=/CM/ContentDisplay.cfm&Co
ntentFileID=61348. Part I.B of this article draws from concepts in the IPO paper and from the 
related workshop discussion, but ultimately reflects solely the views of the authors.  
  15. Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code identifies different types of nonprofit 
corporations. See 26 U.S.C. (c) of t (2006). See also infra Part I.B.2.c. 
  16. Organization, WI-FI ALLIANCE, http://www.wi-fi.org/organization.php (last visited Nov. 
25, 2011). 
  17. Id. 
  18. About USB Implementers Forum, Inc., USB IMPLEMENTERS FORUM, INC., http://www. 
usb.org/about (last visited Nov. 25, 2011).  
  19. About 3GPP, 3GPP, http://www.3gpp.org/About-3GPP (last visited Nov. 28, 2011); see 
also 1. Introduction to SMS Messaging, DEVELOPER’S HOME (Nov. 28, 2011), http://www. 
developershome.com/sms/smsIntro.asp. 
  20. IMT-Advanced (4G) Mobile Wireless Broadband on the Anvil, INT'L TELECOMM. UNION 
(Nov. 21, 2010), http://www.itu.int/newsroom/press_releases/2009/48.html; Licensing Policy for 
3G Generation Mobile, INT'L TELECOMM. UNION (Apr. 4, 2011), http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/3G/.  
  21. Overview of the MPEG Committee, MP3’ TECH, http://www.mp3-tech.org/ (last visited 
Nov. 28, 2011). 
  22. About ISO, INT’L ORG. FOR STANDARDIZATION, http://www.iso.org/iso/about.htm (last 
visited Jan. 4, 2012). 
 
182  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
respectively.23 The DVD Forum is an unincorporated association based 
in Japan and made up of member companies.24 The Blu-Ray Disc 
Association is a California Nonprofit Mutual Benefit Corporation.25   
 
  HTML: Originally proposed as a standard by the Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF), the standardization arm of the nonprofit Internet 
Society;  later  established  by  the  World  Wide  Web  Consortium,  a 
nonprofit with 360 diverse members. HTML was also adopted as an ISO 
standard.26  
  
First, Part II.B.1 describes the basic organizational differences among dif-
ferent types of SSOs. Part II.B.2 describes different organizational approaches 
employed by one subtype of SSO: Consortia.  
1. SDOs v. Consortia 
While SSOs make it their business to develop and promulgate standards, 
specifications and guidelines, they do not themselves have standardized struc-
tures. At the highest level, SSOs can be broken down into two types: (1) for-
mal  standards-development  organizations  (SDOs);  and  (2)  specification-
development consortia or special interest groups (sometimes called SIGs or 
Fora but referred to in this paper as Consortia). That is, the superset of SSOs 
is comprised of two subsets: SDOs and Consortia.  
The defining characteristic of an SDO is formal recognition by a govern-
ment authority (although, as described below, in the case of U.S.-based SDOs 
this quality of government recognition is attenuated).27 The most well-known 
SDOs are the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), the Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization (ISO), and the International Electro-
technical Commission (IEC). These are international bodies that develop and 
adopt formal international standards.28 There are also regional SDOs, such as 
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), which is recog-
                                                                                                           
  23. About DVD Forum, DVD FORUM, http://www.dvdforum.org/about-mission.htm (last 
visited Nov. 28, 2011); BLU-RAY DISC ASS’N, http://us.blu-raydisc.com/ (last visited Nov. 28, 
2011).  
  24. The DVD Forum Charter, DVD FORUM, http://www.dvdforum.org/about-charter.htm 
(last updated Mar. 8, 2010). 
  25. BLU-RAY  DISC  ASS’N,  AMENDED  &  RESTATED  BYLAWS  OF  BLU-RAY  DISC 
ASSOCIATION 1  (2010), available at http://www.blu-raydisc.com/Assets/Downloadablefile/BDA_ 
Bylaws_%28v2.0%29-18618.pdf. 
  26. Mission, W3C (Oct. 14, 2011, 5:00 AM), http://www.w3.org/Interaction/.  
  27. Winn, supra note 11, at 283–284.  
  28. Membership in each organization is led by national delegations. STANDARDS PRIMER, 
supra note 14, at 4. The ITU, ISO and IEC have historically been acknowledged as the principal 
bodies that can produce formal international standards that are recognized under the World Trade 
Organization’s Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) Agreement. Id. For a critical assessment of this 
phenomenon, see James A. Thomas, PlainTalk: Time to Take Stock, ASTM STANDARDIZATION 
NEWS (Aug. 2000), http://www.astm.org/PRESIDENT/08_00_time_to_take_stock.html.  
 
WINTER 2012  183 Biddle et al. 
 
nized by the European Union.29 Additionally, almost every country has some 
form of national body to oversee and coordinate its standardization process.  
In the United States, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) is 
the national body that provides input to the ISO and IEC on behalf of the 
United States.30 Notably, ANSI is not a government agency, but rather an inde-
pendent nonprofit entity. ANSI itself does not develop standards, but it does 
accredit SSOs that comport with ANSI’s rules. ANSI designates standards as 
“American National Standards” when certain criteria are met. Given the quasi-
governmental role played by ANSI, SSOs accredited by ANSI sufficiently 
meet the government recognition criteria such that the 200-plus standards 
setting organizations accredited by ANSI would be considered SDOs in our 
taxonomy. ANSI-accredited SDOs include organizations that are quite impor-
tant to the ICT industry, such as the IEEE31 (which developed the WiFi32 and 
Ethernet specifications,33 among other things) and the JEDEC Solid State 
Technology Association, formerly known as the Joint Electron Devices Engi-
neering Council (JEDEC) (which develops widely adopted computer-memory-
related specifications).34  
The government recognition test provides the most categorical distinction 
between an SDO and a Consortium, but other generalizations apply. SDOs are 
typically open to all interested participants and they follow robust procedural 
rules aimed at ensuring transparency and due process for all participants.35 As 
discussed further below, Consortia often limit participation and employ more 
streamlined governance models. SDOs usually refer to their technical specifi-
cations as standards, while Consortia often frame their output as industry 
specifications. However, there are exceptions to these general rules. Nongo-
vernmental participation is limited at the ITU, for example. Additionally, 
organizations like the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) or the IETF—
                                                                                                           
  29. About ETSI, EUR. TELECOMM. STANDARDS INST., http://www.etsi.org/WebSite/About 
ETSI/AboutEtsi.aspx (last visited Jan. 4, 2012).   
  30. Introduction to ANSI, AM. NAT’L STANDARDS INST., http://www.ansi.org/about_ansi/ 
introduction/introduction.aspx?menuid=1 (last visited Jan. 4, 2012).   
  31. AM. NAT’L STANDARDS INST., ANSI ACCREDITED STANDARDS DEVELOPERS 81 (Jan. 3, 
2012), http://publicaa.ansi.org/sites/apdl/Documents/Standards%20Activities/American%20National 
%20Standards/ANSI%20Accredited%20Standards%20Developers/JAN12ASD.pdf. 
  32. WI-FI ALLIANCE, WI-FI CERTIFIEDTM MAKES IT W-FI: AN OVERVIEW OF THE WI-FI 
ALLIANCE APPROACH TO CERTIFICATION 2 (Sept. 2006), http://www.wi-fi.org/sites/default/files/ 
membersonly/WFA_Certification_Overview_WP_en.pdf. 
  33. Iljitsch van Beijnum, Speed Matters: How Ethernet Went from 3Mbps to 100Gbps . . . 
and Beyond, ARS TECHNICA (July 14, 2011 9:30 PM), http://arstechnica.com/gadgets/news/2011/ 
07/ethernet-how-does-it-work.ars. 
  34. AM. NAT’L STANDARDS INST., supra note 31, at 97; JEDEC-Talking Points Fact Sheet, 
JEDEC,  http://www.jedec.org/sites/default/files/JEDEC-TalkingPointsFactSheet-final_sm.pdf  (last 
visited Jan. 4, 2012). 
  35. See, e.g., ANSI Essential Requirements: Due Process Requirements for American 
National Standards, AM. NAT’L STANDARDS INST., 4 (Jan. 2010), http://publicaa.ansi.org/sites/ 
apdl/Documents/Standards%20Activities/American%20National%20Standards/Procedures,%20G
uides,%20and%20Forms/2010%20ANSI%20Essential%20Requirements%20and%20Related/201
0%20ANSI%20Essential%20Requirements.pdf. 
 
184  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
Consortia in our broad categorization—have participation and procedural rules 
similar to those of many SDOs. IETF and W3C are also examples of Consortia 
that refer to their output as “standards.”  
The organizational structure and operational procedures of SDOs gener-
ally tend to be well documented and reasonably well understood. Consortia, in 
contrast, are often opaque to nonparticipants. Further, Consortia are structured 
in a bewildering variety of ways. A description of the various types of Con-
sortia follows. These Consortia run the gamut from reciprocal licensing pro-
grams to nonprofit, mutual benefit corporations. As it is with SSOs generally, 
rarely can it be said that one size of Consortia will fit all, or that any two Con-
sortia will exactly mirror each other. 
2. Types of Consortia 
There are a number of models and techniques for the development of in-
dustry specifications. Sometimes, the promoters of a specification—several 
companies acting in concert, or potentially a single company—will simply 
define and publish a specification. In other cases the promoters may decide 
that a more formal structure is needed, especially where there will be multiple 
related specifications and updates, or when sophisticated compliance testing 
efforts are necessary. The latter model is driven by the particular motivation of 
the early promoters, and potentially influenced by the needs of adopters of the 
specification. Part I.B.2 describes several models of specification develop-
ment, including Single Promoter Specifications, Contractual Consortia, Incor-
porated Consortia, a hybrid model, and others. 
a. Single-Promoter Specifications 
While not technically a Consortium, one of the most basic forms of pro-
motion for a specification is for a single company to make a specification 
available for industry adoption. The company may employ a so-called just 
publish model, which would not include the promise of a patent license to 
those claims necessary for the implementation of the specification (often de-
fined as Necessary Claims). To foster broader adoption of the specification, 
however, many companies include a covenant not to assert Necessary Claims 
when they are used to implement the specification. Examples of this can be 
seen in the Microsoft Open Specification Promise36 and IBM’s Interoperability 
Specifications Pledge.37 
A promoter of a specification might also call for the execution of a 
royalty-free license agreement, which grants implementers a license to Neces-
sary Claims of the specification promoter and requires the implementer to 
                                                                                                           
  36. Open Specification Promise, MICROSOFT CORP., http://www.microsoft.com/openspecific 
ations/en/us/programs/osp/default.aspx (last visited Nov. 25, 2011) [hereinafter Microsoft Open 
Specification Promise].  
  37. Interoperability Specifications Pledge, IBM, http://www-03.ibm.com/linux/ossstds/Isp 
list.html (last visited Nov. 24, 2011).  
 
WINTER 2012  185 Biddle et al. 
 
license its own Necessary Claims to the promoter of the specification and any 
other implementers. Intel uses this model with the Enhanced Host Controller 
Interface (EHCI) specification, for example.38 
The business motive for the single-promoter approach often appears to be 
that the promoters are encouraging adoption of noncore technologies to drive 
the market demand for their core technologies. The promoter develops the 
specification, essentially giving it away to the industry to promote competition 
between implementers, while at the same time driving the demand for the 
promoter’s products. 
b. Contractual Consortia  
In some circumstances, multiple promoters jointly develop a specification. 
In such a scenario, each promoter may be willing to contribute their Necessary 
Claims, but each also wants a licensing commitment from the other promoters. 
The promoters will execute a Promoters Agreement, which addresses the 
licensing commitment in Necessary Claims and joint ownership in the specifi-
cation copyright.  A Promoters Agreement typically  establishes procedural 
rules for developing specifications, including the process  for contributing 
Necessary Claims, reviewing draft specifications, and adopting final specifi-
cations. A Promoters Agreement generally will also include some sort of go-
vernance provisions, defining decision-making procedures and other logistical 
concerns. This Promoters Agreement is the basic building block of the Con-
tractual Consortium. 
In situations where the promoters are hoping to further develop the speci-
fication or drive quick industry adoption, they will include provisions within 
the Promoters Agreement that allow other companies to contribute ideas into 
the specification development process, and to enable implementers to adopt 
the specification. This is usually accomplished with another set of agreements 
known as Contributors Agreements and Adopters Agreements.39  
A Contributors Agreement will often mirror the Promoters Agreement in 
that it will require the contributor to contribute Necessary Claims to the speci-
fication, or later versions of the original specification. Like the Promoters 
Agreement, it will set forth the requirements for participating in meetings 
where the specifications are developed. In contrast, an Adopters Agreement 
will usually be limited to a reciprocal licensing commitment and will not allow 
adopters to participate in specification development. 
                                                                                                           
  38. EHCI Specification, INTEL CORP., http://www.intel.com/technology/usb/ehcispec.htm 
(last visited Nov. 24, 2011). 
  39. For an example of a Contributor Agreement for the Wireless USB specification, see, 
Wireless Host Controller Interface Specification for Wireless Universal Serial Bus-Contributor 
Agreement, INTEL CORP. (Jun. 3, 2004), http://www.intel.org/content/dam/doc/technical-specifi 
cation/wireless-host-controller-ubs-interface-contributor-agreement.pdf. For a copy of the associated 
Adopters Agreement, see Wireless USB Adopters Agreement, USB IMPLEMENTERS FORUM INC., 
http://www.usb.org/developers/wusb/WUSB_Adopters_Agreement_Final_020411.pdf (last visited 
Nov. 25, 2011). 
 
186  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
The mere adoption of a specification through one or many contracts is not 
always enough to police compliance with the specification. Promoters may 
want to ensure that products that implement the specification actually comply 
with the technical requirements of the specification. Accordingly, the promo-
ters may include interoperability or compliance-testing-requirements provi-
sions within the various agreements. These programs may be administered 
through so-called plug fests where promoters, contributors, and adopters get 
together and test the interoperability of their products or use some other means 
of  determining  compliance  with  the  specification.40  An  example  of  a 
multiagreement Contractual Consortium with a compliance program may be 
found in the MXM Graphics Module SIG.41 
The Contractual Consortia model may be viewed as fast and efficient, 
avoiding the costs and time associated with establishing a more formal, inde-
pendent consortium. There are potential drawbacks to the Contractual Consor-
tia model, however. Legal risks arise in the areas of partnership and trademark 
law, and promoters of Contractual Consortia may face certain practical im-
plementation challenges. 
The Promoters Agreement and the associated Contributors and Adopters 
Agreements typically include a disclaimer of partnership. Regardless of this 
disclaimer, those not privy to these contracts may believe that the various 
contracting parties have created an association of two or more persons en-
gaged in an enterprise: the enterprise of specification development and pro-
motion. The legal definition of a partnership is generally stated as “an associa-
tion of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners a business for profit.”42 
While it can be argued that the contracts that create Contractual Consortia do 
not contemplate group profit, it can also be argued that the reason for execut-
ing these agreements is to allow the contracting parties to benefit in some 
manner. If a Contractual Consortia is determined to be a legal partnership, 
partnership liability claims could be raised against the various parties to these 
agreements, although the likelihood of success is unclear.  
Assuming that the group does not meet the definition of partnership, 
questions concerning ownership of any trademarks or service marks associated 
with the specification become complex. Because there is no independent entity 
(no partnership or incorporated body), the service mark or marks must be held 
by one of the contracting parties and licensed to the other parties. This may, in 
                                                                                                           
  40. See, e.g., Cindy Arce, What’s a Plugfest?, CEA DIGITAL DIALOGUE (Mar. 12, 2010),  
http://blog.ce.org/index.php/2010/03/12/whats-a-plugfest/. For more on CEA-hosted plugfests,  
see also PlugFests, CONSUMER ELECTRONICS ASS’N, http://www.ce.org/Standards/plugfests.asp 
(last visited Jan. 4, 2012).  For a description of a Microsoft-hosted plugfest, see Plugfests and 
Events, MICROSOFT CORP., http://www.microsoft.com/openspecifications/en/us/applied-interoper 
ability/testing/plugfests-and-events/default.aspx (last visited Jan. 4, 2012). 
  41. MXM  Graphics  Module,  MXM-SIG.ORG,  http://www.mxm-sig.org/index.cfm  (last 
visited Nov. 24, 2011).  
  42. REVISED UNIF. P’SHIP ACT § 101 (1997). 
 
WINTER 2012  187 Biddle et al. 
 
turn, lead to administrative costs and burdens placed on the licensing party that 
that party might not want. 
The contractual model also creates money-management challenges. If the 
promoters desire to share costs associated with some aspect of specification 
development—even something as simple as costs of reserving hotel confe-
rence rooms, for example—then one promoter must act as a de facto treasurer 
for the group, collecting and disbursing funds from other promoters. For many 
companies this sort of activity may be impossible as an accounting matter, and 
perhaps could create some legal risks (for example, if funds were misma-
naged) even where logistically feasible.  
c. Incorporated Consortia 
Perhaps the most formal Consortia structures are Incorporated Consortia. 
In the United States, these organizations are usually organized under Section 
501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code, as well as the nonprofit-corporation 
statutes of the domicile jurisdiction.43 Merely being organized under these 
statutes does not in itself qualify the organization for tax-exempt status. In-
stead, the corporate entity must file the appropriate applications for recogni-
tion of tax-exempt status.44  
Incorporated Consortia may be formed to develop and promote one par-
ticular specification or family of specifications, or to develop and publish best-
practices documents or design guidelines. For instance, PCI-SIG was origi-
nally established to promote the PCI Local Bus Specification, a method of 
connecting different components inside a computer.45 Over time, the base 
specification was adapted and updated into a family of interconnected specifi-
cations such as the PCI-X and PCI Express specifications.46 The Digital Living 
Network Alliance, on the other hand, has developed a number of design 
guidelines that in effect delineate best practices in the development of inter-
connected products for home entertainment networks.47 It does this by refe-
rencing existing standards and specifications instead of developing its own 
independent specifications.  
Like Contractual Consortia, Incorporated Consortia are organized around 
multilateral contracts. In this case, the contract is a Membership or Participa-
tion Agreement. Among other things, this agreement requires the members of 
the Consortium to abide by the obligations set forth in the Consortium’s By-
laws and Intellectual Property Rights Policy in exchange for access to mem-
                                                                                                           
  43.26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(6) (2006). 
  44. INTERNAL REVENUE SERV., U.S. DEP’T OF THE TREASURY, PUB. NO. 557, TAX-EXEMPT 
STATUS FOR YOUR ORGANIZATION, at 47 (2010), available at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p 
557.pdf; see also Bluetooth SIG Inc. v. United States, 611 F.3d 617, 620–621 (9th Cir. 2010). 
  45. PCI-SIG Overview, PCI-SIG, http://www.pcisig.com/news_room/overview/association/ 
pcisig_overview.pdf (last visited Nov. 25, 2011).  
  46. See Specifications, PCI-SIG, http://www.pcisig.com/specifications (last visited Jan. 6, 
2012).  
  47. Getting Started, DIGITAL LIVING NETWORK ALLIANCE, http://www.dlna.org/digital_ 
living/getting_started/ (last visited Nov. 24, 2011). 
 
188  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
bership benefits, which include access to the specifications or design guide-
lines and the benefits of the licensing commitments that accompany them.  
Just as Contractual Consortia have different levels of contracts with dif-
ferent rights and obligations, Incorporated Consortia may have different mem-
bership levels. Some organizations, such as PCI-SIG, have only one level of 
membership with all members treated equally.48 Others, such as the Continua 
Health Alliance (an organization focused on establishing systems of interoper-
able telehealth devices and services), have three levels of membership with the 
highest level paying the highest dues but enjoying more member benefits than 
the lower, less-expensive levels.49 The various membership levels tend to 
mirror the three types of Contractual Consortia agreements: promoters, contri-
butors and adopters. 
Incorporated Consortia Bylaws provide for the governance of the organi-
zation as well as the process for the development of specifications or design 
guidelines. The Bylaws may provide for the election of Directors, the perma-
nent right for certain members to appoint Directors, or a combination of per-
manent and elected seats on the Board of Directors. Likewise, the Bylaws will 
generally provide for the establishment of working groups to handle the actual 
development of the specifications or design guidelines, as well as groups to 
handle marketing and groups to run compliance or certification programs. 
Incorporated Consortia with multiple membership levels may limit participa-
tion, voting, and governance of working groups to certain membership levels. 
Finally, the Bylaws will delineate the various qualifications and benefits af-
forded to the different membership levels, or members as a whole. 
Like Contractual Consortia, Incorporated Consortia typically provide their 
members with a promise by the other members to grant them licenses in the 
Necessary Claims needed to implement the Consortia’s specification. This 
Intellectual Property Rights Policy may be a stand-alone document, or in-
cluded in the Bylaws.  
Among the benefits of Incorporated Consortia are the ability to own and 
license trademarks associated with the group’s specifications or design guide-
lines. Included with these benefits is the ability to administer compliance or 
certification programs associated with using the Consortium’s marks with the 
compliant or certified products of its members. Additionally, the corporate 
structure  makes  managing money easier, as the promoters can contribute 
funding into a bank account controlled by the entity. Finally, as an indepen-
dent entity, the Incorporated Consortia avoids any partnership implications 
that may be associated with Contractual Consortia. 
                                                                                                           
  48. See, e.g., Join PCI-SIG, PCI-SIG, http://www.pcisig.com/membership/join_pci_sig/ (last 
visited Jan. 4, 2012) (offering membership for $3000). 
  49. See, e.g., Continua Health Alliance Membership, CONTINUA HEALTH ALLIANCE, http:// 
www.continuaalliance.org/about-the-alliance/join.html (last visited Jan. 4, 2012) (offering the 
opportunity to join as a “Promoter,” “Contributor” or “Supporting Participant,” at different price 
points and with different associated membership benefits). 
 
WINTER 2012  189 Biddle et al. 
 
d. The Hybrid (Combining Elements of Contractual and Incorporated    
    Consortia) 
The Promoters of a Contractual Consortia specification may opt to addi-
tionally establish an independent incorporated nonprofit entity to drive indus-
try adoption of the specification. Under this model, specification development 
and ownership is governed by a contract between the promoters, but other 
matters—such as trademark ownership, marketing functions, and interactions 
with adopters—are handled by an independent organization. This independent 
nonprofit organization may operate a compliance program and can own and 
license the service marks or certification marks associated with the specifica-
tion (thus avoiding the trademark ownership issue). Perhaps the most promi-
nent example of this model is the USB Implementers Forum.50  
A similar hybrid option for promoters is to create a limited liability com-
pany or other for-profit corporation to act as an agent for the promoters and 
manage the licensing and compliance programs under the specification. High-
Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) serves as a prominent example of 
this model. In the case of HDMI, adopters can execute an agreement with 
HDMI LLC that provides a license to Necessary Claims of the promoter com-
panies, a trademark license, and various other rights.51 This limited patent pool 
is then intended as a unitary resource for implementers to obtain the licenses 
necessary to implement the specification or participate in the entity’s com-
pliance programs.52  
Hybrid models enable promoters to engage in specification development 
under a contractual agreement, but delegate the complexity associated with 
managing adopter relationships and compliance-testing programs to a separate 
legal entity. The promoters, however, may find that the contractual model still 
becomes unwieldy. For example, any time the promoters want to engage with 
any separate legal entity (their own agent or any other party), the agreement of 
all promoters is required. Over time the administrative burden of obtaining 
separate approval and signatures on multiparty agreements may prove ineffi-
cient.  
e. Other Models  
One of the perceived drawbacks of Incorporated Consortia is the time and 
expense associated with the actual organization of the entity. Given multiple 
founders, the negotiation of the Bylaws and Intellectual Property Rights Poli-
cies of Incorporated Consortia can be burdensome. One attempt at alleviating 
this burden can be found in the structure of Institute of Electrical and Elec-
                                                                                                           
  50. USB-IF Compliance Program, USB IMPLEMENTERS FORUM, INC., http://www.usb.org/ 
developers/compliance/ (last visited Nov. 25, 2011). 
  51. HDMI Specification Adopter Agreement, HDMI, 3–5, http://www.hdmi.com/pdf/HDMI_ 
Adopter_Agreement_2002.11.01.pdf (last visited Nov 23, 2011). 
  52. See e.g., Becoming an Adopter, HDMI, http://www.hdmi.org/manufacturer/adopter_ 
registration.aspx (last visited Nov. 23, 2011).  
 
190  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
tronics Engineers Industry Standards and Technology Organization (IEEE-
ISTO).53 IEEE-ISTO’s goal is to serve as an umbrella organization to adminis-
ter various programs that are, in most aspects, similar to individual subsidiary 
corporations. The different programs define their own missions, set their own 
dues and largely define their own governing rules. IEEE-ISTO pools the re-
sources of its member programs under one corporation and provides the mem-
ber programs with most of the administrative and corporate compliance ser-
vices necessary for them to operate as they would if they were independent 
entities.  
Another model, conceptually distinct from a Consortium, is the “many-to-
many licensing model” adopted by MPEG LA, a firm that attempts to aggre-
gate particular standards-related patent claims into a patent pool that can be 
accessed by any adopter.54 The licensing policies in many Consortia include a 
promise of access to a license in Necessary Claims, but it is not up to the Con-
sortium to go out and secure the licenses for the members. The MPEG LA 
patent pool model attempts to fill this gap. Standards and specifications are 
administered under one umbrella entity, where the actual licenses are granted 
to those who wish to implement the standards and specifications. This affords 
the implementers of the standard or specification with some level of certainty 
that they have all of the licenses necessary to implement, without having to 
search for and negotiate multiple patent licenses.  
Patent pools and Incorporated Consortia can work together in a model 
adopted by the HDBaseT Alliance, a Consortium focused on digital home 
networking.55 Under this model, specification development and other adminis-
trative duties are carried out under the Incorporated Consortium. Most of the 
original licenses of Necessary Claims under the first HDBaseT specification 
are handled both as a promise of a license in the Alliance Intellectual Property 
Rights Policy as well as a patent pool where that promise is fulfilled.  
C. Complicating Factors in Standards Development 
The problem of poor understanding of standards and standard setting is 
compounded by the extraordinary complexity of the ICT standards develop-
ment process. Standards can and do vary “in scope, specificity, flexibility, 
exactitude, cost, and payoff.”56 Industry technical specifications and standards 
are developed in a bewildering variety of ways: some are driven by govern-
ments; some by large, diverse groups of industry and academia; some by large 
industry groups; some by small groups of companies; still others by noncom-
mercial grassroots efforts. 
                                                                                                           
  53. IEEE-ISTO, http://www.ieee-isto.org (last visited Nov. 25, 2011).  
  54. About, MPEG LA, http://www.mpegla.com/main/Pages/About.aspx (last visited Nov. 24, 
2011) (internal quotation marks omitted).  
  55. About the Alliance, HDBASET ALLIANCE, http://hdbaset.org/about_us. (last visited Nov. 
25, 2011). 
  56. Timmermans & Epstein, supra note 2, at 75. 
 
WINTER 2012  191 Biddle et al. 
 
There are other important scenarios—such as relatively informal contract-
based technical collaborations between parties—which result in a technical 
specification that the parties themselves adopt and make available to others 
(for example, a supplier may agree on an interface with one customer and then 
publish that interface specification so that other customers can also use it). 
Sometimes these informally developed specifications are provided to more 
formal  standards-development  organizations  and  evolve  into  formal  stan-
dards.57 
Another complicated area that is indirectly related to standards develop-
ment is the world of open-source software. While typically developing soft-
ware code instead of technical specifications, open-source efforts demonstrate 
informal but often highly effective mechanisms for organizing interested par-
ties and agreeing upon technical details. Increasingly, methodology and con-
cepts pioneered in the open-source software communities are being applied to 
standard setting in a wide variety of contexts in the ICT sector and else-
where.58 
Two additional factors have recently emerged that add to the complexity 
of the ICT standards-development environment. Telecommunications, soft-
ware, and hardware have historically been standardized in different forums, 
subject to different rules and different cultures. Increasingly these lines are 
blurring as technologies converge, creating confusion and culture clashes as 
different standardization paradigms collide. Forums and methods that worked 
for one sector seem alien or ineffective to those familiar with another sector. 
For example, the relatively freewheeling culture of the Internet Engineering 
Task Force—the group that produces a number of key Internet standards—
may prove difficult to navigate for a telecommunications industry engineer 
accustomed to the long-established, highly formal processes of the Interna-
tional Telecommunications Union. 
Another complicating factor is globalization.59 Most countries have na-
tional standards bodies that regulate different national industries. The ICT 
industry, in contrast, is fundamentally global. Moreover, much of the ICT 
standardization activity has been driven by the private sector. This model has 
worked well under the U.S. government’s approach to standards. Other na-
tional standards bodies are struggling to define their role within ICT standards, 
                                                                                                           
  57. See, e.g., David Ng, One Size-Fits-All Mobile Phone Charger: IEC Publishes First 
Standard,  CELLULAR  NEWS  (Jan.  10,  2011),  http://www.cellular-news.com/story/47664.php 
(describing the adoption by the IEC of a specification developed by the USB Implementers Fo-
rum).  
  58. Laura DeNardis, Open Standards and Global Politics, 13 INT'L J. COMM. L. & POL’Y 
168, 179 (2009); Nicos L. Tsilas, The Threat to Innovation, Interoperability, and Government 
Procurement Options from Recently Proposed Definitions of “Open Standards,” 10 INT'L J. 
COMM. L. & POL’Y (SPECIAL ISSUE) 1, 1 (2005); Andy Updegrove, W3C Launches New “Agile” 
Standards Development Platform, CONSORTIUMINFO.ORG (Aug. 17, 2011, 8:04 AM), http://www. 
consortiuminfo.org/standardsblog/article.php?story=20110817080459979.  
  59. See generally Gibson, supra note 11 (discussing how globalization complicates standards 
setting). 
 
192  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
however, and in some cases seem uncomfortable with the bottom-up, private-
sector-oriented model generally favored by U.S. policymakers and most com-
mercial interests.60  
The diversity of models used in the formation and administration of SSOs 
suggests that one size cannot fit all. The differing needs and desires of the key 
players in the development of standards and industry specifications seem to 
dictate a need for flexibility in the organization and administration of SSOs. 
The models discussed above are only a few of the more notable examples. Just 
as new specifications are constantly under development, so too are refinements 
to the organizational models for SSOs. At the same time, the diversity of stan-
dard-development models potentially may create inefficiency. Better under-
standing  of  different  models  may  enable  more  streamlined  and  effective 
specification-development efforts. Future research might focus on identifying 
conditions where one model would be more effective than another. To aid 
such future research, a discussion of some of the specific problems with cur-
rent standard-setting protocol is warranted. 
 
II. KEY CHALLENGES IN  
STANDARD-SETTING 
 
This Part explores two particular problem areas  within  contemporary 
models of standards development: intellectual property policies and ethical 
dilemmas. The difficulty of balancing the different intellectual property inter-
ests  of  various  stakeholders  is  a  well-recognized—if  rather  intractable— 
problem in standards development. The potential for ethical conflicts, such as 
the possibility that an individual’s membership on an SSO board could clash 
with ethical duties owed to his employer, is a less-explored phenomenon, but 
also presents some difficult tensions. 
A. Intellectual Property Policies 
The relationship between standards and patents has long been a favorite 
topic of standards-focused legal experts. Notwithstanding our earlier assertion 
that standards generally are an underexplored area of academic inquiry, the 
particular topic of patents and standards has generated a significant amount of 
academic analysis.61 Unsurprisingly, the subject generated robust and sophisti-
cated discussion at the ASU Workshop. The discussion in this Part draws 
inspiration from that discussion, but ultimately attempts a modest feat: we 
outline a framework for understanding several key patent-related issues in 
                                                                                                           
  60. Jane K. Winn, Globalization and Standards: The Logic of Two-Level Games 5 I/S J. L. 
POL’Y FOR INFO. SOC’Y 185, 199 (2009). 
  61. See  generally  Brad  Biddle,  Literature  Review:  Recent  Scholarship  Focused  on 
Technology Standards (Jan. 2005–Jul. 2009), STANDARDSLAW.ORG (Aug. 16, 2009), http:// 
standardslaw.org/wp-content/uploads/Standards_Lit_Review_Biddle_16AUG09.pdf  (identifying 
41 academic papers focused on patents and standards). 
 
WINTER 2012  193 Biddle et al. 
 
standards development from the perspective of an ICT company engaged in a 
standards-setting effort. The goal is to provide an introduction to, and sum-
mary of, three important concepts that are addressed in SSO intellectual prop-
erty policies: the definition of necessary claims, the scope and nature of patent 
licensing obligations, and patent disclosure rules.  
ICT companies face a risk when they implement a specification or stan-
dard that the company’s actions relating to that implementation potentially 
infringe upon patent rights held by another party. In other words, absent a 
license granted by the owner of such a patent, companies must consider 
whether the company’s efforts to implement an SSO’s published standard 
could result in a patent infringement claim by the owner. 
These concerns about potential blocking patents are exacerbated by the 
fact that the development of cutting-edge interoperable and compatible devices 
and other technologies often implicates a large number of patent rights held by 
multiple patent holders. For example, building a mobile device with multiple 
features and components could possibly implicate up to hundreds of patents 
held by others.62 Given the likelihood that features specified by various stan-
dards will include patented technology, a company that implements the SSO’s 
standards will want to understand and reduce the risk of being sued for patent 
infringement by a holder of a potential blocking patent.  
Part II.A.1 discusses IP Policies within an SSO generally. Next, the con-
cept and impact of necessary claims is introduced in Part II.A.2. Parts II.A.3–4 
then discuss common SSO contractual obligations that require participating 
patent holders to grant licenses to necessary claims and disclose their relevant 
patent portfolios. 
1. Adoption of SSO IP Policies 
Because of concerns about potential blocking patents and other IP issues, 
SSOs generally negotiate and adopt a policy, often called a Patent Policy or an 
Intellectual Property Right Policy (herein collectively referred to as IP Policy), 
which attempts to address, among other issues, certain concerns about poten-
tial blocking patents owned or otherwise controlled by SSO participants.63 
Many SSOs take steps to have their IP Policies impose reciprocal licensing 
promises on all implementers, even those that were not actively involved in 
development of the particular standard.64 SSOs have no ability to impose li-
censing obligations on parties who choose not to participate in the SSO. Con-
                                                                                                           
  62. See Mark A. Lemley, Ten Things to Do About Patent Holdup of Standards (and One Not 
to), 48 B.C. L. REV. 149, 150–51 (2007) (providing a general discussion of problems presented by 
multiple patents in the ICT field).  
  63. See  COMM.  ON  TECHNICAL  STANDARDIZATION,  AM.  BAR  ASS’N.,  STANDARDS 
DEVELOPMENT PATENT POLICY MANUAL ix–xiii (Jorge L. Contreras ed., 2007) [hereinafter 
PATENT POLICY MANUAL] (providing a detailed overview of the many issues and provisions that 
are typically addressed in an SSO’s IP Policy). 
  64. See discussion infra Part II.A.3. 
 
194  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
sequently, the IP Policy cannot solve the problem of potential blocking patents 
owned or controlled by a nonparticipant. 
2. IP Policies Focus on Necessary Claims 
IP Policies typically do not attempt to govern every conceivable type of 
patent claim that may arise in the development and subsequent implementation 
of the SSO standards. Usually there are practical reasons why an SSO cannot 
attempt such a broad application of its IP Policy.  
One fundamental reason for not engaging in such a broad endeavor is that 
prospective participants may become alienated and decline to participate if an 
SSO’s IP Policy obligates a potential participant to license patent claims that 
the participant believes are particularly valuable. An IP Policy that has an 
overly broad application, or is otherwise perceived to be too burdensome or 
unfair, could have the unintentional impact of limiting the number of industry 
players that are willing to participate in that SSO.65 
To address this situation, SSO IP Policies generally narrow their applica-
tion to only those patent claims that are necessary or essential to allow imple-
mentation of the SSO’s approved standards. In other words, the governing 
application of an IP Policy is typically limited to only those patent rights that 
are unavoidably infringed by an implementer for the purpose of implementing 
the standard.66 These are often called Essential Claims or Necessary Claims 
(hereinafter collectively referred to as Necessary Claims).67 
Because of the profound ramifications of an IP Policy’s definition of Ne-
cessary Claims, it is not surprising that there are often protracted negotiations 
between founding members of an SSO concerning the final scope and meaning 
of the term. Also, it is not surprising that the scope and meaning of Necessary 
Claims can vary greatly from one IP Policy to the next.68  
The meaning and scope of Necessary Claims is often the most analyzed 
provision in an IP Policy. For example, some IP Policies may include, while 
others may exclude, optional portions of the standard from the type of imple-
mentations that give a participant a right to seek a license in another partici-
pant’s Necessary Claims.69  
Other IP Policies may limit the meaning of Necessary Claims to “techni-
cally feasible” implementations (whatever the cost of that implementation) 
                                                                                                           
  65. See Damien Geradin & Miguel Rato, Can Standard-Setting Lead to Exploitative Abuse? 
A Dissonant View on Patent-Hold Up, Royalty Stacking and the Meaning of FRAND 3 EUR. 
COMPETITION J. 101, 104 (2007) available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=946792 (discussing how 
SSO bylaws that are perceived to be “burdensome or unfair” can deter technology developers from 
joining the SSO). 
  66. See PATENT POLICY MANUAL, supra note 63, at 10–13 for a further discussion of the 
scope and significance of Necessary Claims.  
67. PATENT POLICY MANUAL, supra note 63, at 10–13. 
  68. See id. 
  69. Id. at 16–17 (“Optional Portions” are defined as “those Portions or criteria of a Standard 
that may, but are not required to, be selected in an implementation of the Standard.”) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
 
WINTER 2012  195 Biddle et al. 
 
compared to more cost-effective “commercially reasonable/feasible” imple-
mentations.70 Another common concern of some prospective participants as 
they evaluate an IP Policy is whether the scope and meaning of Necessary 
Claims  will  encompass  the  company’s  patent  rights  in  its  underlying  or 
enabling  technology.  A  license  commitment  applicable  to  underlying  or 
enabling technologies is often not acceptable to certain prospective partici-
pants.71  
Another concern of some participants is whether their Necessary Claims 
will be limited to their contributions made during the development of the stan-
dard or, by contrast, whether their Necessary Claims obligation could arise 
from contributions to the standard made by others. It might become difficult 
for a participant to monitor which of its patent rights might be included among 
Necessary Claims if such inclusion could potentially result from actions of 
others engaged in the development of the standard.  
Prospective SSO participants scrutinize IP Policies to evaluate which pa-
tents in their company’s patent portfolio could be included in and governed as 
Necessary Claims. A prospective member’s comfort level with the scope of 
the Necessary Claims is often a gauge of the company’s willingness to partici-
pate with that SSO.  
3. Obligation to Grant RAND License in Necessary Claims 
The Necessary Claims definition is important because IP Policies will im-
pose a licensing obligation in connection with these claims. Most SSOs  re-
quire participants to license their Necessary Claims on reasonable and nondi-
scriminatory (RAND) terms to implementers that seek to implement the SSO’s 
applicable standard.72  
The typical RAND provision is not itself the actual licensing instrument.73 
Instead, a typical RAND term is a contractual covenant of the granting partici-
pant, pursuant to which that entity agrees that it will, at some point in the fu-
ture, grant a license on reasonable and nondiscriminatory terms to any re-
questing implementer of that SSO’s applicable standard.74 The actual RAND 
license is a bilateral agreement negotiated between and executed by only the 
                                                                                                           
  70. Id. at 18–19 (distinguishing between technical and commercial feasibility, and discussing 
how the difference applies to IP Policies) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
  71. See id. at 12–13 (discussing and defining “enabling technologies”). 
  72. PATENT POLICY MANUAL, supra note 63, at 47. See Timothy F. Haslach, Facilitating 
Interoperability  and  De  Facto  Standardization,  in  TECHNOLOGY  LICENSING  STRATEGIES: 
LEADING LAWYERS ON STRUCTURING AGREEMENTS, NEGOTIATING VALUE, AND CAPITALIZING 
ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 105, 109–10 (2007) for a discussion of licensing commitments and 
licensing statements. See also Biddle et al., supra note 3, at 123, which found that about 75% of 
specifications implemented in a modern laptop computer were developed under RAND IPR terms. 
See also Miller, supra note 6, at 355 (discussing some challenges associated with the more typical 
RAND licensing commitment). 
  73. PATENT POLICY MANUAL, supra note 63, at 47. 
  74. STANDARDS PRIMER, supra note 14, at 14.  
 
196  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
granting entity holding the applicable Necessary Claims and the particular 
party that seeks rights in those Necessary Claims.  
In addition to the RAND covenant, some IP Policies contain other provi-
sions that attempt to impose additional requirements on the structure of these 
bilateral RAND license agreements. One significant variation on the tradi-
tional RAND model is RF-RAND: An IP Policy may require that the holder of 
a Necessary Claim offer to license its claims on royalty free and otherwise 
reasonable and nondiscriminatory terms.75  
As an alternative to mandating RAND or RF-RAND license terms, some 
IP Policies contain a provision pursuant to which each participant agrees not to 
assert its rights in its Necessary Claims against other implementers who are 
implementing the applicable standard in accordance with the IP Policy (Non-
Assertion Clause). A typical Non-Assertion Clause may also state that if the 
participant that holds the applicable Necessary Claim nonetheless sues an 
implementer in violation of the Non-Assertion Clause, then the suing party 
will lose its rights under the IP Policy.76  
IP Policies normally do not attempt to mandate all of the terms that must 
be included in a particular RAND or RF-RAND license.77 Indeed, because of 
the nature of negotiating separate bilateral agreements, the licenses will not 
necessarily have identical terms and conditions (subject, however, to the obli-
gation to otherwise comply with the requirements of the IP Policy). 
4. Patent Disclosure Procedures 
In addition to imposing licensing obligations for Necessary Claims, some 
SSO IP Policies require some type of early disclosure or notice of the exis-
tence of applicable Necessary Claims during some portion of the develop-
mental stages of a standard.78 Other SSOs rely solely on licensing promises to 
address the problem of potentially blocking patents.79  
                                                                                                           
  75. The royalty-free RAND license is also referred to as RAND-Z or RAND-Zero. See 
Teece & Sherry, supra note 9, at 1955. 
  76. See, e.g., Microsoft Open Specification Promise, supra note 36. 
  77. But see infra note 78, for a discussion of the growing interest in Ex-Ante Disclosure of 
detailed licensing terms. 
  78. In recent years there have also been proposals that IP Policies should go one-step beyond 
the disclosure of the mere existence of Necessary Claims by including so-called “ex ante” disclo-
sure requirements in an IP Policy (hereinafter “Ex Ante Disclosure”). Ex-Ante Disclosure, gener-
ally, means that the holder of a Necessary Claim will be required to disclose not only the existence 
of its Necessary Claim, but may “also be permitted (or required) to reveal the specific economic 
and other terms upon which” it would be willing to license those Necessary Claims to implemen-
ters.  Andrew  Updegrove,  Editorial,  It’s  Time to  Get on  the  Ex  Ante  Bus, CONSORTIUM 
STANDARDS BULL., June 2006, at 3, available at http://www.consortiuminfo.org/bulletins/pdf/jun 
06.pdf. Despite the potential benefits of Ex-Ante Disclosure provisions, it appears that “standards 
organizations have not rushed to embrace the ex ante idea.” Timothy Simcoe, How Much Ex Ante 
Is Enough?, TALK STANDARDS (Sept. 23, 2009, 5:12 AM), http://www.talkstandards.com/how-
much-ex-ante-is-enough/ (emphasis added). While commentators have presented several reasons 
why they believe standards organizations have not warmly embraced of Ex-Ante Disclosure 
provisions, it appears one key reason cited by several participants at the ASU Workshop is the real 
 
 
WINTER 2012  197 Biddle et al. 
 
Having some level of disclosure of Necessary Claims may enable the 
SSO’s technical working group engaged in the development of the applicable 
standard to “design around” the disclosed Necessary Claims during the work-
ing group’s development process.80 Additionally, a disclosure procedure al-
lows implementers to identify applicable Necessary Claims so that they can 
ultimately seek applicable RAND licenses.81 
Disclosure procedures can be difficult to implement as a practical matter. 
One key issue is whether the disclosure obligation imposes a duty on each 
SSO participant to conduct a company-wide search for its Necessary Claims. 
Broad search requirements may be viewed as an unrealistic burden by certain 
companies,  particularly  large  multinational  corporations  with  large  patent 
portfolios and many affiliates.82 
Even if an IP Policy states that the disclosure obligation does not impose a 
company-wide obligation, uncertainty may remain about whether individuals 
in a participating company (and, potentially, in its affiliated companies) need 
to be engaged to fulfill the disclosure obligations. Because of this concern, IP 
Policies often state that the disclosure obligation is limited to the actual, per-
sonal knowledge of those representatives of a company actively engaged in 
developing the applicable standard, but even this standard may create com-
pliance concerns for some participants, while also potentially reducing the 
value of disclosures.  
Other disclosure issues that raise concerns among participants include:  
(i) Are there time limits to the disclosure obligation? For example, while 
the disclosure obligation during a designated disclosure period might be ob-
vious, what are the exact obligations after these disclosure periods end and 
how long do these obligations last?  
(ii) Not all IP Policies are clear about what information needs to be dis-
closed. If the participant has patents, does the participant simply identify 
those patents which it believes are Necessary Claims or should it provide 
                                                                                                           
or perceived concern that negotiating these types of provisions will be extremely difficult and 
protracted and, thus, will add another major layer of complexity to what are often already complex 
negotiations involved in creating the IP Policy.  
  79. As a general rule disclosure rules appear to be more common in SDOs; Consortia fre-
quently rely on licensing obligations alone. 
  80. Andrew Updegrove, Ex Ante Disclosure: Risks, Rewards, Process and Alternatives, 
CONSORTIUM STANDARDS BULL., June 2006, at 12, available at http://www.consortiuminfo.org/ 
bulletins/pdf/jun06.pdf. See also PATENT POLICY MANUAL, supra note 63, at 31 (discussing patent 
disclosure procedures and their importance to SSOs); Andrew Updegrove, Intellectual Property 
Rights and Standards Setting, in THE ESSENTIAL GUIDE TO STANDARDS (2007) [hereinafter 
Updegrove, Intellectual Property Rights], http://www.consortiuminfo.org/essentialguide/intellectual 
.php (discussing further reasons for, and practical challenges associated with, patent disclosures).  
  81. See PATENT POLICY MANUAL, supra note 63, at 31. See also, Updegrove, Intellectual 
Property Rights, supra note 80.  
  82. IP Policies often impose obligations, including disclosure, on affiliates of members in 
addition to the member itself. Robert M. Webb, There Is a Better Way: It’s Time to Overhaul the 
Model for Participation in Private Standard-Setting, 12 J. INTELL. PROP. L. 163, 219 (2004). 
Thus, a “company-wide” disclosure obligation could become a daunting task for members that are 
large multinational corporations with multiple affiliates. 
 
198  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
more information about why it concluded that these patents are Necessary 
Claims (which could potentially reveal trade secrets)?  
(iii) Does the duty of disclosure only encompass patent registrations? 
Should it encompass the disclosure of still-confidential patent applications? 
How would such a disclosure be phrased? 
  SSOs are realizing that a balanced and fair IP Policy is an important fea-
ture in attracting and retaining members and other implementers of its stan-
dards. Expending sufficient time and effort to formulate an appropriate defini-
tion for the IP Policy’s Necessary Claims is a critical aspect of that IP Policy, 
particularly because the meaning and scope of Necessary Claims has a signifi-
cant impact on the breadth of licensing obligations and on potential disclosure 
procedures. 
B. Ethical Conflict Issues in Standards Development 
Standards-development efforts can raise a complex array of ethical issues. 
For example, participants in these efforts frequently play dual roles: they may 
be employees of companies with strong commercial interests in the outcome 
of a specification-development process and simultaneously serve as members 
of the board of directors of the SSO directing the process. These dual-role 
participants risk potential conflicts between legal duties owed to their em-
ployer and duties owed to the SSO. Other examples involve attorneys: in-
house counsel for a company may be asked to advise these dual-role partici-
pants on matters that implicate the legal interests of the SSO, or counsel for 
the SSO may find their communications to their SSO client compromised by 
dual-role participants in ways that risk undermining the protections of the 
attorney-client privilege.  
Among the group of practitioners, scholars, and other stakeholders with 
experience in standards development at the ASU Workshop, there was a 
striking consensus that standards development raises difficult ethical issues 
and that these issues have not been adequately explored in academic literature 
or elsewhere.83 However, there was an equally striking lack of consensus 
among these experts on the precise nature of these issues, the seriousness of 
the associated risks, and on the appropriate way to analyze them.  
Part II.B attempts to identify a noncomprehensive set of key ethical issues 
that might arise in the standards-setting context, with a particular focus on 
conflicts of interest. The effort focuses on high-level issue spotting rather than 
extensive analysis of particular issues. Even with this limitation, a challenge to 
this effort arises from the diverse structures and processes used to create stan-
dards. For example, issues that might arise in the context of a nonprofit incor-
porated Consortium may be quite different from those that arise in a “Big I” 
                                                                                                           
  83. Supporting this view: none of the over 70 academic papers on standards identified in a 
recent literature review addressed the topic of ethics. See generally Biddle, supra note 61. 
 
WINTER 2012  199 Biddle et al. 
 
standards-development organization.84 Accordingly, it is important to recog-
nize that the issues identified below might apply only in a limited set of stan-
dards-setting circumstances.  
Parts II.B.1–6 describe conflicts in various configurations. First, the au-
thors illustrate conflicts between SSO board duties and duties to an employer. 
Second, conflicts outside of an SSO board role are described, including prob-
lems that may arise when a corporate employee contributes to an SSO’s efforts 
in an individual capacity. Next, potential conflicts for attorneys are presented, 
including in-house and outside counsel. Finally, some best practices are pro-
posed for mitigating some of these ethical concerns. 
1. Conflicts between Board Duties and Duties to Employer 
Consortia and other SSOs engaged in specification development are often 
formed as nonprofit corporations under applicable U.S. state law; many apply 
for tax exempt status as a nonprofit mutual benefit corporation under Section 
501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code.85 Under this model, a small group of 
promoter companies provide start-up funding for the new corporation, and 
these promoter companies name a representative to the Board of Directors of 
the new entity. Each promoter company typically names a company employee 
to serve on the Board of the new SSO. As a matter of corporate law, Board 
members must be natural persons.86 The individual serving on the Board is 
generally not compensated by the SSO.  
While the details can differ depending on applicable state law, generally 
the individual appointed to the Board of a nonprofit corporation incurs three 
duties to the corporation imposed by corporate law: a duty of care, a duty of 
loyalty, and a duty of obedience.87 The duty of care requires that the Board 
member exercise “reasonable care when he or she makes a decision as a ste-
ward of the organization.”88 Pursuant to the duty of loyalty, Board members 
must meet a “standard of faithfulness,” characterized by one commentator as 
an obligation to “give undivided allegiance when making decisions affecting 
                                                                                                           
  84. STANDARDS PRIMER, supra note 14, at 5 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Big I 
standards-setting organizations are “the four widely recognized, well-established, formal interna-
tional-standards developers: the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), and 
the Joint Technical Committee (JTC1) which is a joint group of IEC and ISO.” Id. at 4.  
  85. See, e.g., Bluetooth SIG, Inc. v. United States, No. C05-1778-JCC, 2008 WL 312712, at 
*2 (W.D. Wash. Feb. 1, 2008) , aff'd, 611 F.3d 617 (9 Cir. 2010). Other examples of this model of 
SSO include the USB Implementers Forum, PCI-SIG, Inc., and the Wi-Fi Alliance. See By Laws 
of PCI-SIG (An Oregon Nonprofit Corporation), PCI-SIG (June 29, 2010), http://www.pci 
sig.com/membership/about_us/bylaws/Bylaws_of_PCI-SIG_May_2010_signed.pdf;  About  USB 
Implementers Forum, Inc., USB Implementers Forum, Inc., http://www.usb.org/about (last visited 
Nov. 25, 2011);  Organization, WI-FI  ALLIANCE, http://www.wi-fi.org/organization.php (last 
visited Nov. 25, 2011). 
86. See, e.g., DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 8, § 141(b) (2010). 
  87. BRUCE R. HOPKINS, LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF NONPROFIT BOARDS 13 (2d ed. 2009). 
  88. What Are the Legal Responsibilities of Nonprofit Boards, BOARDSOURCE, http://www. 
boardsource.org/Knowledge.asp?ID=3.364 (last visited Dec. 1, 2011).  
 
200  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
the organization.”89 The duty of obedience requires the Board member to be 
faithful to the organization’s mission: she is “not permitted to act in a way that 
is inconsistent with the central goals of the organization.”90 
Typically the individual serving on the Board of an SSO remains em-
ployed  by  their  promoter-company  employer.  Accordingly,  the  employee 
serving on the nonprofit Board is simultaneously subject to a duty of loyalty to 
their employer: under most state laws, an employee has a duty to act solely for 
the benefit of the employer when engaging in any conduct that relates to the 
employment.91 This duty may be further amplified in an employment contract. 
These legal duties to the employer are complemented by the practical reality 
that the employer provides the individual’s salary and career path, incentiviz-
ing loyalty to the employer.  
At the time of formation of a new Consortium, the interests of the new 
entity and the interests of the various promoter companies that formed the 
entity are likely to be well aligned; however, these interests could diverge over 
time. A promoter company may change its strategy and decide that it supports 
a competing standards effort. Perhaps in such a case the promoter company’s 
interests would be best served by a Board vote in favor of delay or abandon-
ment of a specification, while the broader interests of the SSO would be served 
by releasing the specification. The individual serving on the Board of the non-
profit SSO would face a potential conflict: she may be unable to simulta-
neously discharge their duties owed to the SSO and to their employer.  
Conflicts of interest can be resolved in various ways, such as by appropri-
ate disclosures, recusal from particular decisions, or resignation from either 
position. In any given case, however, the individual facing a potential conflict 
may encounter difficult decisions. The interests of the individual and her em-
ployer may not be well aligned. For example, suppose the employer strongly 
desires a particular outcome from a Board vote and dismisses the employee’s 
concerns about a potential conflict. The individual may be left to decide on her 
own whether a conflict exists and what action to take. Moreover, as further 
discussed below, the legal resources typically available to such individuals—
in-house counsel at their employer and outside counsel for the SSO—may not 
be in a position to advise the individual.  
The individual sitting on an SSO Board facing a potential conflict be-
tween duties owed to the SSO and duties owed to their employer may take 
some comfort in the fact that, to date, the associated risks appear to more theo-
retical than practical. There appears to be no reported cases where an individ-
ual was subject to liability in such circumstances, and the experts at the ASU 
Workshop did not raise any examples of individuals facing liability. Two 
theories may account for this apparent disconnect between theoretical and 
                                                                                                           
  89. Id. 
  90. Id. 
  91. See, e.g., CAL. LABOR CODE §§ 2860, 2863 (West 2001) (codifying the “duty of 
loyalty”). 
 
WINTER 2012  201 Biddle et al. 
 
actual risk. First, while the existence of duties owed in connection with service 
on a nonprofit Board is clear, the question of precisely who can assert breach 
of such duties and what remedies are available is less clear, and this lack of 
clarity may disincentivize litigation.92 Second, participants in standards-devel-
opment efforts may tacitly recognize that individuals serving on SSO Boards 
will  advance  the  interests  of  their  employers,  notwithstanding  potential 
breaches of duties imposed by principles of corporate law. That is, in a situa-
tion where the employer provides substantial funding to launch a new SSO, 
appoints an employee to the Board of the SSO, and pays the salary and all 
costs related to that employee’s participation on the Board, the expectation of 
the employer, the employee and all other members of the SSO may be that the 
employee is there to advocate for the interests of the employer. In such a case, 
behavior that might theoretically amount to a breach of duties owed to the 
SSO could be perceived by all stakeholders involved as consistent with the 
norms of the standard-setting environment. 
2. Conflicts Arising Outside of Dual Roles 
While the dual-role scenario—under which an individual serves both as a 
Board member for an independent nonprofit and as an employee of a corpora-
tion with a strong interest in the activities of the nonprofit—presents perhaps 
the most overt conflict of interest risks, conflicts could conceivably arise in 
other  scenarios  as  well.  As  a  general  matter,  standards  development  can 
present various circumstances where individuals play ambiguous roles, and 
this ambiguity can give rise to potential conflicts. Two examples are identified 
below. 
First, consider the example of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers Standards Association (IEEE-SA). The IEEE-SA has produced over 
3,400 technical standards, including critical information-technology standards 
such as Ethernet and WiFi.93 The IEEE-SA permits two classes of members: 
individual members and corporate members. Standards development efforts in 
the IEEE are performed through a process based either on individual-based 
ballots or corporate ballots, but not both.94 The vast majority of IEEE stan-
dards are developed based on the individual-ballot process.95  
                                                                                                           
  92. Evelyn Brody, The Board of Nonprofit Organizations: Puzzling Through the Gaps 
Between Law and Practice, 76 FORDHAM L. REV. 521, 560 (2007). 
  93. See  IEEE  Standards  Online  Collections,  IEEE,  http://www.ieee.org/publications_ 
standards/publications/subscriptions/prod/standards_overview.html  (follow  “IEEE  All-Inclusive 
Standards” and “IEEE All Information Technology Standards” hyperlinks) (last visited Nov. 23, 
2011). 
  94. See FAQs: IEEE-SA Membership, THE IEEE STANDARDS ASS’N, http://standards.ieee. 
org/faqs/about.html#9 (last visited Nov. 21, 2011). 
  95. The IEEE-Standards website lists 22 standards development projects underway under the 
corporate balloting model. See Corporate Standards in Development, STANDARDS.IEEE.ORG, 
http://standards.ieee.org/develop/corpchan/corpstdsdev.html (last visited Nov. 28, 2011). It also 
lists over 800 under development under the individual balloting model. See Browse Standards by 
 
 
202  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
The IEEE-SA Bylaws require that individual participants “shall act based 
on their qualifications and experience.”96 Representatives in the corporate 
process “are appointed by an entity to represent that entity and act on its be-
half. Such representatives may participate in IEEE-SA standards-development 
activities and take action based upon instruction from the entity for which they 
have been appointed as an entity representative.”97 One interpretation of the 
Bylaws would be that individual participants should act based solely on their 
qualifications and experience, and should not look to their employers for di-
rection; only when acting as an entity representative under the rarely used 
corporate-ballot process should an individual take action based on instructions 
from her employer. At least one participant at the ASU workshop advocated 
for this interpretation.  
Some IEEE-SA materials, however, suggest a more nuanced interpretation 
of the obligations of individuals. The membership page of the IEEE-SA web-
site states that “[w]hile participants may represent the interests of their em-
ployers, individual members participate in the process and ballot as individu-
als, rather than as a corporate entity.”98 Moreover, the Bylaws contain provi-
sions that require disclosure of affiliation by participating individuals, and 
processes for avoiding dominance in the voting process by individuals affi-
liated with the same organization.99 This more nuanced approach seems to 
better comport with the practical reality that many of the participants in the 
IEEE-SA standards process are in fact funded by their employers and partici-
pate as part of their core job activities. Indeed, at the ASU workshop one par-
ticipant dismissed the idea that participants acted purely in an individual ca-
pacity, free from employer influence, as an “obvious fiction.”  
Under either interpretation of the IEEE-SA Bylaws, individual partici-
pants face potential complexity. The Bylaws appear to impose some obligation 
for individuals to act in ways that potentially create a conflict with their em-
ployers. Imagine a scenario where an employer, who funds an individual’s 
participation, insists on a particular option that the individual is convinced 
would be ill-advised. A choice to unequivocally advocate for the employer-
desired position, for example, would seem to open the individual up to at least 
a theoretical risk of liability for breach of the contractual obligation to follow 
the Bylaws and related policies set forth in the IEEE-SA membership agree-
ment.  
                                                                                                           
Topic,  STANDARDS.IEEE.ORG,  http://standards.ieee.org/develop/project/  (last  visited  Nov.  28, 
2011).  
  96. IEEE-SA Standards Board Bylaws, IEEE STANDARDS ASS'N, 8 (Feb. 2011), http:// 
standards.ieee.org/develop/policies/bylaws/sb_bylaws.pdf. 
  97. Id. 
  98. IEEE-SA Membership, IEEE STANDARDS ASS’N, http://standards.ieee.org/membership/ 
(last visited Nov. 25, 2011) (emphasis added).  
  99. See IEEE-SA Standards Board Bylaws, IEEE STANDARDS ASS’N, 10–11 (Feb. 2011), 
http://standards.ieee.org/develop/policies/bylaws/sb_bylaws.pdf (sections 5.2.1.3 Dominance and 
5.2.1.5 Disclosure of affiliation). 
 
WINTER 2012  203 Biddle et al. 
 
The controversy over Open Office XML provides the context for a second 
example that illustrates how ambiguity over standards-related roles can lead to 
an allegation of a conflict of interest.100 In the midst of an acrimonious dispute 
about the international standardization process for Microsoft-supported OO-
XML, the Free Software Foundation Europe alleged that dual roles played by 
one individual in connection with ISO and at the standards-development body 
ECMA amounted to an “an insufficiently resolved conflict of interest.”101 No 
remedial action or other changes, however, appear to have been taken in con-
nection with this allegation.  
3. Conflict Issues for Company Participants 
Another potential concern for companies that participate in a standards-
setting effort might be that a conflict of interest of a particular individual could 
be imputed to that individual’s employer in a manner that would create liabil-
ity for the employing company. An individual serving on an SSO Board who 
is accused of not meeting her duties to the SSO might point to an employer 
mandate as the cause for their failure to meet their duty. One can imagine 
difficult tensions that could arise between employer and employee in such a 
scenario. Further, one can imagine other Board members of the SSO perceiv-
ing that the employer is the bad actor in these circumstances. Whether such 
tensions could rise to actionable legal claims either between employee and 
employer or between the SSO and the employer is unclear. No such cases 
appear to have been litigated, but prudence would seem to dictate that employ-
ers be mindful of the duties owed by their employees to the SSO and careful to 
not pressure these individuals into situations that create a conflict of interest. 
4. Conflicts for In-House Counsel 
In-house counsel for companies participating in standards-development 
efforts also can face complex ethical questions. One scenario arises when an 
individual begins serving on an SSO Board. That individual may have a 
longstanding relationship with in-house counsel for their shared employer: that 
in-house counsel routinely advises the individual in the context of that individ-
ual’s activities performed on behalf of the employing corporation. Joining an 
SSO Board may raise legal issues for the individual that are separate from the 
legal interests of the employing corporation. For example, the individual may 
be concerned about personal liability in the event that the SSO is sued, and she 
may want to understand the scope of any indemnities offered either by the 
SSO or by her employer (who is likely directing the employee to join the 
Board). Further, once the individual is on the Board, at times they represent 
                                                                                                           
  100. See, e.g., Ryan Paul, Microsoft's Office Open XML Now an Official ISO Standard, ARS 
TECHNICA,  http://arstechnica.com/microsoft/news/2008/04/microsofts-office-open-xml-now-an-
official-iso-standard.ars (last visited Nov. 23, 2011).  
  101. Letter from Shane Coughlan to SNV Schweizerische Normen-Verinigung (Aug. 13, 
2007), available at http://siug.ch/ms-ooxml/fsfe-letter.pdf.    
 
204  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
the interests of the SSO, a separate legal entity. The in-house counsel has one 
client, however: the employing corporation. Tenets of professional responsi-
bility require that the attorney not offer legal advice to the individual in his or 
her individual capacity, nor to the SSO.102 Maintaining this responsibility may 
require difficult discernment of boundaries and a change to the historical 
working relationship between the individual and the in-house counsel.  
At a practical level, the individual in this circumstance may not have good 
options for obtaining appropriate legal advice. Engaging a personal attorney to 
advise on the risks of serving on a board, while perhaps prudent, may not be a 
realistic option for some employees. SSOs often employ outside counsel to 
represent the interests of the SSO, but for budgetary or other reasons this out-
side counsel may not be available and engaged on all SSO activities. In-house 
counsel for the employing corporation may be tempted to fill these gaps, par-
ticularly when the issues arise in the context of the ongoing relationship be-
tween the individual and the in-house counsel on other corporate matters, but 
it is clear that personal legal advice for the individual and legal advice for the 
SSO are outside the proper scope of in-house counsel duties.  
A related point concerns the maintenance of the attorney-client privilege. 
A conversation between in-house counsel and the board-serving individual 
could be protected by the attorney-client privilege, provided that the various 
elements of the privilege are met and the individual is acting in their capacity 
as an employee of the employing corporation.103 If the individual is acting in 
their capacity as a representative of the SSO, however, then there is no attor-
ney-client relationship and no applicable privilege. It would thus be imperative 
for in-house counsel and the individual to have a clear understanding of what 
role the individual is playing at any given moment. Further, the individual 
would need an understanding of the requirements to maintain privilege. For 
example, the individual could not take privileged information learned while 
acting as an employee and disclose it to fellow Board members while acting as 
a Board member.  
The situation seems to call for something analogous to Upjohn warnings, 
normally used in the context of corporate investigations.104 Upjohn warnings 
are a mechanism for making clear that counsel for a corporate entity represents 
that entity, and not the constituent individuals who are part of the organiza-
tion.105 While the specific focus of Upjohn warnings is to maintain the ability 
                                                                                                           
  102. Grace M. Giesel, Upjohn Warnings, the Attorney-Client Privilege, and Principles of 
Lawyer Ethics: Achieving Harmony, 65 U. MIAMI L. REV. 109, 161–62 (2010). While an in-house 
attorney could theoretically represent multiple clients, including potentially the individual board 
member and the SSO, this arrangement would be extremely unusual and highly problematic. The 
interests of the various parties are likely to be legally adverse and simultaneous representation 
would presumably violate conflict-of-interest principles. See MODEL RULES OF PROF’L CONDUCT 
R. 1.7 (2009). 
  103. Giesel, supra note 102, 151–52. 
  104. Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U.S. 383 (1981). 
  105. A.B.A.  White  Collar  Crime  Committee  Working  Group,  Upjohn  Warnings: 
Recommended Best Practices When Corporate Counsel Interacts With Corporate Employees, AM. 
 
 
WINTER 2012  205 Biddle et al. 
 
of the entity to waive privilege in counsel-employee discussions in certain 
circumstances, the broader point of the warning is to establish an unambiguous 
understanding between counsel and an individual about the precise nature of 
their relationship.106 In-house counsel may find the concept useful to address 
the potential ambiguities surrounding the relationship with employees serving 
on SSO Boards. 
5. Issues for Outside SSO Counsel 
Outside counsel for SSOs may find themselves facing the mirror image of 
issues faced by in-house counsel. Maintaining privilege in communications 
with SSO constituents is a particularly challenging point. If an SSO is faced 
with litigation or a similar legal dispute, the organizations that participate in 
the SSO will be key stakeholders and will be deeply interested in obtaining all 
available information about the dispute. Given this interest and the individ-
ual’s legal and practical loyalties to her employer, the individual serving on 
the SSO Board will have strong incentives to share information with the em-
ployer. For outside counsel, ensuring that Board members do not disclose 
information in a manner that defeats privilege may prove difficult. 
Discovery may present a similar challenge. As a practical matter, the 
Board members of SSOs often utilize the email addresses of their primary 
employer to do Board business, and thus key SSO communications and other 
documents are stored on systems that are not controlled by the SSO. If these 
documents are subpoenaed, the organization that controls the documents may 
not have identical incentives to the SSO. For example, the SSO might be in-
clined to fight a subpoena under a privilege theory, whereas the organization 
hosting the documents might be willing to produce the documents (perhaps 
even without notice to the SSO) to close the matter quickly and cheaply. Si-
milarly, when faced with a discovery demand, counsel for an SSO might find 
that they do not have practical control of or access to key documents.  
Outside counsel for SSOs might also face the inverse of the issue faced by 
in-house counsel asked to opine on matters outside of their client’s purview. In 
some cases outside counsel for SSOs develop strong relationships with the 
individuals serving on the SSO Board. These individuals may ask counsel to 
discuss matters that go beyond the scope of the SSO and impact the legal in-
terests of the individual’s primary employers or the individual’s personal legal 
interests. In such a case, outside counsel may be well served to bring Upjohn-
style clarity to the discussion, as explored above. 
Finally, standards-setting efforts may present outside counsel with partic-
ularly complex conflicts of interest and attorney-client relationship-formation 
issues. SSOs routinely include parties whose interests are adverse outside of 
the standard-setting context. In the course of SSO formation, counsel might 
                                                                                                           
BAR ASS’N, 14 (July 17, 2009), http://meetings.abanet.org/webupload/commupload/ CR301000/ 
newsletterpubs/ABAUpjohnTaskForceReport.pdf.  
  106. Giesel, supra note 102, at 110–11. 
 
206  52  JURIMETRICS   The Expanding Role and Importance of Standards in the ICT Industry 
 
need to engage directly with a number of these parties simultaneously, raising 
the need for, at a minimum, artful conflict disclosures and waivers.107 After an 
SSO is formed, counsel may find that the SSO’s interests become legally 
adverse to member companies participating in the SSO, or that members en-
gage in disputes that create new potential conflicts for counsel.  
6. Best Practices for Mitigating Conflict Risks 
As discussed above, the ASU Workshop demonstrated some consensus 
that ethical matters related to standards deserve attention, but there was a lack 
of consensus over the nature and degree of these ethics-related risks. Given 
this observation, and given the fact that the topic of ethical issues in standards 
development is virtually unexplored in the academic and practitioner literature, 
it is unsurprising that no best practices or similar guidelines have been docu-
mented. No attempt will be made to do so here, but we will observe that the 
area seems ripe for further analysis.    
Two simple concepts highlighted above may be candidates for inclusion 
in a broader best practices effort: 
 
  Employers should recognize that employees serving on SSO Boards are 
serving in an individual capacity and face potentially conflicting duties. 
Taking care to avoid having actual conflicts arise serves all parties’ in-
terests, including the employer.  
  In-house and outside counsel engaged in standards efforts can learn 
from the concept of Upjohn warnings, and apply the idea when engaging 
with dual-role employees.  
 
Additionally,  SSO  communications  processes,  document  management, 
and conflict management for outside counsel might be other areas for focused 
attention. In sum, ethical issues surrounding standards setting are complex, 
and having better tools to analyze and manage them would benefit all stake-
holders involved with the standards-setting process.  
 
Standards provide structure and consistency to many areas of technology 
and are a critical component of most of the informational services and prod-
ucts we rely on in our daily lives, for example, the Internet, our computers, our 
phones, our televisions, and countless other technology-dependent devices. 
Despite being an integral component of many industries, standards are largely 
created and flourish or fail behind the scenes. The 2010 ASU Workshop 
helped bring standards to the forefront by providing an opportunity for stan-
dards practitioners to come together and engage in discourse on pressing is-
sues in the standards field. 
                                                                                                           
  107. See MODEL RULES OF PROF’L CONDUCT R. 1.7.  
 
WINTER 2012  207 Biddle et al. 
 
This article describes several key topics in standards practice today and 
demonstrates the complex technological and legal environment in which stan-
dards operate. The multitude of interests represented in standards develop-
ment,  the  diversity  of  entities  adopting  standards,  and  the  breadth  of 
experience of the various parties involved make standards a growing yet chal-
lenging area of legal practice. 
Historically, the discipline of standards has been largely ignored by legal 
academia and neglected in the training of young lawyers. In recent years, 
however, the role of standards has greatly evolved and expanded; once limited 
to technical specifications, standards now play a central role in technology 
development, management, and governance. Because of this increasing role as 
a driver and regulator of technology, standards are being recognized for their 
vital importance to legal practice and legal scholarship. To continue engage-
ment with the standards community, in April 2011, ASU hosted a two-day 
standards roundtable that addressed the increasingly global context for stan-
dards development. With additional conferences and other future events fo-
cused on the intersection of standards, technology and the law, the Center for 
Law, Science & Innovation at the Sandra Day O’Connor College of Law will 
continue to foster dialogue within the standards community. 
 
 
208  52  JURIMETRICS 