Forthcoming in CREATIVITY, LAW AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP  
(Shubha Ghosh & Robin Paul Malloy eds., Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011) 
 
Draft of June 1, 2011 
 
 Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
 
Michael J. Madison∗ 
 
I.  Introduction 
 
Consider objects, which I call things.  It is widely acknowledged that things can be 
creative; they are made by creators.  If that is true, then why can’t things be copyrighted?1  
That puzzle and its implications are the subjects of this chapter.  
 
The Supreme Court has confirmed that copyright law is designed to encourage the 
production and distribution of “creative” works of authorship, or “creativity,” to use a 
common shorthand.2  I take that premise as given.  It is well known, nonetheless, that not all 
creativity is equally encouraged by copyright, even in light of what has become known as the 
law’s “aesthetic nondiscrimination principle.”3  Creativity that neither differs in a minimally 
creative way from its source nor originates with the work’s author cannot be protected by 
copyright.4  “Facts” are arguably created by human agency yet cannot be protected by 
copyright.5  “Ideas” that are wholly the product of creative human imagination cannot be the 
subject of copyright, though under some circumstances ideas may be patented; copyright 
protects original “expression.”6  Only creativity that is “fixed in a tangible medium of 
expression”  can  be  the  subject  matter  of  copyright.7  “Unfixed”  creativity,  such  as  the 
improvisations of a jazz performance, lies beyond the scope of statutory copyright and, since 
statutory copyright preempts equivalent state law,8 may disappear from legal protection 
altogether.  Copyright courts tell us that the law does not discriminate among creators and 
creativity.  Yet all available evidence tells us that it does.9 
                                                 
∗ Professor of Law and Associate Dean for Research, University of Pittsburgh School of Law.  
Email: madison@pitt.edu.  Copyright © 2010 Michael J. Madison. 
1 I am taking some poetic license with this statement. Strictly speaking, “copyright” is a noun, rather 
than an adjective.  One does not “copyright” a work of authorship, because copyright attaches to a 
work of authorship automatically, at the moment of its fixation in a tangible medium.   
2 See Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991); Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 
201, 219 (1954). 
3 Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239, 251-52 (1903). 
4 See Feist Publ’ns, Inc., 499 U.S. at 344-47. 
5 Id. 
6 17 U.S.C. § 102(b) (2006). 
7 17 U.S.C. § 102(a) (2006). 
8 17 U.S.C. § 301 (2006). 
9 See Wendy J. Gordon, An Inquiry into the Merits of Copyright: The Challenge of Consistency, Consent, and 
Encouragement Theory, 41 STAN. L. REV. 1343, 1382 (1989); Alfred C. Yen, Copyright Opinions and 
Aesthetic Theory, 71 S. CAL. L. REV. 247 (1998). The foregoing propositions are supported by citations 
to American copyright law, but in countries that belong to the Berne Convention, the law is 
substantially the same.  Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, Sept. 9, 
1886, 102 Stat. 2853, 1161 U.N.T.S. 31, at art. 1, 2.  As Joseph Miller has pointed out, it is recognized 
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1597761MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 2 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
 
  On the standard account of copyright, there are reasons for that discrimination, and 
those  reasons  make  good  sense.    The  dominant  justification  for  copyright  law  is 
consequentialist,  which  means  that  copyright  is  subject  to  a  variety  of  cost/benefit 
calculations as society determines, whether the law leads to the outcomes that society wants 
it  to.    Society  stipulates  to  the  benefit  that  copyright  law  is  needed  to  encourage  the 
production and distribution of creativity.  Society also stipulates to certain offsetting costs.  
Access to material in copyright must be procured before it can be used in new forms of 
creativity, often at a price, which means that producing new works of authorship is more 
expensive than it would be if use of existing works were free.  The scope of copyright should 
be calibrated to avoid imposing those costs if the benefits of creativity can be obtained 
otherwise, without the encouragement of copyright.  Facts, ideas and unfixed creativity are, 
on  one  reading,  examples  of  things  that  will  be  produced  and  distributed  in  adequate 
quantities  even  without  the  incentives  of  copyright,  giving  society  the  benefit  of  their 
existence without the costs associated with copyright protection.  The doctrine of fair use is 
likewise understood as a mechanism to procure the benefits of new creative works without 
society enduring the costs of copyright.10  Within that consequentialist framework, there is 
little to be gained by prejudging the benefits of “good” creativity and the harms of “bad” 
creativity; society is often reluctant to trust judges and legislators to judge what is “good” art 
and “bad” art. 
 
Other sorts of discrimination within copyright make less sense, even within the 
consequentialist account.  This chapter addresses one of those:  the intersection of creativity, 
copyright and craft.  By “craft” I mean the design and production of tangible objects, 
typically by hand or with hand tools and in contrast to mass production by machine or 
standardized  labor.    I  include  everything  from  works  of  fine  art  to  custom-produced 
furniture to needlecrafts; I appreciate the fact that the term “craft” evokes a certain artisanal 
nostalgia, but “craft” in its broadest sense includes human-produced artifacts even if their 
tangible  manifestations  are  digital  or  virtual.    “Craft”  is  typically  associated  with  the 
acquisition and application of knowledge and skill within some discipline or domain, in 
contrast to the personal “creativity” that is thought to characterize “art” and “expression.”  I 
confine the term “craft” to physical things, or at least to material (including digital) things, 
rather than to the cognitive or imaginative processes that produce them.   
 
Copyright law approaches craft works with a standard, historically well-grounded 
analytic  move.    Primarily  through  Section  202  of  the  American  Copyright  Act,11  the 
copyright statute distinguishes the intangible “work of authorship” that is embedded in the 
craft work from the tangible object that one might hold in one’s palm.  The former, the 
intangible, is governed by copyright, though scholars have noted that the law lacks any 
                                                                                                                                                 
that the Berne Convention imposes a minimum requirement that only the works of authors may be 
protected by copyright, and works must be creative or original.  As in American copyright law, the 
Berne Convention defines neither of these terms.  See Joseph Scott Miller, Hoisting Originality, 31 
CARDOZO L. REV. 451, 486 n.179 (2009). 
10 17 U.S.C. § 107 (2006); Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 (1994). 
11 17 U.S.C. § 202 (2006). 
2 
 
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1597761MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 3 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
coherent definition of the concept of “the work.”12  The latter, the tangible, is governed by 
rules applicable to chattel property, including contract and tort.  Copyrightable creativity is 
the product of the mind, not of the hand.   
 
Given that move, one might wonder why I suggest that the discrimination wrought 
by copyright law is difficult to comprehend; surely the law appropriately encourages and 
protects the creativity expressed in the intangible work of authorship that is embedded in a 
craft work, and new tangible objects are not the kinds of public goods that economists 
recognize in intangible creative works protected by copyright.  Creators of craft works do 
not  need  copyright  protection,  because  their  works  are  not  at  risk  for  the  kinds  of 
misappropriation that imperils the creators of intangible works.  Yet that is precisely the 
beginning of my claim.  The tangible elements of craft works are themselves creative, and 
they are creative in ways and for the reasons that the consequentialist account of copyright 
could recognize but chooses not to.  In this first place, I accept the basic validity of 
consequentialism in copyright. 
 
The  fact  that  copyright  law  chooses  not  to  recognize  craft-based  creativity  is 
interesting, and it is disappointing to craft-based creators, but it is hardly momentous.  This 
chapter advances the further claim that the exclusion of craft-based creativity from copyright 
is based on ethical considerations as well as on consequentialist ones.  What I characterize 
here  as  “ethical”  interests  are  sometimes  labeled  elsewhere  “labor-based”  interests  and 
“personality-based” interests,13 that creators might claim legal entitlements in their creations 
by virtue of acts of creation themselves.  This observation is at odds with the standard 
consequentialist  account,  which  increasingly  views  ethical  justifications  for  copyright  as 
inapplicable or irrelevant to modern law.14  Via the distinction between tangible objects and 
intangible works of authorship, the law affirmatively rejects ethical interests of creators.  
That  rejection  on  ethical  grounds  not  only  impacts  copyright’s  ability  to  realize  its 
consequentialist goals in a general sense (via protection of fewer than all creative works than 
copyright might protect) but also in a narrower, practical sense.  The rejection of ethical 
arguments regarding craft works limits the range of possibilities that copyright doctrine 
might  consider  in  the  context  of  computer  software  copyright,  software  licensing,  the 
doctrine of fair use, and rights applicable to derivative works. 
 
                                                 
12 See Justin Hughes, Size Matters (or Should) in Copyright Law, 74 FORDHAM L. REV. 575, 576 (2005).  
13 I do not mean to overstate the rejection of ethical justifications for copyright, even in American 
law.  Wendy Gordon has argued that a harm-based conception of Locke’s labor-based theory of 
property has influenced and continues to influence copyright.  See Wendy J. Gordon, A Property Right 
in Self-Expression: Equality and Individualism in the Natural Law of Intellectual Property, 102 YALE L.J. 1533 
(1993). 
14  English  and  Continental  traditions  that  recognize  labor-based  interests  are  gradually  being 
assimilated to the dominant consequentialist approach.  See Daniel J. Gervais, Feist Goes Global: A 
Comparative Analysis of the Notion of Originality in Copyright Law, 49 J. COPYRIGHT SOC’Y (USA) 949 
(2002) (describing a global trend away from labor-based justifications for copyright, consistent with 
Feist).  But see Jane C. Ginsburg, The Concept of Authorship in Comparative Copyright Law, 52 DEPAUL L. 
REV. 1063 (2003) (noting that labor-based arguments remain viable in the United Kingdom and 
Australia, for example).  
3 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 4 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
The argument proceeds in the following modest steps.  First, the chapter revives and 
reviews long-standing claims regarding the creativity inherent in craft and links those claims 
to contemporary arguments in copyright.  If craft in tangible objects represents human 
creativity, and if the central purpose of copyright law is to encourage and promote creativity, 
then there is no good reason to exclude craft from copyright unless some exception to the 
general principle, akin to the exception that governs facts and ideas, applies to tangible 
objects.  The chapter questions the soundness of a judgment that an exception is justified on 
consequentialist grounds alone.  Ethical claims matter.  Second, the chapter considers the 
ethical implications of craft as creativity.  Philosophers as well as artists themselves have long 
argued that the products of the human hand are ethical in nature, because they link mind and 
body and in so doing express something fundamental about the nature of humanity.15  What 
we make, in a sense, makes us.  The chapter concludes that by excluding these works from 
the scope of copyright protection, the law takes an affirmative stance with respect to ethical 
interests in copyright law.  Finally, the chapter concludes by drawing out some doctrinal and 
policy implications of copyright’s ethical stance regarding craft works.  
 
II.  Craft as Copyrightable Creativity 
 
This section explores the proposition that craft works constitute creativity of the sort 
that copyright law ordinarily is expected to encourage.  In this context, creativity in craft 
works consists precisely of the physicality of creative expression, the material forms of 
human activity that copyright law has distinguished for more than 200 years from the 
intangibles  that  are  the  ordinary  objects  of  the  law.    Yet  the  propositions  that  craft 
constitutes creativity and that creativity is manifested in craft are intended to recapture a 
sense  that  is  even  older,  one  traceable  at  least  to  Aristotle.    That  ancient  sense  was 
challenged by mechanized production and reproduction during the 19th and 20th centuries 
and is often submerged entirely beneath contemporary digital technology.  Yet it also seems 
to be re-emerging in recent popular writing. 
 
Is Craft Creative? 
 
Is craft creative?  Aristotle may have thought so.  In the Metaphysics, Aristotle spoke 
of making (poesis) rather than creativity, as we use the latter term today, in the sense that the 
production of new things – both tangible and conceptual – followed natural and rational 
laws rather than emerged from inspirational or mysterious processes;16 the artist or artisan 
                                                 
15 This part of the argument should be distinguished from arguments that creativity has an important 
and  inescapable  spiritual  dimension  that  should  be  recognized  in  copyright,  see  ROBERTA 
ROSENTHALL KWALL, THE SOUL OF CREATIVITY: FORGING A MORAL RIGHTS LAW FOR THE 
UNITED STATES (2009), and from arguments that “art” in law and practice means more than what 
the artist wants it to mean, if it means anything at all.  See Amy M. Adler, Against Moral Rights, 97 
CALIF. L. REV. 263 (2009). 
16 See Aristotle, Creation as Making, in THE CREATIVITY QUESTION (Albert Rothenberg & Carl R. 
Hausman eds., 1976), at 33; ARISTOTLE, METAPHYSICS (W.D. Ross trans., Clarendon Press 1924) 
(350 B.C.E.), at Book VII, Parts 7-9, in 8 THE OXFORD TRANSLATION OF ARISTOTLE 791-95 (W.D. 
Ross trans. & ed., 1928). 
4 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 5 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
was guided by skill (technê) that embodied the maker’s knowledge of the idea or pattern to be 
achieved.  One might suppose that ancient Greeks distinguished between the conceptual and 
the material in their understanding of making, but they did not.  Making involved the 
production of new things from preexisting things, according to the maker’s idea of the thing 
– the essential attributes – of that which the artist meant to produce.  “Creativity” as we 
know that term and generally understand it today, as an act of imagination, was not part of 
the Aristotelian scheme.  Making was not a matter of imagination or innovation; making 
involved the re-production (that is, the making anew) of existing, natural forms (mimesis). 
 
Aristotle held no monopoly on how ancient Greeks viewed craft and art.  Plato, of 
course, distinguished between the reality of ideal forms and objects in the world of the 
senses; suspicious of mimesis, as a process that interfered with the ability to distinguish 
forms  from  objects,  he  leaned  toward  the  sense  of  (what  we  now  call)  creativity  as 
inspiration.17  Philosophers  aside,  artists  in  many  fields,  including  poets,  the  original 
“makers,” engaged in divine acts of creation, inspired by Muses, the daughters of Zeus.18   
 
As Greece and ancient Rome passed into darkness and eventually the Renaissance, 
making begat creativity.  During the Enlightenment and afterwards, acknowledgement of 
novelty and artistry lost its connection to the divine; what had been an uncertain line 
between the inspired and the man-made became an uncertain line between inspired (one 
might say “genius”-based or at times, madness-based) creativity, and “ordinary” craft.19  
What Aristotle teaches today is that the distinction between (intangible) art and (material) 
craft, and between the “created” and the merely “made,” was originally far less sharp than it 
now appears.20  Leading research today explores the cognitive basis of creativity,21 but the 
presumption that creativity is primarily a cognitive phenomenon is just that – a presumption.  
There is a well-grounded tradition that traces creativity to material practice.  To paraphrase 
the philosopher Hilary Putnam, creativity just ain’t in the head.22 
 
Twentieth-century  philosophers  and  artists  recognized  the  uncertainty  in  the 
distinction between material practice on the one hand, and imagination and creation on the 
other.   Theorists in the phenomenological tradition, such as Heidegger,23 and hermeneutics, 
such as Gadamer,24 centered their philosophies on material practice and objects as we 
                                                 
17 See STEPHEN HALLIWELL, ARISTOTLE’S POETICS 82-92 (1998).  
18 The nine Muses addressed epic poetry, lyric poetry, sacred poetry and hymns, tragedy, comedy, 
music, dance, astronomy, and history. 
19 See Paul Oskar Kristeller, “Creativity” and “Tradition,” 44 J. HIST. IDEAS 105 (1983).  
20 See HUGH HONOUR & JOHN FLEMING, A WORLD HISTORY OF ART 2-3 (7th ed. 2005). 
21 See, e.g., THE NATURE OF CREATIVITY: CONTEMPORARY PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES (Robert 
J. Sternberg ed., 1988) ; MIHALYI CSIKSZENTMIHALYI, CREATIVITY: FLOW AND THE PSYCHOLOGY 
OF DISCOVERY AND INVENTION (1996). 
22 Putnam’s original statement was “Meanings just ain’t in the head.”  Hilary Putnam, The Meaning of 
“Meaning,” in LANGUAGE, MIND AND KNOWLEDGE (Keith Gunderson ed., 1975). 
23 See MARTIN HEIDEGGER, BEING AND TIME 98-101 (John Macquarrie & Edward Robinson trans., 
1962) (1927). 
24 See HANS-GEORG GADAMER, TRUTH AND METHOD 39, 102-10 (Joel Weinsheimer & Donald G. 
Marshall trans., 2d rev. ed. 2004). 
5 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 6 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
experience them, rather than solely on their meaning.  Bronowski and Dewey, among others, 
applied the phenomenological perspective to creativity itself.25  The common thread in this 
work is the insight that materiality expressed in things and in practice is a recursive source of, 
object of and instantiation of human experience, knowledge and imagination. The discipline 
that is implicit in craft, and craft works themselves, manifests creativity as doing, rather than 
creativity as thinking.  In contemporary intellectual property scholarship, Julie Cohen has 
offered related arguments aimed at creativity and invention, arguing that the creativity that is 
the object of copyright law needs to be appreciated in social, cultural and material context.26  
Mario Biagioli has investigated the methods used by makers of new scientific instruments to 
protect their businesses and what he calls their “authorship.”27  Artists and other creators 
still often identify craft with creativity,28 even in the context of creativity and creative 
practice enabled by and reflected in the virtual but nonetheless material aspects of digital 
technology and computer software.29  Their livelihood is in their hands as much as it is in 
their imaginations – in contrast to the early formulation of copyrightable originality offered 
by Justice Holmes, “the personal reaction of an individual upon nature.”30   
 
Perhaps  the  best  modern  evidence  for  the  proposition  that  society  should  not 
overlook the creativity of the material comes from 20th-century critiques of craft.  The 
German critic Walter Benjamin queried the meaning of an “original” work of art in an era 
when cheap mechanical reproduction deprived the original of its distinctive, authoritative 
                                                 
25 See JACOB BRONOWSKI, THE ORIGINS OF KNOWLEDGE AND IMAGINATION (1978); JOHN 
DEWEY, ART AS EXPERIENCE (1934).  For a contemporary example of this argument, see Barbara 
Bolt,  Heidegger,  Handlability  and  Praxical  Knowledge,  (2004),  available  at 
http://www.acuads.com.au/conf2004/papers/bolt.pdf  (accessed  Nov.  29,  2010)  (following 
Heidegger,  characterizing  creativity  as  skill  rather  than  inspiration),  in  PUBLICATION  OF  THE 
CONFERENCE  PAPERS  ACUADS  2004  (Stephanie  Jones  ed.,  2004),  available  at 
http://www.acuads.com.au/conf2004/conf2004.htm. 
26 See Julie E. Cohen, Creativity and Culture in Copyright Theory, 40 U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 1151 (2007).  My 
research on the practice-based character of the creativity supported by the fair use doctrine occupies 
related theoretical space.  See Michael J. Madison, A Pattern-Oriented Approach to Fair Use, 45 WM. & 
MARY L. REV. 1525 (2004). 
27 See Mario Biagioli, From Print to Patents: Living on Instruments in Early Modern Europe, 44 HISTORY OF 
SCIENCE 139, 139 (2006). 
28 See JO LAURIA & STEVE FENTON, CRAFT IN AMERICA: CELEBRATING TWO CENTURIES OF 
ARTISTS & OBJECTS (2007); Steve Fenton, The Lost Chapter: Craft in America: Memory and the DNA of 
Creativity,  available  at  CRAFT  IN  AMERICA:  A  JOURNEY  TO  THE  ARTISTS,  ORIGINS  AND 
TECHNIQUES  OF  AMERICAN  CRAFT,    available  at 
http://www.craftinamerica.org/book/story_201.php (accessed Nov. 29, 2010). 
29 See Michael Shanks & Jeffrey T. Schnapp, rethinking art as craft in a knowledge economy: a manifesto, in 
ART  SCHOOL:  PROPOSITIONS  FOR  THE  21ST  CENTURY  (Steven  Henry  Madoff  ed.,  2009); 
CHRISTOPHER M. KELTY, TWO BITS: THE CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE OF FREE SOFTWARE (2008).  
The computer scientist Edward Felten refers to the related “freedom to tinker” as “your freedom to 
understand, discuss, repair, and modify the technological devices you own.”  See Freedom to Tinker, 
available at  http://www.freedom-to-tinker.com/ (accessed Nov. 29, 2010). 
30 See Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239, 250 (1903). 
6 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 7 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
“aura.”31  Andy Warhol took that suggestion to its logical conclusion, deliberately conflating 
art, craft and industrial production and centering his artistic and cultural enterprise in a 
facility known as the Factory.32  Warhol’s work would hardly have been revolutionary had 
works of art traditionally been defined in terms of their craft-attributes; his work may be the 
single best argument for the proposition that creativity and craft overlap considerably, if they 
are not one and the same.  Are craft works creative?  The answer must be that they may be.  
What copyright law makes of that proposition is addressed in the next section. 
 
Copyright’s Treatment of Craft 
 
Though  things  can  be  creative,  copyright  law  goes  to  great  lengths  to  exclude 
creative things from copyright protection.  Surprisingly, in other words, a body of law that is 
calculated to encourage creativity goes out of its way not to encourage creativity in craft. 
 
Copyright’s foundational principle, distinguishing the intangible, creative work of 
authorship protected by copyright from its material embodiment, is now stated in Section 
202 of the Copyright Act:   
Ownership of a copyright, or of any of the exclusive rights under a copyright, 
is  distinct  from  ownership  of  any  material  object  in  which  the  work  is 
embodied. Transfer of ownership of any material object, including the copy 
or phonorecord in which the work is first fixed, does not of itself convey any 
rights in the copyrighted work embodied in the object; nor, in the absence of 
an agreement, does transfer of ownership of a copyright or of any exclusive 
rights under a copyright convey property rights in any material object.33  
The  second  sentence  of  that  section  offers  the  standard  explanation  for  the  first.  
Distinguishing the intangible from the material is necessary in order to ensure that the flow 
of objects from person to person does not, in itself, entail the flow of copyright interests.  If 
I sell you a book, I do not sell you the copyright that protects what the author wrote.  I may 
not own that copyright or, if I do, I may want to sell or license the copyright separately.   
 
Section 202 is not the only copyright provision that reflects the intangible/tangible 
distinction.  Section 109(a), the doctrine of first sale, implements the second sentence of 
Section 202 by confirming that a sale or gift of a lawfully-produced copy of a work of 
                                                 
31  See  Walter  Benjamin,  The  Work  of  Art  in  the  Age  of  Mechanical  Reproduction,  reprinted  in 
ILLUMINATIONS 217 (Hannah Arendt ed., Harry Zohn trans., 1968). 
32 Whether Warhol and other Pop artists changed art, ended art, or extended an existing dialogue 
about art is the subject of lively critical commentary. Arthur Danto is well-known for his critique of 
Warhol as a revolutionary.  See, e.g., ARTHUR C. DANTO, BEYOND THE BRILLO BOX: THE VISUAL 
ARTS IN POST-HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE (1992).  In a recent article, Louis Menand reports on an 
unpublished response to Danto by Bertrand Rouge, in which Rouge points out that Warhol’s 
celebrated Pop pieces (Brillo boxes, for example) were not in fact Brillo boxes but were carefully 
(and importantly) constructed reconstructions of Brillo boxes.  Louis Menand, Top of the Pops, NEW 
YORKER (Jan. 11, 2010), at 57, 62.  Was it art?  Craft?  Mass produced?  Warhol toyed with the 
audience.  
33 17 U.S.C. § 202 (2006). 
7 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 8 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
authorship does not infringe the copyright owner’s exclusive right to distribute copies of the 
work.34  A “work of authorship” may exist – in the author’s mind, for example – prior to its 
“fixation” in a tangible medium; only upon fixation does copyright protection begin.35  The 
definition of a copyrightable “work of authorship” draws the same line.  Works of visual 
creativity, such as photography, painting, and sculpture, can be protected by copyright as 
pictorial, graphic, and sculptural (PGS) works, but only so long as the creative expression 
that they embody can be deemed to be “separable” from their materiality.36  Exactly how to 
analyse “separability” is a question that continues to challenge courts; in some circumstances, 
“conceptual” separability is sufficient.37  Conceptual separability is the ability to hold in one’s 
imagination a concept of the intangible work of authorship embodied in a thing, though it is 
impossible to specify what that means in practice, for it requires conjuring an (intangible) 
idea  of  (intangible)  expression.      That  explanation  is  itself  an  intangible  concept.  
Immateriality is the most slippery of slippery slopes. 
 
  Finally,  there  is  the  body  of  rules  that  addresses  the  creator’s  so-called  “moral 
rights,” which include the right to prevent harm to the integrity of the work, including 
destruction or mutilation of the author’s work, and to have the work properly attributed to 
the author.38  In American copyright law, these are expressed primarily in Section 106A of 
the Copyright Act.39  Section 106A expresses the ambivalence about intangible and material 
dimensions of original works of authorship that inheres in the concept of moral rights.  On 
the one hand, the very idea of moral rights presupposes an act of intangible creativity that is 
transferred from the author to the work of authorship.  The creative object “embodies” the 
author in one of several possible ways (the author’s labor, or the author’s identity, or the 
author’s personality, or the author’s moral standing), all of them pointing unequivocally to 
the notion that what is at stake is protecting rights in an intangible.40  On the other hand, 
Section 106A deals largely with the materiality of the author’s work.  Under Section 106A, 
the author’s rights extend only to certain works that are produced in limited editions, that is, 
those in which the author’s expression is most clearly expressed in the materiality of craft.41 
Moral  rights  in  copyright  reflect  a  kind  of  internal  struggle,  with  the  commitment  to 
intangibility facing off against the pragmatics of artistic practice. 
 
                                                 
34 17 U.S.C. § 109(a) (2006). 
35 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2006) (definition of “fixed”).  Copyright law does not consider the human brain 
to  be  a  “tangible  medium  of  expression,”  an  assumption  that  carries  the  law’s  treatment  of 
“creativity” as disembodied thought to its logical conclusion.  David Nimmer, Brains and Other 
Paraphernalia of the Digital Age, 10 HARV. J.L. & TECH . 1 (1996). 
36 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2006) (definition of “pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works”). 
37 See Brandir Int’l , Inc. v. Cascade Pacific Lumber Co., 834 F.2d 1142 (2d Cir. 1987). 
38 Moral rights are not, primarily, concerned with morality; rather, they are contrasted with the 
author’s economic rights, through which the author controls commercial exploitation of the work.  
The  two  frameworks  are  less  distinct  than  they  sometimes  appear.    See  Cyrill  P.  Rigamonti, 
Deconstructing Moral Rights, 47 HARV. INT’L L.J. 353 (2006). 
39 17 U.S.C. § 104A (2006). 
40 See Rigamonti, supra note 38. 
41 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2006) (definition of “work of visual art”). 
8 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 9 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
  The first modern copyright law, the Statute of Anne, did not clearly differentiate 
among “expression,” “copyright” and “medium”; it referred to the “copy” and “copies” in 
“books,” intending that authors could own and transfer exclusive rights to print them.42  
What we now regard as distinct “expressive” and “tangible” things, or content and form, 
was a unity.  “Copy” referred to both the author’s original manuscript and to the right to 
produce  further  copies.    The  first  American  copyright  statute  similarly  referred  to 
protectable and indivisible “maps, charts, and books.”43  (Oren Bracha argues that the 
concept of the intangible literary work was known at the time, but also notes that a copyright 
referred to the exclusive right to manufacture copies of a specific text.44)  Copyright’s 
modern duality, which we now read in Section 202, can be traced, instead, to judicial 
decisions in England and later, in the United States, adding the gloss that comes to us as the 
idea that copyright only protects intangibles.  In England, Pope v. Curll45 dealt with ownership 
of unpublished letters sent by Alexander Pope to Jonathan Swift.  The letters having come 
into  the  possession  of  Pope’s  enemy,  the  bookseller  Curll,  Pope  sued  to  enjoin  their 
publication.  He won his injunction, and on Curll’s demand to lift the injunction, the Lord 
Chancellor refused, ruling that possession of copies of the letters did not entail the right to 
publish them.  That right remained with the author.46  That distinction between form and 
content appeared first in the United States in Stevens v. Cady,47 which addressed the right to 
publish maps produced from a copperplate that had been seized to satisfy a judgment.  Two 
years later, in a later opinion in the same case, Stevens v. Gladding,48 the Court elaborated:  
And upon this question of the annexation of the copyright to the plate it is 
to be observed, first, that there is no necessary connection between them. 
They are distinct subjects of property, each capable of existing, and being 
owned and transferred, independent of the other. It was lawful for any one 
to make, own, and sell this copperplate. The manufacture of stereotype plates 
is an established business, and the ownership of the plates of a book under 
copyright may be, and doubtless in practice is, separated from the ownership 
of the copyright. If an execution against a stereotype founder were levied on 
                                                 
42 “An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the 
Authors or Purchasers of such Copies, during the Times therein mentioned,” 8 Anne., c. 19 (1710) 
(Eng.). 
43 “An Act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts, and books, to 
the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times therein mentioned,” Act of May 31, 
1790, § 1, ch. 15, 1 Stat. 124 (1790).  
44 See Oren Bracha, The Ideology of Authorship Revisited: Authors, Markets, and Liberal Values in Early 
American Copyright,  118 YALE L.J. 186, 199-200 (2008). 
45 2 Atk. 342 (1741). 
46 See Mark Rose, The Author in Court: Pope v. Curll (1741), 21 CULTURAL CRITIQUE 197 (Spring 
1992). 
47 55 U.S. 528, 530 (1852) (“The copyright is an exclusive right to the multiplication of the copies, for 
the  benefit  of  the  author  or  his  assigns,  disconnected  from  the  plate,  or  any  other  physical 
existence.”). 
48 58 U.S. 447 (1854).  Meredith McGill argues that the distinction between the author’s legal right 
and the physical object can be traced to Wheaton v. Peters, 33 U.S. (8 Pet.) 591, 654-62 (1834), the 
first major American copyright case.  See Meredith L. McGill, The Matter of the Text: Commerce, Print 
Culture and the Authority of the State in American Copyright Law, 9 AM. LITERARY HIST. 21, 41-42 (1997).  
9 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 10 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
such plates, which he had made for an author and not delivered, the title to 
those plates would be passed by the execution sale, and the purchaser might 
sell them, but clearly he could not print and publish the book for which they 
were  made.  The  right  to  print  and  publish  is  therefore  not  necessarily 
annexed to the plate, nor parcel of it. 
Neither is the plate the principal thing, and the right to print and publish an 
incident or accessory thereof. It might be more plausibly said that the plate is 
an incident or accessory of the right; because the sole object of the existence 
of the plate is as a means to exercise and enjoy the right to print and publish. 
Nor does the rule that he who grants a thing, grants impliedly what is 
essential to the beneficial use of that thing, apply to this case. A press, and 
paper, and ink, are essential to the beneficial use of a copperplate. But it 
would hardly be contended that the sale of a copperplate passed a press, and 
paper, and ink, as incidents of the plate, because necessary to its enjoyment.49 
The Court’s reasoning (and that in Pope v. Curll) is notable in that there was virtually no 
consideration given to what object was or was not original, or expressive or creative.  The 
intangible/material distinction was at least metaphysical and at most economic.  The point of 
decision in each case was largely that the tangible object and the copyright were two separate 
“things,” as if it were silly to conflate the two.  To be sure, the opinions manifest sensitivity 
to the functional questions at stake, but those questions were largely economic, not artistic.  
Pope was not subject to the depredations of his nemesis Curll and could publish the letters 
independently; the party that seized the copperplate in Stevens did not get more value than it 
was entitled to.   
 
As  the  legislative  history  underlying  Section  202  later  confirmed,  the 
intangible/material distinction first identified in these cases did not immediately become a 
universal  proposition  of  Anglo-American  copyright,  grounded  in  aesthetic  or  cognitive 
sensibilities.  At least with respect to unpublished work, and in tension with Pope v. Curll, 
conveyance of a tangible expressive object included conveyance of the right to publish it.  
The House Report noted:  
[T]he bill would change a common law doctrine exemplified by the decision 
in Pushman v. New York Graphic Society, Inc., 287 N.Y. 302, 39 N.E. 2d 249 
(1942). Under that doctrine, authors or artists are generally presumed to 
transfer common law literary property rights when they sell their manuscript 
or work of art, unless those rights are specifically reserved. This presumption 
would be reversed under the bill, since a specific written conveyance of rights 
would be required in order for a sale of any material object to carry with it a 
transfer of copyright.50 
In  short,  the  logic  of  copyright’s  insistence  on  protection  for  the  intangible  work  of 
authorship produced by an author, and only for that intangible work of authorship, emerged 
not as part of the initial justification for copyright or part of its essential structure.  It 
emerged out of the common law process by which courts decided how best to protect the 
                                                 
49 Stevens v. Gladding, 58 U.S. at 452. 
50 H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, at 124 (1976), reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659. 
10 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 11 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
legitimate  interests  of  the  parties  before  them,  and  as  a  result,  the  scope  of  the 
intangible/material distinction was, at least initially, rather modest.   
 
Note that in the structure of copyright doctrine as reviewed above there are two, 
related, dualities at work.  The first is between the tangible object that embodies a work of 
authorship on the one hand, and the copyright that attaches to that work of authorship on 
the other.  This is the distinction that developed in Pope v. Curll, Stevens v. Cady and that is 
embodied now in Section 202 of the Copyright Act, for example.   The second is between 
the tangible object that embodies a work of authorship, on the one hand, and the expressive 
work of authorship itself, on the other.  This is the distinction that drives “separability” 
analysis with respect to PGS works, for example.51  The two distinctions are closely aligned, 
to the point that some scholars, and perhaps many, simply identify the work of authorship 
with the copyright and declare that both constitute the intangible to be distinguished from 
the relevant tangible object.  Only a small, emerging body of scholarship treats the concept 
of the intangible “work of authorship” as an analytically distinct and relevant thing.52  It does 
so partly in declarative, metaphysical terms that echo the arguments of courts that divide the 
copyright from the work.  Importantly for present purposes, it does so partly in service of 
functional aims, defining and redefining the work of authorship for reasons that oppose the 
goal of those courts.  The point is to use the concept of the intangible work to limit the 
scope of the rights of the owner of the copyright in that work, rather than to preserve or 
extend them. 
 
  The proposition that the existence and character of a work of authorship can be 
shaped by legal doctrine is the link between the first duality (copyright/material object) and 
the  second  duality  (work  of  authorship/material  object).    The  distinction  between  the 
intangible and tangible attributes of creative works themselves is, in large part, a creature of 
the  law  itself.    When  copyright  courts  and  lawyers  go  searching  for  the  copyrightable 
“expression” that is distinct from the “tangible object” in which expression is embodied, 
they are engaging in a process taught, at least in the first place, by law and not by art. 
 
What we now understand as a broad and fundamental intangible/material distinction 
applicable to the concept of creativity emerged during the late 18th century and during the 
19th centuries, under the influence of the English poet Edward Young and the German 
                                                 
51 For present purposes, I need not brave the further challenge of deciding whether a work of 
authorship must be divided into intangible expression and intangible idea, or whether a work of 
authorship is, by definition, expression, which resides in a tangible object somehow independent of a 
work’s “idea” or “ideas.” 
52 See Cohen, supra note 26,  at 1171 (relying in part on an unpublished manuscript by Olufunmilayo 
B. Arewa); Justin Hughes, supra note 12 (arguing that copyright should not extend to works that are, 
in effect, too small); Michael J. Madison, Law as Design: Objects, Concepts, and Digital Things, 56 CASE W. 
RES. L. REV. 381 (2005) (describing the ability of the law to affect the size and shape of its objects); 
L. Ray Patterson & Stanley F. Birch, Jr., A Unified Theory of Copyright, 46 HOUS. L. REV. 215 (2009) 
(arguing that the intangible work of authorship is unowned, as a matter of the First Amendment). But 
see Robert H. Rotstein, Beyond Metaphor: Copyright Infringement and the Fiction of the Work, 68 CHI.-KENT 
L. REV. 725 (1993) (critiquing copyright’s construct of fixed, autonomous work). 
11 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 12 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
philosopher  Johann  Gottlieb  Fichte.    As  part  of  the  emergence  of  what  Martha 
Woodmansee has described as the “romantic authorship” model of creativity during that 
period, and as part of an political campaign to promote property for authors,53 Fichte, 
following Young, responded to the challenge of identifying and defining the singular “thing” 
that could be owned by an author even as that thing was multiplied in copies produced by a 
bookseller.54  In Proof of the Illegality of Reprinting: A Rationale and a Parable, Fichte argued: 
We can differentiate a book into two separate kinds: the physical one, the 
printed paper; and the intellectual one. Through the sale of the book, the 
property of the first undeniably turns over to the buyer. He can read it, and 
lend it out, as often as he wants, sell it again to whom he wants, as expensive 
or as cheap as he wants or can, or tear it up, or burn it; who could argue with 
him about that? However, since one also rarely buys a book for this, and 
most rarely buys one only to show off with its paper and print, and paper the 
walls with it; so one must also think of coming by a right to its intellectual 
aspect  through  the  purchase.  This  intellectual  aspect  is  namely  further 
divided: into the material, the contents of the book, the ideas it brings about; 
and into the form of these ideas, the manner and connection in which the 
phrases and wordings are brought forward.55 
An author’s intellectual creativity had an independent, intangible metaphysical existence that 
was linked to but distinct from any tangible carrier.  And that independent creative thing 
could be the subject of property, owned, in the first place, by the author. 
 
The implication of this abbreviated history is not that creativity does not have a 
significant intangible dimension, nor that what I define as craft is automatically or necessarily 
creative.  Rather, the implication is that the distinction between protected expression and 
tangible  medium  now  reflected  in  the  law  is  a  product  of  history,  philosophical 
commitments, economic strategies, political argument and the common law; it is neither an 
eternal  truth  nor  a  fundamental  law  of  the  psychology  of  creativity.    In  stating  a 
philosophical commitment to a distinction between intangible creativity and tangible things, 
Fichte expressed an argument that is in most respects the reverse of Aristotle’s view of 
making.  Copyright was born in an era that viewed an author’s work as a unity – the copy, 
which was expression, manuscript and exclusive right all rolled into a single thing and which  
was or at least could be, in modern jargon, “creative.”  Notwithstanding Fichte and the 
developments of the 19th century, it remains the case that material things are, or at least can 
be,  creative,  in  ways  that  closely  resemble if  not  always  mimic  those  that  characterize 
intangible original works of authorship.  My suggestion here is not that all tangible objects 
                                                 
53 See Carla Hesse, The Rise of Intellectual Property, 700 B.C.—A.D. 2000: An Idea in the Balance, 131 
DAEDALUS 26, 35 (2002). 
54 See Martha Woodmansee, Genius and the Copyright, 17 EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY STUD. 425 (1988), 
reprinted in THE AUTHOR, ART, AND THE MARKET: REREADING THE HISTORY OF AESTHETICS 
49-55 (1994). 
55 JOHANN GOTTLIEB FICHTE, PROOF OF THE ILLEGALITY OF REPRINTING: A RATIONALE AND A 
PARABLE (1793) (translation from KARL-ERIK TALLMO, THE HISTORY OF COPYRIGHT: A CRITICAL 
OVERVIEW  WITH  SOURCE  TEXTS  IN  FIVE  LANGUAGES  (forthcoming),  available  at 
http://www.copyrighthistory.com/fichte.html (accessed Nov. 29, 2010). 
12 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 13 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
should be protected by copyright; rather the suggestion is that it is possible to treat some 
tangible objects as creative craft in themselves, without separating intangible creativity from 
tangible media.  The repeal of Section 202 might be imagined, or the elimination of the 
“separability” requirement for PGS works.  A tangible object might be an original work of 
authorship.  If copyright is meant to encourage creativity, then why exclude creative things 
from its coverage?  Considering justifications for the exclusion is the subject of the next 
section. 
 
Justifications for the Exclusion of Craft from Copyright 
 
The standard consequentialist justification for copyright raises at least two immediate 
objections to the possibility of copyright in craft works, or in things.  The first is that such an 
expansion  in  the  scope  of  copyright  would  prove  administratively  and  commercially 
impractical, disruptive and harmful.  We might call this the anti-monopoly objection.  The 
second, more fundamental objection is that the standard public  goods justification  for 
copyright  law  is  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  copyright  in  craft  works.    Such 
expanded copyright is therefore unnecessary, and accepting it would impose unacceptable 
social costs.    We might call this the public goods objection.  The first objection is in part a 
special version of the second, but I treat them as distinct.  The objections have less power 
than they initially appear to.  The exclusion of copyright in craft works may be justifiable, but 
the omission probably has additional sources. 
 
The administrative and commercial disruption that might accompany copyright in 
craft works is apparent at once.  Pope v. Curll and Stevens v. Cady each adopted early versions 
of the distinction between intangible and material property precisely to clear the way for 
commercial arrangements that those courts believed appropriately respected the interests of 
each party.  The doctrine of first sale evolved for related reasons.  In the most famous first 
sale  case  in  American  law,  Bobbs-Merrill  Co.  v.  Straus,56  the  Supreme  Court  limited  a 
publisher’s copyright in its book to the first authorized sale of each volume, despite a printed 
notice in each volume that asserted that resale at a price lower than that specified by the 
publisher would be treated as an infringement of copyright.  Inelegantly, the Court expressed 
its concern that the publisher might control not only the initial market for copies of its 
books, but also subsequent markets for their resale: 
This conclusion is reached in view of the language of the statute, read in the 
light of its main purpose to secure the right of multiplying copies of the 
work,-a right which is the special creation of the statute. True, the statute also 
secures, to make this right of multiplication effectual, the sole right to vend 
copies of the book, the production of the author’s thought and conception. 
The owner of the copyright in this case did sell copies of the book in 
quantities and at a price satisfactory to it. It has exercised the right to vend. 
What the complainant contends for embraces not only the right to sell the 
copies, but to qualify the title of a future purchaser by the reservation of the 
right to have the remedies of the statute against an infringer because of the 
printed notice of its purpose so to do unless the purchaser sells at a price 
                                                 
56 210 U.S. 339 (1908). 
13 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 14 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
fixed in the notice. To add to the right of exclusive sale the authority to 
control all future retail sales, by a notice that such sales must be made at a 
fixed sum, would give a right not included in the terms of the statute, and, in 
our view, extend its operation, by construction, beyond its meaning, when 
interpreted with a view to ascertaining the legislative intent in its enactment.57 
The Court was speaking directly of concerns that the copyright owner would acquire a 
monopoly over all markets in which its books were distributed, even though it was unwilling 
or unable to express those concerns directly in antitrust terms. 
 
Later scholars identified related problems in the idea of equitable servitudes on 
chattels.  A copyright in a material object, limiting what the possessor of that object might 
do  with  it,  would  amount  to  a  kind  of  servitude  that  would  needlessly  interfere  with 
commerce.  What objects could be so protected?  What kinds of limitations would be 
permitted?    How  would  any  individual  know  the  scope  of  the  legal  limits  that  might 
accompany a given object?  Servitudes in land were (and are) subject to rules that limit the 
kinds of restrictions that can be imposed on later landowners; land transfers are relatively 
infrequent and highly ritualized; recording systems make it mostly straightforward to impose 
on both transferors and acquirers of land certain duties to notify and to investigate the 
condition of legal title.  Servitudes in land are traditionally legitimate.  The world of objects is 
far  denser,  faster  paced,  less  ritualistic  and  not  subject  to  effective  recording  systems.  
Servitudes in chattels are suspect. 
   
  The  analyses  that  pointed  out  these  concerns  also  offered  ways  to  limit  them.  
Zechariah Chafee observed in 1928 that copyright operates less like a servitude than a patent 
does, because copyright, unlike patent, does not embrace the exclusive right to control use 
of the protected work.58  In other words, the extent to which copyright in an object might 
obstruct commerce in things depends on the shape of the copyright in the first place.  
Patents in things, or more precisely, patents that cover innovative technologies built into 
tangible objects, pose a greater potential threat to commerce, because patent law includes the 
exclusive right to “use” the patented invention, even after a device embodying the invention 
is sold.59  Patent law mitigates this threat in a variety of ways:  It includes an “exhaustion” 
principle that corresponds roughly to copyright’s doctrine of first sale.60  Patents are not 
available until an application for a patent has been examined by the Patent Office and a 
patent has been issued.  Prospective users of an invention have access to a public database of 
patents that corresponds, crudely, to an index of recorded interests in land.  So long as 
copyright lacks an exclusive “use right,” and so long as copyright remains limited to the core 
purpose of permitting the copyright owner to control reproduction and distribution of 
                                                 
57 Id. at 350-51. 
58 See Zechariah Chafee, Jr., Equitable Servitudes on Chattels, 41 HARV. L. REV. 945, 998-1005 (1928). 
59 35 U.S.C. § 271 (2006). 
60 Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc., 128 S. Ct. 2109 (2008).  The subject matter of 
patent law is, of course, far broader than innovation manifested in machines.  35 U.S.C. § 101 (2006).  
The extent of limitations on patentable subject matter, and the scope of overlaps between patent and 
copyright in computer technology, are in flux.  In re Bilski, 545 F.3d 943 (Fed. Cir. 2008), cert. granted 
sub nom. Bilski v. Doll , 130 S. Ct. 3218 (2010). 
14 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 15 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
multiple copies of the work, then permitting copyright to apply to creative chattels imposes 
relatively modest burdens on commerce.  The doctrine of first sale mitigates the major 
remaining burden, by limiting the copyright owner’s right to distribute copies of the work 
and thereby separating the initial market for the work from resale markets for the work.   
 
More significant problems have emerged in recent decades with the rise of a de facto 
use right in copyright,61 which exists via interaction of the exclusive rights to reproduce the 
work in copies (the reproduction right) and to display and perform the work publicly (the 
display  and  performance  rights)  and  the  fact  that  virtually  all  computer  code  is  both 
protected  by  copyright  and  cannot  be  used  without  being  reproduced  or  displayed  or 
performed, or both.  A printed book can be used (that is, read) without being reproduced; 
using an electronic or digital book requires its reproduction, display or performance.  Given 
the existence of these de facto use rights, copyright in creative chattels (a phrase that I use 
only for the limited purpose of discussing servitudes) imposes problematic burdens on later 
users.  Scholars have analysed those burdens at length.62  Those burdens might be mitigated 
by reform of the copyright law (an expanded doctrine of first sale, for example).  Copyright 
reform seems unlikely.  Promising solutions have emerged via private institutions.  Recent 
scholarship on servitudes in copyright law suggests that modern technologies and emerging 
forms of private ordering, such as open source and Creative Commons licenses, can mitigate 
the commerce-inhibiting effects of servitudes on creative chattels,63  largely by solving the 
problems of giving adequate notice of restrictions on use to later users, and by standardizing 
the types of restrictions that are used.  In the context of copyright in computer chattels, that 
is,  original  computer  programs  and  other  digital  (but  material)  works,  servitudes  have 
become commonplace and have not proved unduly problematic.64 
 
  Even if the commercial burdens possibly associated with copyright in craft works 
can be overcome, there remains the more basic question of justification.  Is copyright in 
craft  works  even  necessary?    Copyright’s  distinction  between  the  intangible  work  of 
authorship and the material form that embodies that work plays into a central tenet of the 
consequentialist account.  Copyright is needed not merely to encourage the production and 
distribution of creativity.  As economists have taught us over the last 25 years, copyright is 
needed to solve a specific economic problem associated with the production of intangibles.  
Intangible  works  of  authorship  are  species  of  information  or  knowledge  goods,  and 
information or knowledge goods are kinds of “public goods.”  Intangible public goods are 
nonrival, which means that consumption of one item of that kind (one copy of a book, for 
example) does not deplete the supply of that kind available to others, and nonexcludable, 
                                                 
61 See Jessica Litman, Billowing White Goo, 31 COLUM. J.L. & ARTS 587, 596 (2008). 
62 See Madison, supra note 51. 
63 See Molly Shaffer Van Houweling, The New Servitudes, 96 GEO. L.J. 885 (2008).  David McGowan 
referred to license restrictions on computer programs that bind downstream users as “covenants that 
run with the code.”  David McGowan, Legal Implications of Open-Source Software, 2001 U. ILL. L. REV. 
241, 268-71 (2001). 
64 See Michael J. Madison, Reconstructing the Software License, 35 LOY. U. CHI. L.J. 275, 279-82 (2003) 
(describing how software licensing depends on the concept of the “licensed program,” or material 
thing). 
15 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 16 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
which means that producers of those goods are unable to appropriate returns via market 
transactions.  Nonrivalry and nonexcludability create a problem of incentives.  Rivalry and 
excludability are keys to creating markets in things.  With no price, there is no return; with 
no return, producers will not produce.  If authors and publishers cannot recover the cost of 
producing new books, then they will not produce new books.   
 
Copyright law steps in to protect authors and producers.  Copyright cannot create 
rivalry, but it can offer degrees of excludability.  Copyright punishes me if I share the 
intangible contents of a book that I purchase, at least under some circumstances – if I share 
those  intangible  contents  by  making  and  distributing  my  own  tangible  copies,  or  by 
performing or displaying those contents publicly.65  The discipline of the legal sanction 
enables authors and publishers to set prices and to make money.  Of course, copyright 
represents a tradeoff.  By permitting authors and publishers to set prices and make money, 
copyright imposes costs on those who read and rely on creativity, including both ordinary 
consumers and other authors who build on earlier work, all of whom typically pay to access 
creative works.  Copyright law offers reasonable efforts to mitigate those costs, by limiting 
the scope of copyright to what is needed to produce new creativity.  Copyright does not 
protect unoriginal “facts” or “ideas”; its scope is limited to the author’s “expression”; 
copyright permits some “fair use” of the author’s work. 
 
  The economic logic of copyright, that it is designed to solve a public goods problem 
and encourage the production of creative works of authorship, does not apply, on its face, to 
the question of creative craft works.  Craft works are rival.  There are no public good 
barriers to creating effective markets for them.  Creators of these things have “ordinary” 
market-based incentives to produce their works: scarcity of supply and the sizable challenges 
inherent in reproducing works whose aesthetic appeal lies largely in their irreproducibility.  
Offering copyright protection to these creators would impose costs on society, similar to the 
costs described above with respect to the burdens on commerce imposed by servitudes on 
chattels, that would not be warranted by offsetting benefits.  Via markets for chattels, those 
benefits would be available anyway.  The idea that copyright protects intangible works of 
authorship is tightly bound up with the central economic justification for copyright, and 
copyright in craft works simply has no place in that argument. 
 
  The strength of the public goods objection to copyright in craft works depends, 
however, on the strength of the claim that copyrightable works truly can be separated into 
intangible original works of authorship on the one hand, and tangible forms on the other.  
As I pointed out above, within copyright doctrine itself much of that distinction stems not 
from recognition of an organic difference that is natural to creators and creativity, but 
instead from judicial and philosophical judgments that drawing that line was and is necessary 
to protect the interests of authors and other copyright owners.  The line between intangible 
creativity and tangible objects is made, not given.  The earliest copyright statutes drew no 
such distinction.  The fact that the line was not present in the early history of copyright does 
not mean that the line cannot or should not be drawn, or that in some metaphysical sense, 
that it cannot exist.  But the line established by Section 202 and in “separability” analysis 
                                                 
65 17 U.S.C. § 106 (2006). 
16 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 17 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
applicable to PGS works, for example, has to be justified, not merely assumed, just like any 
other legal rule.  The distinction between copyright protection for intangible works of 
authorship and its absence for material forms cannot be justified entirely by the public goods 
argument, because the public goods argument depends largely on the premise that there is a 
distinction  between  intangible  works  of  authorship  and  material  objects.    The  partial 
circularity of the public goods argument should be acknowledged.   
 
The economic justification for copyright should not be overstated, but it should not 
be discarded.  Copyright in computer programs and other digital works demonstrates the 
power of the public goods justification in the context of works that might be characterized 
as wholly intangible (though digital technology might also be termed a type of materiality).  
The legally-mandated distinction between the original work of authorship and the tangible 
medium is, to a meaningful degree, not only unnecessary in this context but resisted by 
copyright owners.  Producers of these digital works clearly face problems of nonrivalry and 
nonexcludability with respect to potential users of those programs.66  Copyright protection 
solves those problems and provides an appropriability mechanism for those producers, but 
only up to a point.  Over time, and via industry practices, those producers have filled the gap 
that they perceive between the protection that the law offers and the true scope of the 
appropriability problem.  How?  Via licenses and restrictive notices by which the copyright 
owner claims ownership of the material work, among other things, they try to collapse the 
distinction between the work of authorship and the tangible medium.67  Copyright law 
pushes back, most recently in cases questioning the scope of the doctrine of first sale as 
applied to digital works.68  The public goods justification for copyright turns out to have an 
uncertain foundation in distinguishing between intangible works and material objects, and 
when it is applied to a true intangible, computer programs, producers of those programs 
seek (partial) refuge in materiality.  In the end, if a justification for excluding copyright in 
craft works is to be found, it has to be found merely in the economic logic of copyright, 
which is incomplete, but elsewhere.  
 
                                                 
66 See Pamela Samuelson et al., A Manifesto Concerning the Legal Protection of Computer Programs, 94 
COLUM. L. REV. 2308 (1994) (describing a route to solving this problem without the costs of 
copyright).  Scholars have identified a range of contexts in which materiality, including material 
practices (social norms) provide solutions to appropriability problems regarding public goods, or 
putting the same proposition differently, suggest that the scope of a public goods “problem” is less 
severe than an exclusive focus on intangibles might suggest.  See, e.g.,  Stephen Breyer, The Uneasy Case 
for Copyright: A Study of Copyright in Books, Photocopies and Computer Programs, 84 HARV. L. REV. 281 
(1970) (discussing the economics of the book publishing industry); Dotan Oliar & Christopher 
Sprigman,  There’s  No  Free  Laugh  (Anymore):  The  Emergence  of  Intellectual  Property  Norms  and  the 
Transformation of Stand-up Comedy, 94 VA. L. REV. 1787 (2008) (discussing social norms among stand-
up comics); Kal Raustiala & Christopher Sprigman, The Piracy Paradox: Innovation and Intellectual Property 
in Fashion Design, 92 VA. L. REV. 1687 (2006) (discussing fashion design). 
67 See Madison, supra note 64 (describing practices of software licensors that focus on licensing 
program copies); Michael J. Madison, Notes on a Geography of Knowledge, 77 FORDHAM L. REV. 2039 
(2009) (describing circumstances of recent copyright first sale and patent exhaustion cases). 
68 Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010) (rejecting application of doctrine of first 
sale to re-sale of “licensed” software). 
17 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 18 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
III.  The Ethics of Craft 
 
The distinction between intangible creativity and material creativity is, at bottom, 
philosophical as well as economic, which is to say that it is ethical.  Fichte, who is the 
philosopher most directly connected with the origins of that distinction in law, worked in the 
natural law tradition.69  Identifying and recognizing the intangible expression of the author 
was an effective way to protect the economic interests of the author, to be sure, but in 
Fichte’s hands the separation of intangible from material was also a way to identify and 
protect the distinctive personality and identity of the author.70  The author, in short, had 
ethical standing as an individual that deserved to be protected regardless of the economics of 
the author’s exploitation by publishers.  “Desert” does not quite capture Fichte’s argument; 
his claim was that the author’s expression was incapable of appropriation by others and that 
property in the expression necessarily remained with the author.  The English philosopher 
John Locke is more often associated with the concept of rewarding the author for his labor, 
but in the Lockean framework, the argument is likewise ethical, and likewise tied to the 
intangible expression produced by the creator.71  In terms of the history of copyright, 
designing the law to protect intangible interests was not, originally, an economic argument. 
 
Despite the fact that this distinction has acquired an economic cast, in practice and 
in copyright doctrine it retains a strong ethical flavor, to the point that the Supreme Court 
has gone out of its way to try to exclude ethical considerations from copyright analysis.72  
Copyright law does not merely seek to recognize intangible works of authorship because 
society needs to create incentives to produce and distribute them – and does not need to 
create  incentives  to  produce  and  distribute  material  things.    Copyright’s  embrace  of 
consequentialist  justifications  means  that  the  law  affirmatively  excludes  the  material.  
Copyright in craft works is not part of copyright law because the law makes an ethical 
judgment, not because craft works are outside the now-standard public goods account of 
copyright. 
 
For present purposes, Fichte has a modern counterpart in the sociologist Richard 
Sennett.  In The Craftsman,73 Sennett both describes and argues the proposition that humans 
are and should be makers (recalling Aristotle74), and makers of material things, and that their 
                                                 
69 See Maurizo Borghi, Owning Form, Sharing Content: Natural-Right Copyright in the Digital Environment, in 
5 NEW DIRECTIONS IN COPYRIGHT LAW 197 (Fiona Macmillan ed., 2007). 
70 See id. 
71  Tying  ethics  to  intangibles  in  the  Lockean  framework  is  common  both  to  those  who  are 
sympathetic to Locke in copyright, see Wendy J. Gordon, Render Copyright unto Caesar: On Taking 
Incentives Seriously, 71 U. CHI. L. REV. 75 (2004), and to those who critique Locke.  See Carys J. Craig, 
Locke’s Labor and Limiting the Author’s Right: A Warning Against a Lockean Approach to Copyright Law, 28 
QUEEN’S L.J. 1 (2002). 
72 See Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991) (rejecting the possibility 
that a work of authorship might be “original” by virtue of the author’s labor and investment in 
creating it, sometimes known as the author’s “sweat of the brow”). 
73 See RICHARD SENNETT, THE CRAFTSMAN (2008). 
74 Sennett focuses on Aristotle’s and Plato’s respective ethical views of “artists” and “artisans,” 
treating the question of making as distinct.  See id. at 23. 
18 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 19 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
status as makers was and is avowedly ethical.  In Sennett’s words, “people can learn about 
themselves through the things they make. . . .  [W]e can achieve a more human material life, 
if only we better understand the making of things.”75  Sennett writes about craftsmanship, 
“the skill of making things well.”76  His usage is not of a piece with what I refer to here as 
craft in tangible things; Sennett is interested in the discipline of skilled craft whether or not it 
results in something tangible.  But he focuses on a phenomenon that is clearly and closely 
linked to the “creativity” that is the focus of modern copyright.  He  
explores these dimensions of skill, commitment, and judgment in a particular 
way.  [He] focuses on the intimate connection between hand and head.  
Every good craftsman conducts a dialogue between concrete practices and 
thinking;  this  dialogue  evolves  into  sustaining  habits,  and  these  habits 
establish a rhythm between problem solving and problem finding.  The 
relation between hand and head appears in domains seemingly as different as 
bricklaying, cooking, designing a playground or playing the cello – but all 
these practices can misfire or fail to ripen.  There is nothing inevitable about 
becoming  skilled,  just  as  there  is  nothing  mindlessly  mechanical  about 
technique itself.77 
Sennett traces the rise of art (distinct from craft) and the notions of “originality” and 
“creativity” to changes in the institutional settings of material production during the 
Renaissance.  “Craft” denoted (and still connotes) a status of personal autonomy that 
was  increasingly  threatened  in  the  context  of  various  emerging  hierarchies; 
establishing a rhetoric of originality and especially “creativity” was a way for the 
individual to recover some autonomy, no matter what the institutional context.78  
Sennett might seem to be naively ignorant of the realities of modern industrial 
production, but his philosophical stance is hardly new.  The Victorian essayist John 
Ruskin took essentially the same position.  “Give a worker the chance not merely to 
manufacture or assemble, but actually to create, and you lay open the road to a life of 
redemptive beauty. To those whom the scripture could not preserve, the experience 
of true artistic craftsmanship might yet give salvation.”79  
 
The result, in historical terms, was a new bridge between the ethics of “making” as 
ennobling and the concept of “creativity” as an essentially internal process.  In other words, 
like Fichte Sennett argues that philosophically speaking, creativity is an ethical construct, not 
                                                 
75 Id. at 8. 
76 Id. 
77 Id. at 9. 
78 See id. at 69-72. 
79 John Matteson, Constructing Ethics and the Ethics of Construction:John Ruskin and the Humanity of the 
Builder, CROSS CURRENTS (Fall 2002) (describing Ruskin and his ethics of architecture, as expressed 
in The Seven Lamps of Architecture (1849) and The Stones of Venice (1851-1853)).  As the reference to 
Ruskin suggests, Sennett is trying to rehabilitate a pre-modern tradition.  He is hardly alone.  In 
another recent retelling, Matthew Crawford popularizes the point in a work whose title speaks its 
thesis.  See MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD, SHOP CLASS AS SOULCRAFT: AN INQUIRY INTO THE VALUE 
OF WORK (2009).  Crawford’s book began as an article in The New Atlantis.  See Matthew B. 
Crawford, Shop Class as Soulcraft, THE NEW ATLANTIS (Summer 2006). 
19 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 20 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
only or even primarily a psychological phenomenon.  Industrialization and mechanization 
during the 19th and 20th centuries pushed creativity and art to distinctly valued class and 
cultural plateaus; the economics of mass production and mass consumption led not just to 
an explicit but unjustified divorce of the hand from the head, but also to a marriage of the 
head and the wallet.  In earlier work, Sennett described the changes wrought among bakers 
by  the  mechanization  of  the  process  of  producing  bagels  and  baguettes;  they  become 
machine operators.80  In historical and pragmatic terms, craftworks became commodities, to 
be “produced” by firms rather than made by oneself.  With books at the high end as with 
bagels at the low end.  Creators and consumers became two distinct classes. 
 
The idea that working and making are jointly creative echoes in some recent work in 
copyright that is trying to similarly rehabilitate the concept that consumers of copyrighted 
works are (ethically and normatively valued) creators, or at least are and should be permitted 
to be more actively engaged with works of authorship than standard copyright rhetoric tends 
to assume.  Rebecca Tushnet has called attention to the creative value inherent in consumer 
and reader engagement with the materiality of expressive works .81 
 
The link between Sennett and copyright in craft works is more subtle, because unlike 
scholarship  celebrating  the  complex  of  intangible  creativity  not  grounded  in  economic 
incentives,  Sennett focuses our attention on the disciplined creativity that is manifest in craft 
works, and he does so not only for the consequentialist reasons that drive most inquiries into 
creative re-use or re-mixing of copyrighted works (that is, he is not interested principally in 
arguments that encourage more people to make more things).  Instead, Sennett emphasizes 
the creation of the tangible because of how processes of creation affect us as human beings.  
Matthew Crawford’s Shop Class as Soulcraft  makes this point even more directly.82  And that 
is the point where their argument runs into the concrete wall of copyright’s distinction 
between intangible works of authorship and material artifacts.   
 
That distinction therefore represents not merely the assimilation of an early ethical 
argument about authors to a modern conception of copyright manifesting and perpetuating 
the economics of commodified creativity.  The Copyright Act does not merely ignore the 
ethical interests of authors in craft.  It rejects them, as it rejects the idea that one might be a 
“creator” if one is not working at the level of the intangible.  That rejection is unequivocal in 
the statute itself,83 but if that were not enough, then the Supreme Court’s opinion in Feist 
Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co.84 completes the task.   
 
Feist  anchors  the  entirety  of  modern  copyright  law.    Rural  Telephone  Service 
compiled and published white pages telephone directories.  Feist Publications, a competitor, 
                                                 
80 See RICHARD SENNETT, THE CORROSION OF CHARACTER: THE PERSONAL CONSEQUENCES OF 
WORK IN THE NEW CAPITALISM 71-73 (1998). 
81 See Rebecca Tushnet, Economies of Desire: Fair Use and Marketplace Assumptions, 51 WM. & MARY L. 
REV. 513 (2009). 
82 See CRAWFORD, supra note 79. 
83 See supra notes 33-41 and accompanying text. 
84 499 U.S. 340 (1991). 
20 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 21 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
copied listings from Rural and published its own directories.  Rural sued Feist.  The Supreme 
Court ultimately ruled that Rural had no legitimate copyright claim, because the phone 
numbers themselves were “facts” not protectable by copyright, and the directories were 
unoriginal “compilations” of fact.  Feist’s principal and essential contribution to copyright 
law is the articulation of the “minimal creativity” threshold for copyright protection, a 
standard the Court located in the Constitution.   
 
The Court might have stopped there and rested its argument on the nuances of 
originality and creativity in fact-based works of authorship, but it did not.  Instead, the Court 
went on a wide-ranging excursion into copyright history, seeking out and extinguishing the 
possibility that any copyright claimant might have a valid interest by virtue of the so-called 
“sweat of the brow” doctrine.  Copyright owners in some earlier cases had prevailed on the 
theory that the time and labor invested in a work of authorship justified the award of a 
protectable copyright interest.  In Feist, the Court rejected that possibility once and for all, 
and in terms that made it clear that the Court regards economic justifications for copyright 
as the only legitimate arguments in the copyright context.85  Permitting “sweat” or labor-
based claims in copyright would permit claimants to control (unoriginal) facts; in turn that 
would require new users of those facts to invest their own labor in collecting those facts.  An 
economic reading of that argument would frame the second claimant’s efforts in terms of 
waste; the second claimant (and all similarly situated second claimants) should be permitted 
to  engage  in  a  kind  of  free-riding  that  is  socially  beneficial.86  The  Court’s  conviction, 
however, is not that material practice (such as  labor)  cannot  be  the  basis  for  creative 
expression.  The Court is convinced that it should not be.  What Richard Sennett’s work 
suggests, as it looks back centuries, is that this is more than an economic argument; it is an 
ethical one.  The telephone directories under consideration in Feist were just about as far 
from craft works as one might imagine.  But the process-oriented “sweat of the brow” 
justification rejected by the Court sweeps broadly, and its rejection speaks directly to the 
kind of craft-making process that Sennett celebrates.  The Court looked the ethics of 
copyright law in the eye, and it rejected them.   
 
IV.  Conclusion:  What Craft Can Offer Copyright 
 
  Feist, on most readings, is a case about copyright in facts.  I claim that it encapsulates 
and  terminates  an  argument  about  ethics  and  about  craft,  an  argument  which  began 
centuries  ago.    In  this  conclusion,  I  point  to  some  implications  of  that  argument  for 
copyright policy and doctrine. 
 
                                                 
85 See id. at 352-54.  The Court has since reaffirmed this view, in terms that make clear that the Court 
believes  that  economic  justifications  for  copyright  have  always  been  the  only  valid  bases  for 
argument.  See Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186, 236 (2003). 
86 Hoehling v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 618 F.2d 972, 979 (2d Cir. 1980), offers an example of a 
court refusing to protect facts at least partly on the ground that the law should avoid requiring 
duplicative effort.  The defendant was cleared of a claim of infringement by a historian who argued 
that  a  motion  picture  dramatization  of  the  Hindenberg  incident  appropriated  his  historical 
reconstruction of the event. 
21 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 22 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
Beginning with questions about creative objects, or craft works, this chapter has 
examined the creativity-related aspects of copyright’s distinction between original “works of 
authorship”  and  material  objects.    It  argues  that  notwithstanding  the  proposition  that 
copyright operates under a “non-discrimination” principle with respect to the sorts of works 
that copyright can protect, forms of creativity that are expressed directly in material form, 
specifically the craft aspects of material production, are excluded from copyright protection.  
This exclusion is more doubtful that it might appear under the economically-oriented policy 
frameworks usually applied to justify copyright law, largely because the distinction between 
intangible  works  of  authorship  and  tangible  objects  is  constructed  from  philosophical 
argument as much as it relies on psychological phenomena or economic realities.  And the 
exclusion has a direct impact on the scope of ethical claims that might be made within 
copyright. There is a long and respectable tradition of arguments made on behalf of ethical 
arguments in craft, and copyright law affirmatively rejects those arguments. 
 
  The chapter has not argued that this state of affairs is necessarily inequitable or 
suboptimal from a social welfare standpoint.  Rather, it is a description of the choices that 
the law has made and continues to make.  Creativity and creation are not given to the law.  
The law “creates” creativity, in a sense, by recognizing some (the intangible products of the 
mind) and rejecting others (the tangible products of the hand).  Elsewhere I have suggested 
that the structure of intellectual property laws might be investigated profitably from the 
standpoint of the kinds of institutions and disciplines that intellectual property law enables.87  
That point leads to a key implication of this chapter.  Robert Merges and Neil Netanel, 
among others, each have argued that a chief virtue of copyright has been its success in 
supporting the existence of an independent “creator” class of artists who do not depend on 
the state or private patrons for their support.88  If society desires to construct an equivalent 
“craft  creator”  class,  then  the  scope  of  copyright,  and  particularly  the  statutory 
implementation of the intangible/material distinction, should be revisited.  The Constitution 
authorizes the enactment of copyright in “Writings.”89  Perhaps copyright should again 
subsist in “books.” 
 
  That  suggestion,  while  discomforting  in  the  sense  that  it  contradicts  a  well-
established axiom of modern copyright, leads to a series of implications for the law itself.  
Earlier  in  this  chapter  I  noted  that  some  scholars  have  begun  to  explore  theoretical 
justifications for consumer reworking and re-mixing of copyrighted works of authorship.  In 
doctrinal terms, that reworking touches on the scope of the doctrine of fair use, and on the 
scope of the copyright owner’s exclusive right to prepare derivative works.  Some of that 
scholarship mostly retains copyright’s standard intangible/material object distinction with 
respect to creativity.90  Some explores versions of creativity situated in material practice, 
                                                 
87  See  Michael  J.  Madison,  Open  Secrets,  in  THE  LAW  AND  THEORY  OF  TRADE  SECRECY:  A 
HANDBOOK OF CONTEMPORARY RESEARCH (Rochelle C. Dreyfuss and Katherine J. Strandburg 
eds., 2010) (forthcoming). 
88 See Robert P. Merges, The Concept of Property in the Digital Era, 45 HOUS. L. REV. 1239 (2008); Neil 
Weinstock Netanel, Copyright in a Democratic Civil Society, 106 YALE L.J. 283 (1996). 
89 U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8, cl. 8. 
90 See Tushnet, supra note 81. 
22 
 MADISON – CREATIVITY AND CRAFT 
Draft of June 1, 2011 – Page 23 of 23 
   
Please do not quote or cite without permission of the author. 
 
including objects and space.91  An expanded theory of copyright that embraces creativity in 
the  tangible  thing,  that  is,  in  craft  works,  might  offer  an  additional  analytic  tool  for 
measuring the proper scope of copyright as a whole.  Copyright in craft works might appear 
to extend the law beyond its current boundaries, but it might also limit the scope of the right 
to the boundaries of the tangible object itself and generate more opportunities for fair and 
non-derivative reworking.   
 
A final implication bridges traditional and modern applications of the idea of creative 
craft, moving from things produced with hand tools to things molded with keyboards and 
mice.  The chapter noted the awkward fit between copyright’s intangible/material object 
distinction and computer programs and other digital works, which impacts the operation of 
the doctrine of first sale in the digital context, and interpretations of software licenses.92  
Suppose the law were to formally recognize copyrightable creative things in the digital 
context, allowing creators of computer programs and other digital works to exercise a set of 
exclusive rights in those things that was parallel (though not necessarily identical in all 
respects) the set of exclusive rights that attaches to intangible works of authorship today?  
Adjustments to laws governing preemption of state laws applicable to copyrighted works93 
might be required.  The result, however, would be a public law of software and digital 
content licensing, rather than the kind of private law that is the subject of much skepticism 
and criticism.94  It is a possibility worth pondering, even if I stop short of recommending it.  
Reconsidering  creativity  and  craft  challenges  copyright  to  examine  broad  questions  of 
justification.  It also points to some new possibilities in addressing precise and difficult 
questions in contemporary practice. 
                                                 
91 See Cohen, supra note 26. 
92 See supra notes 66-68 and accompanying text. 
93 See 17 U.S.C. § 301 (2006). 
94 See Madison, supra note 64; Maureen A. O”Rourke, Drawing the Boundary Between Copyright and 
Conotract: Copyright Preemption of Software License Terms, 45 DUKE L.J. 479 (1995); Joel Reidenberg , The 
Rule of Intellectual Property Law in the Internet Economy,  44 HOUS. L. REV. 1073 (2007). 
23 
 