First published at 83 UMKC L. Rev. 967 (2015).
INNOVATORS, ESQ.: 
 TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  
OF LAWYER SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURS 
 
Stephanie Dangel* and Michael J. Madison** 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
To survive in today’s legal marketplace, all law school graduates must be 
entrepreneurial: they must be enterprising, opportunistic, and willing to take risks 
in the hope of reward, just like entrepreneurs.1  Yet traditional legal education 
tends  to  produce  lawyers  who  are  “strange  bedfellows”  with  entrepreneurs.   
Although  many  law  school  programs  now  train  law  students  to  represent 
entrepreneurs and to be entrepreneurial in law-related careers, few (if any) law 
schools have programs that train their graduates to be entrepreneurs in non-legal 
careers.  While a legal education may not be the best training for business 
entrepreneurs, we argue that law schools can and should be training the next 
generation of social entrepreneurs, i.e., “entrepreneurs who serve the whole of 
society with solutions that are sustainable, fair and sufficient.”2 
We begin by examining both the tension between entrepreneurs and 
traditionally-trained lawyers and the innovative programs at many law schools 
that ameliorate that tension, including the programs offered by our Innovation 
Practice Institute (IPI) at the University of Pittsburgh School of Law (“Pitt 
Law”).  These programs focus on training law students to represent entrepreneurs 
(“entrepreneurs’  lawyers”)  and  to  be  entrepreneurial  in  law-related  careers 
                                                                                                                                    
 
* Executive Director of the Innovation Practice Institute (IPI) at the University of Pittsburgh School 
of Law (Pitt Law). Email: sad111@pitt.edu.  The IPI trains law students to represent innovators and 
entrepreneurs and to be innovators and entrepreneurs. For a full description of the IPI, see 
http://innovation-practice.org. Prior to joining the IPI, Stephanie Dangel clerked in New York and 
Washington, D.C. and worked as a lawyer and social entrepreneur in Pittsburgh. 
** Professor of Law and Faculty Director of the Innovation Practice Institute at the University of 
Pittsburgh  School  of  Law.  Email:  michael.j.madison@gmail.com.  Prior  to  becoming  a  law 
professor, Professor Madison practiced law in Silicon Valley and San Francisco. The authors wish 
to thank former IPI Executive Directors Max Miller and Justine Kasznica Thornton for their 
leadership in establishing the IPI and initiating its programs and partnerships; Pitt Law graduates 
Melinda (Mindy) Cooper and M. Elizabeth Boehm Jorge for research assistance; and Pitt Law 
Dean William M. Carter, Jr., the Heinz Endowments, Charles J. Queenan, Jr., K&L Gates and Reed 
Smith for their support of the IPI. 
1 For more on the role of entrepreneurial thinking and behavior in the context of the modern legal 
profession and legal education, see David Bennett, The New Normal and the Challenge for Legal 
Education, SILICON FLATIRONS ROUNDTABLE SERIES ON ENTREPRENEURSHIP, INNOVATION, AND 
PUBLIC  POLICY  (April  2004),  available  at  http://www.silicon-
flatirons.org/documents/publications/report/201404NewNormalReport.pdf;  Michael  J.  Madison, 
Visions of the Future of (Legal) Education, U. OF PITTSBURGH LEGAL STUDIES RESEARCH PAPER 
NO. 2014-13 (Mar. 20, 2014), available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2412238. For a review of 
entrepreneurship generally that links it to economic prosperity and equity, see Amar V. Bhidé, 
Non-destructive creation: How entrepreneurship sustains development, in THE EMERGENCE OF 
ENTREPRENEURIAL ECONOMICS 55 (Tsvi Vinig & Roel van der Voort eds., 2005). 
2 See Scott London, How Do You Change the World? Become a Social Entrepreneur, SCOTT 
LONDON, http://www.scottlondon.com/interviews/drayton.html (last visited Mar.18, 2015).  
 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2620307 968  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
(“entrepreneurial lawyers”).  We then address the potential difficulties posed by 
law  school  programs  that  focus  exclusively  on  training  law  students  to  be 
entrepreneurs in the business sector (“lawyer entrepreneurs”).  Drawing on our 
own experiences and the writings of Bill Drayton, the lawyer who pioneered the 
field of social entrepreneurship, we discuss how some lawyers have applied their 
legal  education  to  be  successful  social  entrepreneurs  (“lawyer  social 
entrepreneurs”).  Finally, we outline a three-year law school program explicitly 
designed to train law students to be lawyer social entrepreneurs, a program that 
we are building at the IPI.   
 
II.  TRAINING LAW STUDENTS TO REPRESENT ENTREPRENEURS 
 
Lawyers and entrepreneurs make strange bed fellows.  Lawyers look 
“backwards” at precedents while entrepreneurs look “forward” to the 
launch of a new business or new product.  Lawyers are generally 
conservative and risk-adverse while their clients are almost always 
optimistic and willing to take chances to achieve their goals. 3 
 
This  description  accurately  and  unfortunately  reflects  the  limits  of 
traditional legal education and the stereotypical lawyers it trains.  Traditional 
legal education tends to train lawyers who are left-brained: logical, analytical, 
and  objective.    That  bias  seems  to  render  them  poorly  suited  to  represent 
entrepreneurs who are right-brained: intuitive, thoughtful, and subjective.   
These  simple  stereotypes  are  obvious  exaggerations,4  although  the 
conflicting cognitive styles of entrepreneurs and lawyers do raise a “vexing 
question of why apparently rational executives would be willing to pay such 
large sums of money for the services of an unproductive troublemaker.”5  In fact, 
“accomplished entrepreneurs will occasionally confess, sometimes grudgingly, 
                                                                                                                                    
 
3 Arizona State University, National Transactional clinic conference hosted by College of Law, 
ASU  NEWS  (June  8,  2010)  (quoting  Professor  Thomas  H,  Morsch,  who  spoke  at  a  Nat’l 
TransactionalClinicConference), https://asunews.asu.edu/20100608_TransactionalClinic 
Conference. 
4 It is, of course, a myth that people are either right-brained or left-brained.  See Kendra Cherry, 
Left  Brain  vs  Right  Brain,  ABOUT  EDUCATION, 
http://psychology.about.com/od/cognitivepsychology/a/ 
left-brain-right-brain.htm (last visited Apr. 15, 2015). To be successful, entrepreneurs must be 
analytical,  just  as  successful  lawyers  must  be  creative.    See  Marty  Zwilling,  Is  an  Ideal 
Entrepreneur  Right  Brain  or  Left  Brain?,  HUFF.  POST  (Apr.  15,  2014  5:58  PM), 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/marty-zwilling/is-an-ideal-entrepreneur_b_5155730.htm;  Michael 
Melcher, Create a Right-Brain File, CREATIVE LAWYER (Oct. 2, 2007) http://thecreativelawyer. 
typepad.com/the_creative_lawyer/2007/10/create-a-right-.html. 
5 Mark C. Suchman & Mia L. Cahill, The Hired Gun as Facilitator: Lawyers and the Suppression 
of Business Disputes in Silicon Valley, 21 LAW & SOC. INQUIRY 679, 680 (1996). 
 
 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2620307 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  969 
 
 
but with sincere gratitude and even respect, that their lawyers were key players in 
their success.”6   
Characterizations of these lawyers vary.  Professor Ronald Gilson has 
compared  lawyers  to  transaction  cost  engineers  and  reputational  brokers;7  
Professor George Dent sees them as “enterprise architects.”8  Professor Mark 
Suchman’s research on lawyers in Silicon Valley suggests that lawyers in that 
entrepreneurial  economy  do  more  than  design  solutions  to  legal  and 
organizational problems; they also play crucial roles as moderators of the hazards 
of new-company formation9 and act as “organizational pollinators” in the startup 
process.10   
Thankfully, “the Silicon Valley venture capital bar has not cornered the 
facilitative lawyering market,”11 nor is the need for such lawyering limited to 
high technology economies.  Professor Michael Risch’s study of the evolving 
economy of West Virginia demonstrates that lawyers can play crucial roles 
everywhere  in  the  development  of  founders,  business  plans  and  intellectual 
property.12 
Preparing law students and new graduates for these roles can take many 
forms.  Although traditional legal education may fail to produce lawyers who are 
trained to innovate, the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation’s Entrepreneurship 
Law website currently lists more than 100 law schools that train law students to 
represent innovators and entrepreneurs.13   
 
A.  Law Clinics 
 
Many of these programs are law school clinics offering legal services to 
innovators  and  entrepreneurs.  Northwestern  University  School  of  Law’s 
                                                                                                                                    
 
6 Anthony J. Luppino, The Value of Lawyers as Members of Entrepreneurial Teams, in HANDBOOK 
ON LAW, INNOVATION AND GROWTH 300 (Robert E. Litan ed., 2011).   
7 Ronald J. Gilson, Value Creation by Business Lawyers: Legal Skills and Asset Pricing, 94 YALE 
L.J. 239, 255 (1984).  
8 George W. Dent, Jr., Business Lawyers as Enterprise Architects, 64 BUS. LAW. 279, 281 (2009). 
9 Suchman & Cahill, supra note 5, at 680. 
10MARK C. SUCHMAN, THE CONTRACTING UNIVERSE:  LAW FIRMS AND THE EVOLUTION OF VENTURE 
CAPITAL FINANCING IN SILICON VALLEY 2 (2006); see also Mark C. Suchman, Dealmakers and 
Counselors:  Law  Firms  as  Intermediaries  in  the  Development  of  Silicon  Valley,  in 
UNDERSTANDING SILICON VALLEY: THE ANATOMY OF AN ENTREPRENEURIAL REGION 71 (M. Kenney 
ed., 2000). 
11 Luppino, supra note 6, at 311.  
12  Michael  Risch,  IP  and  Entrepreneurship  in  an  Evolving  Economy:    A  Case  Study,  in 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION IN EVOLVING ECONOMIES: THE ROLE OF LAW 156 (Megan 
Carpenter ed., 2011).  
13 See Entreprenueurship.org: For people growing great ideas, Law School Entrepreneurship 
Clinics,  http://www.entrepreneurship.org/entrepreneurship-law/law-school-entrepreneurship-
clinics.aspx (last visited Apr. 10, 2015).  For an overview of these programs, see ANTHONY J. 
LUPPINO, CAN DO: TRAINING LAWYERS TO BE EFFECTIVE COUNSELORS TO ENTREPRENEURS—
REPORT  TO  EWING  MARION  KAUFFMAN  FOUNDATION  (Jan.  30,  2008),  available  at 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1157065. 
 970  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
Entrepreneurship Law Center teaches law students to be problem solvers,14 and 
the University of Missouri—Kansas City School of Law’s Entrepreneurial Legal 
Services  Clinic  trains  “can  do”  lawyers  who  are  indispensible  members  of 
entrepreneurial teams.15  Brooklyn Law School’s Brooklyn Law Incubator and 
Policy Clinic teaches new lawyers “who are well-versed across the spectrum of 
skills needed to represent emerging tech, Internet, communications, and new 
media companies.”16  And at the University of California Hastings School of 
Law,  the  Startup  Legal  Garage  trains  law  students  to  become  “partners  in 
enterprise and more than just ‘the lawyer in the room.’”17  
 
B.  Beyond Clinics: Classroom and Community 
 
A handful of law schools direct their efforts to training innovative law 
students via combinations of classroom and community experiences.  At the 
University of Colorado Law School, the Tech Law Accelerator (TLA) provides a 
four-week summer boot camp to train future lawyers on their clients' businesses. 
The  TLA  also  partners  with  technology  companies  to  place  its  boot  camp 
graduates in internships with in-house law departments.18 
At the Innovation Practice Institute at Pitt Law, we take a three-pronged 
approach to preparing law students to represent entrepreneurs.  First, the IPI 
integrates the teaching of entrepreneurship into the curriculum with courses such 
as “Law and Entrepreneurship,” which takes law students “through the life cycle 
of  a  technology  start-up  company,  from  concept  and  formation  to  exit.”19  
Second, the IPI works to ensure that its law students are integrally involved in the 
campus-wide entrepreneurship education program at the University of Pittsburgh, 
                                                                                                                                    
 
14  Bluhm  Legal  Clinic,  Entrepreneurship  Law  Center,  NORTHWESTERN  LAW, 
http://www.law.northwestern.edu/legalclinic/elc/ (last visited Apr. 10, 2015). 
15 UMKC School of Law Elective Course Information, Entrepreneurial Law and Practice Clinic 
(Fall  2013),  http://law.umkc.edu/pdfs/electives/entrepreneurial-law-clinic-8757r.pdf.    The  “Can 
Do” tagline permeates many UMKC Law entrepreneurship programs, in addition to this clinic. 
16 BROOKLYN LAW INCUBATOR & POLICY (BLIP), http://www.blipclinic.org/ (last visited Apr. 15, 
2015). 
17 University of California—Hastings College of Law, Institution for Innovation: Implementable 
Solutions, http://innovation.uchastings.edu/focus-areas/startup-legal-garage/ (last visited Apr. 10, 
2015). 
18 See University of Colorado Boulder—Colorado Law, New Tech Accelerator Program Garners 
Inaugural Access Group Grant (July 17, 2014), http://www.colorado.edu/law/2014/07/17/new-
tech-lawyer-accelerator-program-garners-inaugural-access-group-grant. 
19  See  University  of  Pittsburgh—Pitt  Law,  Law  and  Entrepreneurship, 
http://www.law.pitt.edu/academics/courses/catalog/5631 (last visited Apr. 15, 2015) (this course 
involves careful analysis of relevant legal documents and case studies, as well as participation in 
lectures, workshops and simulations). 
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  971 
 
 
which provides opportunities for law students to work with Pitt researchers and 
entrepreneurs as part of the technology commercialization process.20   
Third,  the  IPI  offers  an  extracurricular,  community-based  program 
entitled “Start Smart Law,” a unique cross-university collaboration with Project 
Olympus, a Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) innovation center.21  During 
Start Smart Law seminars, experienced startup lawyers teach basic startup law 
and practice to IPI law students and CMU computer science and engineering 
graduate students.  These seminars are open to the public as well, and attendees 
may  include  other  researchers,  inventors,  investors,  and  practicing  lawyers.  
These startup legal issues include seminars on entity formation, raising capital, 
intellectual property, employee relationships, and immigration law.  Start Smart 
Law workshops follow the seminars, during which, startup lawyers and IPI staff 
oversee the law students as they work with their graduate student peers and other 
local entrepreneurs to produce “roadmaps” of legal information that will guide 
the  entrepreneurs  in  their  planning  and  decision-making  process.    These 
roadmaps are not confidential and do not constitute legal advice; however, they 
do educate the entrepreneurial consumer so that he or she knows the questions to 
ask when engaging a startup lawyer, saving the entrepreneur time and legal fees.  
And preparing these legal roadmaps provides IPI law students with a real-world 
simulation of how startup lawyers partner with entrepreneurs to advance new 
ventures.  
 
III.  TRAINING LAW STUDENTS TO BE ENTREPRENEURIAL IN 
LAW-RELATED CAREERS  
 
Lawyers must think more like entrepreneurs. Clients’ changing needs 
will demand it. The economy demands it.22 
 
Today’s law students do not just want to represent entrepreneurs.  They 
need to be entrepreneurs, regardless of whether they pursue solo, small firm, Big 
Law, or other legal services careers.  The ABA Journal’s “Legal Rebels” series 
                                                                                                                                    
 
20  The  Innovation  Institute  at  the  University  of  Pittsburgh  oversees  the  university’s 
entrepreneurship  program.    For  more  information,  see  Innovation  Institute,  U.  PITT., 
http://www.innovation.pitt.edu/ (last visited Apr. 15, 2015).   
21 Carnegie Mellon University and the University of Pittsburgh are located next to each other in the 
Oakland neighborhood of Pittsburgh.  Carnegie Mellon University does not have a law school.  For 
more information on Start Smart Law, see IPI Programs: Start Smart, INNOVATION PRACTICE INST., 
http://innovation-practice.net/what-we-do/ipi-programs-start-smart/ (last visited Apr. 10, 2015). For 
more  information  about  Project  Olympus,  see  Project  Olympus,  CARNEGIE  MELLON  UNIV., 
http://www.cmu.edu/olympus/about/index.html (last visited Apr. 10, 2015). In addition to the IPI 
and Project Olympus, lawyers from K&L Gates play a leading role in presenting Start Smart Law.  
22 Sam Glover, Lawyers Must Evolve or Face Extinction, LEGAL REBELS (Oct. 15, 2009, 9:00 PM), 
http://www.abajournal.com/legalrebels/article/sam_glover_lawyers_must_evolve_or_face_extincti
on/.  Sam Glover is a Minnesota-based legal entrepreneur and manages a full-time consumer rights 
practice. 
 972  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
features  some  of  these  entrepreneurial  lawyers.    Sam  Glover,  founder  of 
Lawyerist, an online lawyer’s survival guide, warns that lawyers must evolve and 
“think more like an entrepreneur” or “risk extinction.”23 Susan Cartier Liebel, 
founder of Solo Practice University, views solo law firm practice as “the ultimate 
expression of entrepreneurship.”24  And in the legal services industry, the influx 
of technology and venture capital financing are pressuring lawyers and law firms 
to be more entrepreneurial.25   
In  a  variety  of  ways,  law  schools  are  connecting  their  students  to 
entrepreneurial thinking and practice as lawyers. The Kauffman Foundation’s 
Entrepreneurship Law website currently lists more than eighty law schools that 
offer courses or related programs that train law students to be entrepreneurs in 
providing legal services.26   
 
A. Incubators and Laboratories 
 
A growing number of law schools have created “incubators” or partnered 
with law practices employing their own recent graduates, which helps to develop 
those lawyers’ skills as new solo or small office practitioners.  Leading examples 
include the International Justice Center for Postgraduate Development at the 
Touro College Jacob D. Fuchsberg Law Center;27 the Solo and Small Firm 
Institute and Incubator at the University of Missouri—Kansas City;28  and the 
Alumni Law Group at Arizona State University Sandra Day O’Connor College 
of Law.29 A related but distinct development is a legal “residency” program 
operating independently of a law school but designed to hire new graduates, train 
them  for  a  period  of  years  as  future  solo  or  small  firm  practitioners,  then 
transition them into their own practices.30 And the ReInvent Law Laboratory, 
created at the Michigan State University College of Law, teaches students to 
                                                                                                                                    
 
23 Id.  
24 Jenny B. Davis, Susan Cartier Liebel: Solos’ Champion, LEGAL REBELS (Sept. 16, 2009, 1:28 
AM), http://www.abajournal.com/legalrebels/article/susan_cartier_liebel_solos_champion/. 
25 See Cari Sommer, How Entrepreneurship is Reshaping the Legal Industry, FORBES (July 24, 
2013, 11:46 AM), http://www.forbes.com/sites/carisommer/2013/07/24/how-entrepreneurship-is-
reshaping-the-legal-industry/. 
26  See  Entreprenueurship.org:  For  people  growing  great  ideas,  Law  School  Courses, 
http://www.entrepreneurship.org/entrepreneurship-law/law-school-courses.aspx  (last  visited  Apr. 
10, 2015).  For a list of incubator programs, see Incubator/Residency Programs, AM. BAR ASS’N, 
http://www.americanbar.org/groups/delivery_legal_services/initiatives_awards/program_main.html 
(last visited Apr. 21, 2015). 
27 See International Justice Center for Postgraduate Development, TOURO L., http://www.tourolaw 
.edu/justiceCenter/?pageid=857 (last visited Apr. 15, 2015). 
28 See UMKC School of Law, Solo and Small Firm Practice, https://law.umkc.edu/prospective-
students/life-after-umkc/solo-small-firm-incubator/ (last visited Apr. 10, 2015).  
29 See ASU ALUMNI LAW GROUP, http://asualumnilawgroup.org/ (last visited Apr. 15, 2015). 
30 The model here is Fair Shake, a Pittsburgh-based not-for-profit that focuses its practice and its 
advocacy on representing modest means clients in environmental justice issues.  See FAIR SHAKE: 
ENVIRONMENTAL LEGAL SERVICES, http://www.fairshake-els.org/ (last visited Apr. 15, 2015). 
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  973 
 
 
“think of themselves as potential founders of start-ups . . . and to operate fluidly 
in a legal environment that is being transformed by technology.”31 
 
B.  Curricular and Extracurricular Combinations 
 
At Pitt Law, the Innovation Practice Institute offers a framework that 
provides opportunities for law students to learn from and about entrepreneurial 
lawyers through both curricular and extracurricular programs.  A classroom 
course entitled “Understanding the Legal Services Marketplace” teaches IPI law 
students about “the commercial landscape of the legal services industry” by 
interacting with both practicing attorneys and consumers of legal services.32  A 
course entitled “In-House Counsel in Modern Corporations” explores the unique 
legal and practical challenges that counsel face when working in corporate law 
departments  of  various  sizes,  including  entrepreneurial  contexts.33   The  IPI 
extracurricular weekly “Innovators, Esq.” lunchtime speakers’ series gives law 
students the chance to interact with entrepreneurial lawyers who have been 
innovative in law-related careers, including lawyers who have:  moved from solo 
practices to law firms and vice versa; moved back and forth between private law 
practice  and  in-house  positions;  developed  innovative  business  and 
organizational practices inside law firms; and built law-related technologies and 
startups. 
 
IV.  TRAINING LAW STUDENTS TO BE LAWYER ENTREPRENEURS 
IN NON-LEGAL CAREERS  
 
Anyone who is intelligent enough and has worked hard enough to 
become a lawyer can become a success in a myriad of fields.34 
 
Tim and Nina Zagat were working as successful corporate lawyers when 
a dinner party conversation about lousy restaurant reviews changed their lives.  
What started as an informal survey printed on legal size paper grew into the 
                                                                                                                                    
 
31 John Schwartz, This is Law School?, N.Y. TIMES (Aug. 1, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014 
/08/03/education/edlife/socrates-takes-a-back-seat-to-business-and-tech.html;  see  also  ReInvent 
Law Laboratory, MICH. ST. UNIV. L. http://www.reinventlaw.com/main.html (last visited Apr. 10, 
2015).  
32  See  University  of  Pittsburgh—Pitt  Law,  Understanding  the  Legal  Services  Marketplace, 
available at http://www.law.pitt.edu/academics/courses/catalog/5133 (last visited Apr. 10, 2015). 
33 See University of Pittsburgh—Pitt Law, In-house Counsel in Modern Corporations, available at 
http://law.pitt.edu/node/20745 (last visited Apr. 15, 2015). 
34  JD  Bliss,  Interview:  Tim  Zagat:  From  Law  to  Leisure  Guide  Empire  (Mar.  13,  2007), 
http://www.jdblissblog.com/2007/06/interview-tim-z.html.  Tim  Zagat  co-founded  his  company 
with his wife, Nina Zagat, who is also a graduate of Yale Law School.  Zagat, About Us: Tim & 
Nina Zagat, https://www.zagat.com/about-us/tim-and-nina-zagat (last visited Apr. 10, 2015). 
 974  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
“world's original provider of user-generated content.”35  By 2005, the Zagat 
Survey covered seventy cities.  In 2011, Google acquired the company for a 
reported $151 million.36 
The Zagats are neither the first nor the only lawyers to leave the practice 
of law to become entrepreneurs in non-legal fields (“lawyer entrepreneurs”).  
Forbes Magazine recently profiled four women who “changed hats” by leaving 
the practice of law to become entrepreneurs in retail, construction, food service, 
and  real  estate.37    U.S.  News  &  World  Report  featured  several  lawyer 
entrepreneurs and even proposed entrepreneurship as one of three common career 
options pursued by law graduates who choose not to practice law. 38  The Harvard 
Law Entrepreneurs Network boasts that their alumni have been “very successful 
across a variety of industries.”39 
Despite these positive portrayals of lawyer entrepreneurs, a number of 
lawyer entrepreneurs have reported that their legal education was an impediment 
to becoming a successful lawyer entrepreneur.  The American Bar Association 
Journal featured a troubling article entitled “Lawyer-Turned-Entrepreneur Says 
He Had to Overcome His Legal Training to Succeed.”40  In an article entitled 
“Why Most Lawyers Make Terrible Entrepreneurs,” a lawyer entrepreneur writes 
that  “thousands  of  lawyers  make  the  leap  every  year,  [but]  it’s  been  my 
observation that very few succeed.”41  
Training law students to be lawyer entrepreneurs in non-legal fields 
raises a number of practical questions, including whether there are a sufficient 
number of students interested in becoming lawyer entrepreneurs to warrant the 
development of a program to support that ambition, and, of course, the staffing 
and content of the program itself.  It has long been true that many individuals 
with law degrees do not work as lawyers, but it is difficult to determine the 
number or proportion of those who focus on lawyer entrepreneurship of one sort 
or another.  
                                                                                                                                    
 
35 Zagat, About Us: Our History, https://www.zagat.com/about-us/our-history (last visited Apr. 10, 
2015). 
36 Zagat, WIKIPEDIA http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zagat (last visited Apr. 10, 2015). 
37 See Sommer, supra note 25; see Angela Haines, Changing Hats: Lawyers Turn Entrepreneurs, 
FORBES (Sept. 19, 2011, 4:00 PM), http://www.forbes.com/sites/85broads/2011/09/19/changing-
hats-lawyers-turn-entrepreneurs/#comment_reply.  
38 See Shawn P. O’Connor, Three Careers Law School Graduates Should Consider Outside the 
Legal  Field  (May  19,  2014),  http://www.usnews.com/education/blogs/law-admissions-
lowdown/2014/05/19/3-careers-for-law-school-graduates-outside-the-legal-field.  
39 Antonia Floyd, The Harvard Law Entrepreneur Network: About, http://hlawtrepreneurs.com/ 
about/ (last visited Apr. 10, 2015).  
40 Debra Cassens Weiss, Lawyer-Turned-Entrepreneur Says He Had to Overcome His Legal 
Training to Succeed, ABA JOURNAL (Nov. 10, 2011, 11:29 AM),  http://www.abajournal.com/ 
news/article/lawyer-turned-entrepreneur_says_he_had_to_overcome_his_legal_training/.  
41 Jonathan Fields, Why Most Lawyers Make Terrible Entrepreneurs, PSYCH. TODAY (Aug. 1, 
2013), https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/awake-the-wheel/201308/why-most-lawyers-make-
terrible-entrepreneurs. 
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  975 
 
 
Assuming that a sufficient cohort of students exists to justify developing 
a program that focuses on entrepreneurship in both law-related and non-legal 
fields, a number of different program approaches can be used.  For instance, 
programs  that  train  their  students  to  represent  entrepreneurs  and  to  be 
entrepreneurs in law-related fields do teach at least some of the skills needed to 
be entrepreneurs in non-legal fields.  Producing extracurricular programming that 
introduces students to lawyer entrepreneurs provides another relatively easy and 
important opportunity to explore entrepreneurship in non-legal fields.  At Pitt 
Law, for example, the Innovation Practice Institute uses this strategy as part of 
our  Innovators,  Esq.  lunchtime  speakers’  series  to  engage  students  with 
numerous lawyer entrepreneurs, including:  
 
•  A lawyer turned sports marketing executive; 
•  A real estate lawyer turned real estate developer;  
•  An in-house intellectual property lawyer who is also a 
successful inventor and author; 
•  A corporate lawyer turned chief financial officer and 
angel investor;  
•  A  labor  litigator  who  launched  a  startup  to  teach 
organizations how to create a civil workplace, and 
•  A city government lawyer turned country musician. 
 
Introducing students to these lawyer entrepreneurs typically provides a 
useful insight or spark for students seeking to learn about non-traditional careers.  
Equally important, in many cases introductions over lunch blossom into longer 
lasting acquaintances and even jobs.42  
Like programs at some other law schools, the IPI has also developed a 
curriculum that exposes students to entrepreneurship in non-legal fields through 
courses co-taught by law and professors in other schools and departments.43  For 
                                                                                                                                    
 
42  The  University  of  Colorado  recently  announced  the  launch  of  the  thematically  similar 
“Entrepreneurs in Residence” program.  Instead of bringing law students into frequent but brief 
contact with a range of lawyer entrepreneurs, Colorado Law is bringing a small number of 
entrepreneurs to the law school to engage deeply with students.  See Karen Sloan, Colorado Law 
Launches  First  Campus  Entrepreneur  Program,  NAT’L  L.J.  (Apr.  1,  2015)  available  at 
http://www.nationallawjournal.com/id=1202722325554/Colorado-Law-Launches-First-Campus-
Entrepreneur-Program?slreturn=20150315131239. 
43  University  of  Pittsburgh—Pitt  Law,  Commercializing  New  Technologies, 
http://www.law.pitt.edu/academics/courses/catalog/5135 (last visited Apr. 10, 2015); University of 
Pittsburgh—Pitt Law, Law, Entertainment and Social Enterprise, http://www.law.pitt.edu/ 
academics/courses/27211-0 (last visited Apr. 10, 2015).  Emory University law students and 
business, science, and engineering students at the Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) 
collaborate start-up projects through the TI:GER program.  See TI:GER® Program, EMORY LAW, 
http://law.emory.edu/academics/academic-programs/ti-ger.html (last visited Apr. 21, 2015).  On the 
development of a similar partnership at UMKC see Anthony J. Luppino, Minding More Than Our 
Own  Business:  Educating  Entrepreneurial  Lawyers  Through  Law  School-Business  School 
Collaborations, 30 W. NEW ENG. L. REV. 151 (2007). 
 976  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
instance, the IPI’s “Commercializing New Technologies” course is taught by a 
member of Pitt’s business school faculty and an adjunct professor at Pitt Law, a 
lawyer entrepreneur who also worked for a local startup incubator.   
Where  local  conditions  make  it  feasible,  these  courses  can  be 
supplemented by placing law students in the middle of entrepreneurial activities 
beyond the law school, particularly elsewhere at the university. 44  At Pitt Law, 
the IPI has connected its students to team-based research commercialization 
activities  at  the  Swanson  School  of  Engineering,  through  the  Coulter 
Translational  Research  Partners  II  Program.    Law  students  collaborate  with 
business students and engineering students on teams that support full-time faculty 
researchers in developing proposals to commercialize bioengineering research.45 
The IPI also connects interested students with summer internships that “embed” 
its students in a local startup incubator, which allows them to experience the 
business side entrepreneurship in a variety of non-legal fields.     
The  IPI  also  mentors  law  student  teams  that  enter  business  plan 
competitions  both  at the University  of  Pittsburgh and  at local and regional 
business incubators.  And like many law  schools,  the  IPI  also  connects  their 
prospective lawyer entrepreneurs with entrepreneurship programming through 
joint degree programs, particularly JD/MBA programs, and through internships 
in university technology transfer offices.46 
Despite the success of these programs, one frequent concern raised in 
discussions of lawyer entrepreneurs working in business fields is ethics.   To 
what extent are ethical frameworks that inform and guide lawyers and the legal 
profession compromised when legal training is so explicitly blended with the 
rhetoric and practice of for-profit entrepreneurship?  We do not suggest that 
lawyers are necessarily ethical, nor that business entrepreneurs necessarily are 
not.  Still, it is not hard to imagine situations where a lawyer’s professional 
training and ethical restrictions might conflict with an entrepreneur’s financial 
bottom line.  In the next Part, we suggest one field of entrepreneurship where 
lawyers’  professional  and  ethical  obligations  may  give  them  a  competitive 
advantage:  the growing field of social entrepreneurship.  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                    
 
44 Laura L. Hollis, Why – and how – law schools need to teach entrepreneurship, UNIV. OF NOTRE 
DAME, MENDOZA COLL. OF BUS., http://www.entrepreneurship.org/~/media/Entrepreneurship/Files 
/eLaw/Why%20law%20schools%20need%20to%20teach%20entrepreneurship.pdf  (last  visited 
Apr.  10,  2015)  (recommending  that  law  schools  should  be  integrated  in  campus-wide 
entrepreneurship education programs).   
45 Coulter Translational Research Partners II Program, COULTER PITT, http://www.engineeringx. 
pitt.edu/coulter/ (last visited Apr. 15, 2015) (describing the full program).  
46 Pitt Law students work in technology transfer offices both at the University of Pittsburgh and at 
Carnegie Mellon University.  
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  977 
 
 
  V.  TRAINING LAW STUDENTS TO BE LAWYER SOCIAL 
ENTREPRENEURS 
 
A.  The Synergy Between Lawyers and Social Entrepreneurs 
 
What defines a social entrepreneur is the motivation from deep within 
to serve the whole and to make sure that solutions are sustainable, fair, 
and efficient.47 
 
In the view of many admirers, “no one has done more to put social 
entrepreneurship on the map than Bill Drayton.”48  While still a law student at 
Yale,  Drayton  launched  a  social  enterprise  that  engaged  one-third  of  his 
classmates in drafting legislation.49  During the 1980s, Drayton “coined” the term 
“social entrepreneur”  and founded Ashoka, the world’s largest network of social 
entrepreneurs.50    Over  the  last  twenty-five  years,  Ashoka  has  funded  and 
connected over 3,000 social entrepreneurs in seventy countries.51   
Although  Bill  Drayton  may  be  the  most  famous  lawyer  social 
entrepreneur, we know that he is far from the only lawyer participating in this 
movement.  After  leaving  the  practice  of law  in  the  late  1990s,  one of  the 
authors—Stephanie Dangel—spent a decade promoting and producing social 
enterprise entertainment, i.e., entertainment that is both socially meaningful and 
commercially viable.52   
Since 2013, we have worked to recruit a wide range of lawyer social 
entrepreneurs  to  speak  at  and  engage  students,  faculty,  staff,  and  graduates 
through the IPI’s Innovators, Esq. speaker series. The following are a few of the 
lawyer social entrepreneurs who have spoken over the last two years: 
 
                                                                                                                                    
 
47 Scott London, How Do You Change the World? Become a Social Entrepreneur, SCOTT LONDON, 
http://www.scottlondon.com/interviews/drayton.html (last visited Mar. 18, 2015) (quoting Bill 
Drayton). 
48 Id. 
49 Stanford Technology Ventures Program, Bill Drayton, ECORNER: STAN. U. ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
CORNER, http://ecorner.stanford.edu/author/bill_drayton (last visited Mar. 18, 2015). 
50 See, e.g., Ashoka, Celebrate Global Entrepreneurship Week with Quotes from The Man Who 
Coined The Term Social Entrepreneur, FORBES (Nov. 15, 2001, 11:18 AM), http://www.forbes. 
com/sites/ashoka/2012/11/15/celebrate-global-entrepreneurship-week-with-quotes-from-the-man-
who-coined-the-term-social-entrepreneur/. 
51 For more information about Ashoka, see ASHOKA, https://www.ashoka.org/ (last visited Apr. 10, 
2015). 
52 After clerking for Judge Pierre Leval and Justice Harry Blackmun, Stephanie practiced law at 
K&L Gates where she worked with both for-profit and non-profit clients. She subsequently worked 
for the Pittsburgh-based non-profit Steeltown Entertainment Project where she produced two 
documentaries, “My Tale of Two Cities,” a documentary about Pittsburgh’s post-steel renewal, and 
“A Shot to Save the World,” a Smithsonian Channel and BBC documentary about Jonas Salk’s and 
Bill Gates’ battle to eradicate polio. Working with former Wall Street lawyers, Susan Schwartz of 
K&L Gates and the late Ellen Weiss Kander, Stephanie also launched a for-profit subsidiary of the 
non-profit Steeltown, which has helped to fund numerous social enterprise entertainment projects.  
 978  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
•  A  litigator  who  left  his  law  firm  to  start  a  social 
enterprise incubator; 
•  A  former  United  States  Attorney  who  now  heads  a 
foundation that encourages innovation to address social 
issues; 
•  A former Fortune 500 lawyer who now incubates clean 
energy, advanced manufacturing, and materials startups; 
•  A corporate attorney who directs a foundation that is 
advancing learning innovation;  
•  An  in-house  energy  lawyer  who  formed  his  own 
company to develop and supply energy to developing 
countries; and 
•  A lawyer turned entrepreneur who launched a public-
private partnership to support underserved entrepreneurs. 
 
Given Pittsburgh’s strong history of philanthropy,53 we initially thought 
these lawyer social entrepreneurs might be part of a regional phenomenon.  Yet, 
when  we  looked  for  national  examples,  we  found  more  lawyer  social 
entrepreneurs, including:  
 
•  Lawyers who are organizing funding for environmental 
and social justice litigation; 54 
•  Lawyers who are crowd-funding to raise legal fees for 
indigent clients;55  
•  Transactional lawyers who are crowd-sourcing solutions 
for fellow social entrepreneurs;56  
•  Government lawyers who are launching national offices 
to empower social entrepreneurs;57 and 
•  Clinical law professors who are teaching their students 
to represent social entrepreneurs.58   
                                                                                                                                    
 
53 See Emily Yarrison, A legacy of philanthropy: How foundation support benefits Pittsburgh, 
today and tomorrow, POP CITY, (Mar. 25, 2015) http://www.popcitymedia.com/features/ 
philanthropy_032515.aspx. 
54 See JUSTICE INVESTOR, www.justiceinvestor.com (last visited Apr. 9, 2015).  
55 See Martha Neil, New crowdfunding site helps individuals raise money for legal fees, ABA J. 
(Dec. 15, 2014, 11:10 AM), http://www.abajournal.com/news/article/new_litigation_crowdfunding 
_site_seeks_to. 
56 See David Roll, Legal Issues for Social Entrepreneurs, LAWFORCHANGE, http://www.lawfor 
change.org/NewsBot.asp?MODE=VIEW&ID=3592 (last visited Apr. 15, 2015). 
57 In 2009, President Obama launched the White House’s first Office of Social Innovation and 
Civic Participation.  See Office of Social Innovation and Civic Participation, THE WHITE HOUSE, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/sicp (last visited Mar. 18, 2015). 
58 See Ashoka, How Law Schools and Entrepreneurs Collaborate to Serve Both Students and 
Innovators, FORBES (Dec. 7, 2012, 12:06 PM), http://www.forbes.com/sites/ashoka/2012/12/07/ 
how-law-schools-and-entrepreneurs-collaborate-to-serve-both-students-and-innovators/. 
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  979 
 
 
Anecdotes do not make a movement, but we believe that the salience of 
lawyers in the ranks of social entrepreneurs is neither a coincidence nor an 
educational opportunity to be overlooked.  Is there some synergy between the 
roles of lawyers and social entrepreneurs?  Based on our experience and those of 
other lawyer social entrepreneurs, as well as literature on social entrepreneurship, 
we  believe  that  lawyers  and  social  entrepreneurs  do  share  many  important 
qualities and that those affinities offer us an important opportunities as educators.  
The first similarity is the easiest to understand: Social entrepreneurs 
frequently confront legal obstacles.  In a recent poll conducted by the Social 
Enterprise Alliance, 71% of social entrepreneurs reported that finding “the best 
legal structure for their ventures was the single greatest challenge they faced.”59  
And of the 3,000 Ashoka social entrepreneurs, approximately 800 of them are 
pursuing missions involving law to varying degrees.60  
Lawyers  and  social  entrepreneurs  also  share  a  similar  mindset  or 
approach to the problems they confront.  For example,  
 
•  Like lawyers who are taught to serve the interests of 
their  clients  and  the  interests  of  justice,  social 
entrepreneurs also serve (at least) two masters—their 
social mission and their need for economically (and in 
some cases environmentally) sustainable solutions.  
•  Like lawyers who are trained to see issues from multiple 
perspectives, social entrepreneurs must see issues from 
both social and economic perspectives, as well as from 
the varying perspectives of the constituencies they need 
to unite to accomplish their missions.61   
•  Like  lawyers,  social  entrepreneurs  must  be  both 
visionary and practical.  While a lawyer must understand 
                                                                                                                                    
 
59 See B. Ray Dining, Structuring Social Ventures: Choice of Legal Structure, VERITAS VENTURE 
CAPITAL FOR MICRO FINANCE IN AFRICA (Nov. 29, 2009), https://veritasvc.wordpress.com/2009/ 
11/29/structuring-social-ventures-by-b-ray-dinning-jd-llm/. It is admittedly ironic to think that 
social entrepreneurs find the choice of legal structure to be a greater challenge than their “life 
purpose,” which is “to change the world.”  Not surprisingly, lawyer social entrepreneur Bill 
Drayton does not find the choice of a for-profit legal structure to be a challenge: “Everyone says, 
you've got to do a foundation and legal structure to finance social change. What nonsense!” Fast 
Company Staff, Q&A: Bill Drayton, FAST COMPANY (Dec. 1, 2007), http://www.fastcompany.com/ 
693594/qa-bill-drayton. 
60 This rough approximation is based on a keyword search for “law” in the Ashoka Fellow 
descriptions  found  at  https://www.ashoka.org/fellows?country=All&keys=law&tid=All&tid_ 
1=All&tid _2=All&term_node_tid_depth=All. See, e.g., Asoka Innovators For The Public, Fellow 
Samisdar,  https://www.ashoka.org/fellow/samsidar  (last  visited  Apr.  9,  2015)  (describing  an 
Ashoka Fellow in Indonesia who is assisting women victims seeking legal redress). 
61 Although the details of the definition of social entrepreneurship vary, the balancing of social 
mission and financial sustainability is central to the field.  See, e.g., Samer Abu-Saifan, Social 
Entrepreneurship: Definition and Boundaries, TIM REVIEW (2012), available at http://timreview 
.ca/article/523. 
 980  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
the client’s ultimate objective, the lawyer must also be 
able to apply broader legal principles to a specific set of 
facts. 
•  A  successful  lawyer,  like  an  accomplished  social 
entrepreneur, must be “double dominant,” meaning must 
possess the ability to use both her left and right brain.  A 
lawyer and a social entrepreneur both need “a poem and 
an engineering drawing”62 to solve the challenges before 
them. 
•  Like  lawyers,  social  entrepreneurs  must  be  “social,” 
which requires them to be good communicators and to 
possess  strong  emotional  intelligence  capabilities.  
Persuasion is key.  Making a pitch to a funder, be it for-
profit, non-profit, or governmental, is like arguing a case 
before a judge or mediator.  Writing a grant proposal is 
like  drafting  a  brief,  with  previously  awarded  grants 
serving as “precedents.” 
•  Lawyers have played an important role in advancing 
other forms of “new” entrepreneurship akin to social 
entrepreneurship,  including  norm  entrepreneurship, 
policy  entrepreneurship,  moral  and  civic 
entrepreneurship. 63 
•  Lawyers, like social entrepreneurs, must be comfortable 
with  both  complexity  and  ambiguity.    Humorously, 
Tony Sheldon of the Yale Social Enterprise program has 
invoked  United  States  Supreme  Court  Justice  Potter 
Stewart  in  trying  to  define  social  entrepreneurship:  
“Social entrepreneurship is a little like pornography. It’s 
hard to define, but you know it when you see it.”64 
 
Finally, and most importantly, social entrepreneurs are leaders, which is 
a role long played by lawyers.  In the twentieth century, law schools trained 
lawyers who went on to become leaders in law firms, for-profit businesses, non-
profit organizations, and in government offices.  In the twenty-first century, 
social entrepreneurs will be the leaders who “recognize when a part of society is 
                                                                                                                                    
 
62 See Caroline Hartnell, Interview – Bill Drayton, ALLIANCE (Mar. 1, 2000), http://www.alliance 
magazine.org/interview/interview-bill-drayton/. 
63 See David A. Pozen, We Are All Entrepreneurs Now, 43 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 283 (2008) 
(describing legal origins of social, norm, policy and moral entrepreneurs); see also Harold Hongju 
Koh, The 1998 Frankel Lecture: Bringing International Law Home, 35 HOUS. L. REV. 623, 646–55 
(1998). UMKC Law offers a course on law and civic entrepreneurship, entitled Law, Technology 
and  Public  Policy.    See  http://law.umkc.edu/pdfs/electives/special-topics-law-tech-pub-policy-
8921.pdf  
64 SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE AGE OF ATROCITIES 1 (Zachary D. Kaufman ed., 2012).  
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  981 
 
 
not working and solve the problem by . . . persuading entire societies to take new 
leaps.”65  It is up to law schools to ensure that their graduates are well prepared 
for leadership as social entrepreneurs.66  
 
B.  Why Law Schools Should Train Law Students to be  
Lawyer Social Entrepreneurs 
 
Social  entrepreneurs  can  only  come  to  rest  when  their  vision  has 
become the new pattern all across society. . . . To succeed, many of the 
laws and frames of mind that today divide the world will have to 
change. There is tremendous work here for the law schools.67 
 
Based on our personal experience and conversations with other lawyer 
social entrepreneurs, we believe that their legal education played a key role in 
preparing them to be social entrepreneurs.  That is the good news.  The bad news 
is that there are not nearly as many lawyer social entrepreneurs as there should be 
or can be.  Of the 800 Ashoka fellows working on projects involving law, fewer 
than eighty of those fellows appear to be lawyers68—and that includes Bill 
Drayton, the lawyer founder of Ashoka, who presumably understands the value 
of legal training for social entrepreneurs.  
The lack of more lawyer social entrepreneurs is unfortunate for a number 
of reasons.  In terms of jobs, the dearth of lawyer social entrepreneurs is a missed 
opportunity for underemployed law school graduates.  According to Drayton, 
what he refers to as “the citizen sector,” which includes both non-profit and non-
governmental sectors,69 is the fastest growing economic sector, generating jobs 
                                                                                                                                    
 
65  See  Bill  Drayton,  Everyone  a  Changemaker,  7  PEER  REV.  3  (2005), 
http://www.aacu.org/publications-research/periodicals/everyone-changemaker. 
66  For  descriptions  of  the  roles  that  lawyers  can  play  in  emerging  economic  and  cultural 
organizations, see JANELLE ORSI, PRACTICING LAW IN THE SHARING ECONOMY: HELPING PEOPLE 
BUILD COOPERATIVES, SOCIAL ENTERPRISE, AND LOCAL SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIES (2012); Jenny 
Kassan & Janelle Orsi, The Legal Landscape of the Sharing Economy, 27 J. ENVTL. L. & LITIG. 1 
(2012).. 
67  See  Bill  Drayton,  Everyone  a  Changemaker:  Social  Entrepreneurship's  Ultimate  Goal, 
INNOVATIONS (Feb. 22, 2007), http://www.policyinnovations.org/ideas/innovations/data/ 
changemakers. 
68 This approximation is based on a keyword search for “lawyer” among the database of Ashoka 
fellows. See Ashoka Innovators For The Public, Keyword Search, https://www.ashoka.org/fellows? 
country=All&keys=lawyer&tid=All&tid_1=All&tid_2=  All&term_node_tid_depth=All  (last 
visited  Apr.  10,  2015).    See,  e.g.,  Ashoka  Innovators  For  The  Public,  Fellow  Abbass, 
https://www.ashoka.org/fellow/abbass-abbass (last visited Apr. 10, 2015) (Abbass is a lawyer 
working to improve the lives of disabled Arabs in Israel).  
69 Drayton’s use of the term “citizen sector,” as opposed to “non-profit” and “non-governmental 
sector,” provides an excellent example of how he brings a lawyer’s precise use of language to the 
field of social entrepreneurship.  “One cannot constructively or effectively define anything by what 
it is not.  Moreover, by calling us ‘non-government’, one suggests a conflict with government that 
is not and certainly should not be there. Similarly ‘non-profit’ suggests, at best, foreignness to the 
business reader.” See Bill Drayton, Words Matter, 12 ALLIANCE 2 (2007).  
 982  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
two and a half to three times as fast as the business sector.70  The number of U.S. 
citizen groups has doubled since 1990,71 and from 1990 to 2000, the number of 
registered international citizen groups increased by 650%.72  In Brazil alone, the 
number of such groups grew from 5,000 in 1980 to 1,000,000 in 2000.73  “There 
are  now  millions  of  modern,  competing  citizen  groups,  including  big, 
sophisticated second-generation organizations,”74 many of which could provide 
much-needed job opportunities for law school graduates. 
The lack of more lawyer social entrepreneurs also suggests a failure of 
law schools to respond to the interests of their current and prospective students.  
We  have  met  lawyers  who  skeptically  view  social  entrepreneurship  as  a 
socialism best avoided or as a fad destined to disappear—but those lawyers do 
not belong to the current generation of students, who, given the global financial 
crisis, are often suspicious of strictly business or governmental solutions.75  The 
pervasiveness  of  social  media  and  marketing  has  led  one  of  us  (Stephanie 
Dangel) to call today’s students the “Toms shoes” generation, after the for-profit 
footwear company known primarily for donating shoes to children in need on a 
one-sold-to-one-donated basis.76  As trite as it may sound, today’s students are 
potential social entrepreneurs from the soles of their feet to the souls in their 
hearts.77  
Whether the match between legal education and social entrepreneurship 
is based on career opportunities or on shifting student aspirations, over the past 
eighteen months at the Innovation Practice Institute we have been overwhelmed 
by the interest of our students in innovation and entrepreneurship, particularly 
social entrepreneurship.  More than 175 law students have participated in IPI 
programming that has introduced them to, or trained them to be, lawyers who 
                                                                                                                                    
 
70 See Drayton, supra note 67. 
71 Bill Drayton, Needed: A New Social Financial Services Industry, 9 ALLIANCE 1 (2004).  
72 See id. 
73 See id. 
74 Drayton, supra note 67. 
75See David Bornstein, The Rise of the Social Entrepreneur, N.Y. TIMES (Nov. 13, 2012),   
http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/11/13/the-rise-of-social-entrepreneur/;  Giles  Hutchins, 
Social Entrepreneurship and Generation Y – A Match Made in Heaven, THE NATURE OF BUSINESS 
(Dec. 21, 2012), http://thenatureofbusiness.org/2012/12/21/social-entrepreneurship-and-generation-
y-a-match-made-in-heaven/.  
76 See TOMS, http://www.toms.com (last visited Apr. 13, 2015). Some commentators, including 
Drayton, have understandably questioned whether Toms qualifies as true social entrepreneurship. 
See Neil Parmer, How to Know If You’re Really a ‘Social Entrepreneur’, INC. (July 8, 2014), 
http://www.inc.com/neil-parmar/how-to-know-if-you-re-really-a-social-entrepreneur.html.  
However, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the marketing campaign of this company is 
consistent with the familiarity of today’s students with companies that blend doing well and doing 
good. 
77 For further evidence of the student interest in social entrepreneurship, see John Tyler, Evan 
Absher, Kathleen Garman & Anthony Luppino, Producing Better Mileage: Advancing the Design 
and Usefulness of Hybrid Vehicles for Social Business Ventures, 33 QUINNIPIAC L. REV. 235 (2015) 
(article on hybrid entity forms for social ventures co-authored by Professor Luppino, John Tyler of 
the Kauffman Foundation, and two UKMC law students, who are social and civic entrepreneurs). 
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  983 
 
 
work with and who are innovators and entrepreneurs.  While not all of these 
programs  dealt  specifically  with  social  entrepreneurship,  our  students  have 
consistently raised a related and significant question:  How do I balance my 
desire to do well financially with my desire to do good in the world? 
 
C.  The Innovation Practice Institute’s Proposal to Train the Next 
Generation of Lawyer Social Entrepreneurs 
 
The Innovation Practice Institute at Pitt Law  is currently developing a 
pilot version of a three-year program to train law students to become social 
entrepreneurs  via  a  wide  variety  of  career  options,  including  some  more 
conventional routes (as legal practitioners in private law practice, government 
service,  or  as  in-house  counsel)  and  some  less  conventional  (as  social 
entrepreneurs in for-profit, non-profit, or hybrid entities).  As the text below 
indicates, parts of this program are already being piloted by the IPI.  Over the 
next year, we will continue to develop this program into a professional education 
framework that is experiential and forward-looking, grounded in community 
engagement and partnerships with legal and non-legal organizations.  
Based on the  experience of  Stephanie  Dangel  in  launching  a  social 
enterprise, our three-year program will follow what we see as the three stages 
required to launch such a venture.  In brief, these three stages require social 
entrepreneurs to: 
 
(1) Identify  a  social  innovation  that  is  commercially 
promising;  
(2) Incubate  the  social  innovation  until  is  commercially 
viable; and 
(3) Invest in the social innovation so that it can become 
commercially sustainable.  
 
These three stages align with the three years of law school. In brief, to 
train law students to be social entrepreneurs, the IPI will: 
 
(1) Identify  law  students  interested  in  social 
entrepreneurship through extra-curricular events;  
(2) “Incubate” these law students through team-based social 
enterprise courses and internships; and 
(3) Invest in these law students through subsidized positions 
at new or currently existing social enterprises.  
 
The first year of the program will focus in part on extracurricular events, 
as the courses during the first year of law school are traditionally mandatory.  
During  the  first  semester,  Innovator,  Esq.  lunchtime  presentations  will 
prominently feature lawyer social entrepreneurs from a wide-range of fields.  The 
 984  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
IPI’s  Start  Smart  Law  seminars  will  enlist  lawyers  who  represent  social 
entrepreneurs to train Pitt Law students and local social entrepreneurs to advance 
social ventures.  The IPI will also leverage other Pitt Law resources that focus on 
helping  new  law  students  develop  their  identities  as  members  of  the  legal 
profession.    A  year-long  mandatory  first-year  course  entitled  “Pitt  Law 
Academy” brings members of the profession to the law school as guest lecturers 
on a wide range of subjects, from forms of practice to work-life balance issues.78  
During the first year, students serious about exploring the field of social 
entrepreneurship will also be invited to participate in the IPI’s extracurricular 
“Leadership Forum.”79  The forum will focus on the three qualities of an effective 
social entrepreneur and begin to address how these qualities specifically apply to 
lawyer social entrepreneurs.   
First, an effective social entrepreneur “must be creative in both goal-
setting and problem-solving.”80  By drawing on case studies of Ashoka Fellows 
who are lawyer social entrepreneurs working in a variety of fields,81 the law 
students will learn how to use their legal training to solve social problems.  
Drayton explains that while “the professional succeeds when she solves a client’s 
problem . . . Social entrepreneurs can only come to rest when their vision has 
become the new pattern all across society.”82 Law students will also begin to 
visualize their own paths to becoming a lawyer social entrepreneur through 
creative leadership development exercises.83  
Second, an effective social entrepreneur must have an entrepreneurial 
quality.84  “What is that? It’s not getting things done or leading or managing . . . 
[i]t’s a deep drive to change society for the good of all. . . .”85  Drawing on 
                                                                                                                                    
 
78 See University of Pittsburgh—Pitt Law, Pitt Law Academy Message For All 1L Students, 
http://www.law.pitt.edu/pitt-law-academy-message-all-1l-students (last visited Apr. 15, 2015). 
79 For students interested in becoming lawyer social entrepreneurs, this Leadership Forum will 
build on the success of the IPI Leadership Forum, a ten-hour classroom experience taught by the 
IPI’s Faculty Director, Professor Michael Madison. See IPI Leadership Forum, INNOVATION 
PRACTICE INST., http://innovation-practice.net/what-we-do/ipi-leadership-forum/ (last visited Apr. 
15, 2015).  Although this program is voluntary, extracurricular, and not-for-credit, over the last two 
years Pitt Law staff, alumni, and twenty students have completed the program. See Michael J. 
Madison, Leading New Lawyers: Leadership and Legal Education, U. OF PITTSBURGH LEGAL 
STUDIES  RESEARCH  PAPER  NO.  2015-12  (Apr.  16,  2015),  available  at 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2595351. 
80 See Drayton, supra note 65, at 8. 
81 See, e.g., Ashoka Innovators For The Public, Fellow Andrade, https://www.ashoka.org/fellow/ 
juan-andrade (last visited Apr. 10, 2015) (Andrade has formed a grass-roots social movement to 
rehabilitate and empower street children and eradicate the forces that compel children to the 
streets).   
82 Drayton, supra note 65, at 8. 
83  MICHAEL  F.  MELCHER,  THE  CREATIVE  LAWYER:  A  PRACTICAL  GUIDE  TO  AUTHENTIC 
PROFESSIONAL SATISFACTION (2007). 
84 Drayton, supra note 65, at 8. 
85  Bill  Drayton,  How  to  Be  a  Change  Agent,  FAITH  &  LEADERSHIP  (Mar.  28,  2011), 
http://www.faithandleadership.com/qa/bill-drayton-how-be-change-agent.  
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  985 
 
 
materials  from  Ashoka  U,86  law  students  will  learn  that  “everyone’s  a 
changemaker,” or, in other words, “anyone can apply the skills of changemaking 
to solve complex social problems.”87  However, in a world increasingly defined 
by change, lawyer social entrepreneurs must understand that their “[v]alue . . . 
comes not from providing the same thing over and over to a client, but from 
managing  kaleidoscopic  change  processes  that  are  busily  bumping  one 
another.”88  
While  change  is  crucial,  change  alone  not  sufficient  for  a  social 
entrepreneur.  “Changing the world’s systems is what defines entrepreneurship.  
Doing so for the good of all is what defines social entrepreneurs.”89  A legal 
education that trains law students to balance their duties to their clients and the 
interests of justice should also serve to train them to be social entrepreneurs who 
pursue change for the “good of all.”  
Third, a social entrepreneur must have ethical fiber,90 because “[p]eople 
will not make significant changes in their lives if they do not trust the person 
asking  them  to  do  so.”91    With  respect to  lawyer  social  entrepreneurs, law 
students will learn that  
 
[a]s change accelerates and as the world becomes more complex, the 
rules cover less and less. They have not been invented. They are 
changing. They are in conflict. Anyone living only by rules-based 
ethics will unavoidably hurt others and disrupt groups . . . [people] 
need different skills. They must master empathy. . . .92   
 
Drawing  on  materials  from  Ashoka’s  Start  Empathy  initiative,  law 
students will learn that empathy means much more than “the ability to understand 
what someone is feeling.”   
                                                                                                                                    
 
86 ASHOKA U., http://ashokau.org/ (last visited Apr. 10, 2015).  Another important source of 
materials relevant to training lawyer social entrepreneurs is the United States Association for Small 
Business  and  Entrepreneurship  (USASBE)  Social  Entrepreneurship  Certificate  Program—see 
http://law.umkc.edu/mwse/usasbe-certificate/.  USASBE  collaborates  with  UMKC  and  the 
Kauffman Foundation to co-host an annual Midwest Symposium for Social Entrepreneurship.  See 
the  Symposium  website  at  http://law.umkc.edu/mwse/  and 
http://www.usasbe.org/events/event_details.asp?id=599145, and http://law.umkc.edu/mwse/ .   
87 Ashoka Innovators for the Public, Vision and Mission, https://www.ashoka.org/visionmission 
(last visited Apr. 10, 2015).  
88  Bill  Drayton,  A  Team  of  Teams  World,  STAN.  SOC.  INNOVATION  REV.  (Spring  2013), 
http://www.ssireview.org/articles/entry/a_team_of_teams_world. 
89 Bill Drayton, Foreword, in BEVERLY SCHWARTZ, RIPPLING:  HOW SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURS 
SPREAD INNOVATION THROUGHOUT THE WORLD (2012).  
90 Drayton, supra note 65, at 8. 
91 Paul Light, The Four Components of Social Entrepreneurship, SKOLL WORLD FORUM (2008), 
available  at  http://skollworldforum.org/2008/09/30/the-four-components-of-social-
entrepreneurship/. 
92 Bill Drayton, Bill Drayton: Empathy-Based Ethics: A Strategic Essential, FORBES, INDIA (2012), 
http://forbesindia.com/article/third-anniversary-special/bill-drayton-empathybased-ethics-a-
strategic-essential/32952/1#ixzz3U5j4ISKT (emphasis added). 
 986  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
It  means  the  ability  to  grasp  the  many  sides  of  today’s  complex 
problems and the capacity to collaborate with others to solve them; it 
means being as good at listening to the ideas of others as articulating 
your own; it means being able to lead a team one day, and participate as 
a team member the next.93   
 
For  Drayton  and  other  lawyer  social  entrepreneurs,  empathy  is  the 
twenty-first century skill that is “the foundation for everything else.”94   
After  students  complete  their  leadership  training,  during  both  the 
students’ first and second years the IPI will also work with Pitt Law’s Office of 
Career  Planning  and  Development  (OPCD)  to  find  these  students  summer 
internships working with lawyer social entrepreneurs.  Pitt Law  is attuned to 
such opportunities as it is now has on its staff a career counselor specifically 
focused on matching law students and graduates with jobs and careers for which 
bar passage is not required.  In addition, through its Innovators, Esq. and Start 
Smart  Law  events,  the  IPI  has  engaged  alumni  lawyer  social  entrepreneurs 
willing to mentor similarly inclined students.   
For example, during the Summer of 2014 Pitt Law students interned at 
Thrill  Mill,  a  Pittsburgh  incubator/accelerator  founded  by  a  lawyer  social 
entrepreneur. 95 By “embedding” law students at Thrill Mill, with practicing 
lawyers supervising their work, the IPI and its students have begun to play an 
important  role  in  Pittsburgh’s  social  entrepreneurial  ecosystem.    The  IPI  is 
currently working with other incubators and accelerators in the Pittsburgh region 
to provide additional opportunities to similarly “embed” law students. 
During their second year of the pilot, law students will participate in 
experiential,  team-based  courses  that  will  focus  on  “incubating”  social 
innovations.    The  ability  to  work  in  teams  is  an  essential  skill  for  social 
entrepreneurs:  “Because one needs to see and seize ever-changing opportunities, 
the new organizational model must be a fluid, open team of teams.”96 
 
We can get a glimpse of this new world by looking at the islands of 
collaborating changemakers that already exist, for example, in the fluid 
interchanges of Silicon Valley (consider the free movement of people, 
the  increase  in  open-sourcing,  and  the  Valley’s  rapidly  evolving 
support structures) or the Ashoka community of leading social and 
                                                                                                                                    
 
93 Start Empathy, Why, http://startempathy.org/why (last visited Apr. 9, 2015). 
94 Drayton, supra note 92.  Although “empathy” has become a controversial criteria for Supreme 
Court nominees, even the for-profit business world is increasingly recognizing it as a key to 
success.  Compare Peter Baker, In Court Nominees, Is Obama Looking for Empathy by Another 
Name?, N.Y. TIMES  (Apr. 25, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/26/us/politics/26memo. 
html, with Jason Boyers, Why Empathy is the Force that Moves Business Forward, FORBES (May 
30,  2013,  1:26  PM),  http://www.forbes.com/sites/ashoka/2013/05/30/why-empathy-is-the-force-
that-moves-business-forward/. 
95 See THRILL MILL, http://thrillmill.com/ (last visited Apr. 21, 2015). 
96 Drayton, supra note 89. 
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  987 
 
 
allied business entrepreneurs (consider its breakthrough beyond solo 
entrepreneuring to ‘‘collaborative entrepreneurship’’).97 
 
The IPI currently offers team-based “social entrepreneurship” courses, 
including: 
 
•  “Law,  Entertainment  and  Social  Enterprise,”98  a 
practicum  in  which  law  students  work  closely  with 
lawyers  representing  local  social  entertainment 
enterprises,  such  as  public  television  stations  and 
educational gaming companies; and   
•  Coulter Translational Research Partners Program II99 in 
partnership with the University of Pittsburgh Swanson 
School of Engineering and the University of Pittsburgh 
Innovation  Institute’s  “From  Benchtop  to  Bedside”100 
course,  in  which  law  students  work  with  scientists, 
physicians,  bioengineers,  and  business  students  “to 
commercialize  innovations  and  move  basic  research 
discoveries to the patient.” 
 
To expand these offerings, the IPI plans to work across disciplines, with 
Pitt’s  School  of  Social  Work  and  School  of  Public  Health,  and  across 
universities, with CMU’s Heinz College, which “exists to improve the ability of 
public, not-for-profit, and private organizations to address the most difficult 
challenges facing society.”  Drawing on materials from Ashoka U, law students 
will learn that social entrepreneurship requires teams to work together to make 
reforms that are systems-changing, innovative, scalable, replicable, measurable, 
and sustainable.101   
After completion of the team-based courses, the IPI and OPCD will work 
with law students to find internships with national and international lawyer social 
                                                                                                                                    
 
97 Id.  
98 Law, Entertainment and Social Enterprise, supra note 43. 
99 See Coulter Translational Research Partners II Program, supra note 45.  Each law student who 
participates on Coulter teams may elect to receive academic credit toward their law degree or a 
stipend supplied by the Coulter program itself. 
100 University of Pittsburgh Innovation Institute, From Benchtop to Bedside what every scientist 
needs to know, Course Syllabus, http://www.innovation.pitt.edu/sites/default/files/2015%20B2B% 
20course%20syllabus.pdf (last visited Apr. 10, 2015). 
101 Ashoka U., Changemaking 101: A Student Guide to Social Entrepreneurship, THE ALGERNON 
SYDNEY SULLIVAN FOUND. 9, https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/7252825/ashoka_studentkit_12-
15-12_final.pdf (last visited Apr. 10, 2015).    UMKC Law School also offers several law and 
social entrepreneurship opportunities that provide models for law schools interested in training 
lawyer  social  entrepreneurs.    See  http://law.umkc.edu/pdfs/electives/social-entrepreneurship-
ventures-8757s.pdf;  and  http://law.umkc.edu/pdfs/electives/social-venture-creation-8915.pdf; 
http://bloch.umkc.edu/levitt/. 
 988  UMKC LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:4 
 
 
entrepreneurs.    Possible  internships  might  include  opportunities  through 
Ashoka’s “Law for All” initiative, which “works with social entrepreneurs and 
partners from the public, private, and social sectors to defend changemakers, 
encourage  pro  bono  legal  culture,  and  foster  access  to  justice.”102    Those 
internships may connect to other, existing Pitt Law resources, including funding 
from Pitt Law’s “Pitt Legal Income Sharing Foundation” (PLISF), a student-run 
501(c)(3)  fundraising  organization  that  awards  grants  to  Pitt  Law  students 
pursuing unpaid, public interest summer internships, and Pitt Law’s Nordenberg 
Fellowship program, which supports students studying abroad.103  Our goal is to 
weave  social  enterprise  themes  into  the  fabric  of  the  law  school’s  overall 
program. 
In the third year of the program, IPI students will have the opportunity to 
explore the variety of career options open to lawyer social entrepreneurs through 
more  advanced  curricular  and  extracurricular  offerings  and  further  work  in 
community  settings.  IPI-affiliated  students,  for  example,  are  interning  and 
working  part-time  in  technology  transfer  offices  both  at  the  University  of 
Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University.  The IPI aims to build the third year 
of its program by combining those opportunities with other, more novel ones 
with social entrepreneurship themes: Team-based projects identified during the 
students’ second year may mature into entries into business plan competitions or 
grant applications for outside funding.  For instance, two IPI students recently 
launched an award-winning social enterprise that will offer policy and legal 
services to Pittsburgh’s urban agricultural community.104 
To date, the IPI has worked with students succeeding along each of these 
pathways; our goal is to institutionalize each of them as part of the pilot program.  
We are also looking ahead to extending the IPI’s impact beyond our students’ 
graduation.  We  anticipate  that  students  interested  in  solo  law  practice,  for 
example, may transition into residency programs or a law practice incubator, 
currently in development at Pitt Law. We have already begun working under the 
IPI’s auspices to advance the public presence and identity of recent graduates of 
Pitt Law who have initiated social entrepreneurship careers in Pittsburgh.105   
                                                                                                                                    
 
102 Ashoka Innovators for the Public, Law for All Initiative, https://www.ashoka.org/lawforall (last 
visited Apr. 10, 2015). 
103 The Nordenberg Fellowships, which cover up to $6,000 in travel and living expenses, are 
funded by the Chancellor Mark  A. Nordenberg University Professorship. See University of 
Pittsburgh, Pitt Law, Nordenberg Fellowships, http://law.pitt.edu/academics/cile/jd/competitions/ 
nord (last visited Apr. 10, 2015). 
104 See TRELLIS, http://www.trellispgh.com/ (last visited Apr. 10, 2015).  
105  See  Pittsburgh  Humanities  Festival:  Rap  Lyrics  on  Trial,  http://law.pitt.edu/events/new-
event/pittsburgh-humanities-festival-rap-lyrics-trial (last visited Apr. 13, 2015) (describing the 
IPI’s co-sponsorship of a public event organized in part by Legal Means, a social enterprise 
founded by a Pitt Law graduate that provides online tools to help indigent criminal defendants 
navigate the criminal justice system). Legal Means grew out of a class project for the IPI’s Law, 
Entertainment and Social Enterprise course.  InterSector, a Pittsburgh-based social enterprise 
accelerator,  chose  Legal  Means  as  one  of  its  portfolio of  social  enterprise  startups.  Social 
Enterprise,  Social  Enterprise:  A  New  Type  of  Entrepreneurship,  IDEA  FOUNDRY, 
 2015]  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION  989 
 
 
Our goal is to support and mentor law students as they progress toward 
professional  independence.  The  IPI  aims  to  collect,  document,  and 
institutionalize  practices  that  exist  in  different  ways  and  places  across  the 
existing  law  school  program:  Practicums  may  mature  into  internships.  
Internships may mature into paid employment.     
The IPI and its pilot is itself, of course, a social enterprise startup, 
directed  by  two  people—the  authors—who  think  of  themselves  as  social 
entrepreneurs  as  well  as  lawyers  and  educators.    Our  partners  in  the 
community106 and our partners at Pitt Law107 are likewise social entrepreneurs.    
As with all entrepreneurial ventures, we cannot anticipate whether, when, where, 
or  how  our  vision  and  program  will  succeed.    We  plan  to  report  back 
periodically, through the IPI’s website,108 social media,109 and published accounts 
regarding the evolution of our program and the progress of our graduates.  As 
with all social entrepreneurs, and as guided by the experience and voice of Bill 
Drayton,  we  must  measure  our  impact  in  terms  of  lives  and  communities 
changed.   
 
VI.  CONCLUSION 
 
Today’s law school graduates need to be entrepreneurial to succeed. A 
focus  on  social  entrepreneurship  in  legal  education  offers  the  prospect  of 
bridging two worlds in need: law graduates in need of twenty-first century skills 
and abilities and twenty-first century communities in need of new solutions. As 
Bill Drayton notes,  
 
Time  and  time  again  .  .  .  entrepreneurs  with  narrow  objectives 
(including  self-interest,  shareholders’  interests,  or  a  religious  or 
ideological end) pull the world astray . . . . Social entrepreneurs are the 
essential corrective force. 110 
 
In a world filled with injustice, lawyers have long served as an essential 
corrective force in courtrooms and board rooms, in non-profits and for-profits, 
and in public and private organizations.  The time has come for law schools to 
prepare its students to play that corrective role as social entrepreneurs.  The IPI is 
up for this challenge.  As with all social entrepreneurs, we welcome fellow 
travelers.  
   
                                                                                                                                    
http://ideafoundry.org/sectors/socialenterprise/ (last visited Apr. 9, 2015). 
106 Our community partners include those found elsewhere at the University of Pittsburgh and at 
Carnegie Mellon University, and at regional accelerators and incubators. 
107 Our Pitt Law partners include adjunct faculty helping us as teachers and student mentors, and 
graduates of the law school who share their time and wisdom in building a community of Pitt Law 
entrepreneurs and innovators. 
108 See INNOVATION PRACTICE INST., http://innovation-practice.org. 
109 The Innovation Practice Institute tweets at @IPI_Pgh. 
110 Drayton, supra note 89. 
 