THE RIGHT TO TAKE PART IN CULTURAL LIFE: ON
COPYRIGHT AND HUMAN  RIGHTS
LEA SHAVER & CATERINA SGANGA*
ABSTRACT
Article  15(1)(a)  of the  International  Covenant  on  Economic
Social and Cultural Rights-a source of binding law in 160  countries-
recognizes  "the  right  of everyone  to  take  part  in  cultural  life."  This
article  suggests how lawmakers and jurists might give  meaning to this
provision, with particular attention to issues arising in an age  of digital
culture. The authors  conclude that the right to take part in cultural  life
should be understood in terms of the ability to access, enjoy, engage, and
extend upon a common cultural inheritance and that realizing this right
will require significant reforms in international intellectual property law.
I. INTRODUCTION
For over a decade,  legal scholars  and public  interest advocates
have  endeavored to  defend creative  and communicative  liberty against
efforts at excessive control  through copyright,  particularly in the online
world. Jamie Boyle's calls for an "environmentalism  for the Net,"'  Larry
Lea Shaver is an Associate Research Scholar and Lecturer in Law at Yale Law School, where
she is a resident fellow of the Information Society Project at Yale Law School. Caterina Sganga
is a PhD candidate in Private Comparative Law at Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy; she
also  holds an  LLM  from Yale  Law School.  The authors  would  like to  express their deep
appreciation to their colleagues at the Information Society Project at Yale Law School, and in
particular  the  participants  of the  Fall  2008  Access  to  Knowledge  Practicum,  for their
contributions, feedback, and support.
James Boyle, A Politics of Intellectual Property: Environmentalismf or the Net?, 47 DUKE L. J.
87 (1997). See also James Boyle, Op-Ed., Sold Out, N.Y. TIMES, Mar. 31,  1996, at E15; James
Boyle, The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain, 66 LAW &
CONTEMP. PROBS. 33 (2003); JAMES BOYLE, THE PUBLIC DOMAIN: ENCLOSING THE COMMONS
OF THE MIND (2008), availablea t http://thepublicdomain.org/thepublicdomain I .pdf (arguing that
the use of intellectual property protection to solve the "public goods problem" of knowledge
goods is inefficient and may retard scientific and cultural innovation).
 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1437319 Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
Lessig's inspiration to the Free Culture movement,2 the founding of the
Creative Commons  initiative,  Yochai Benkler's work on the Wealth of
Networks,3  Jonathan  Zittrain's concern  for the  Future of the  Internet,4
and  the  Access  to  Knowledge  mobilization  described  by  Amy
Kapczynsk5  all  hail  in  this  line.  Concerned  about  efforts  to  further
expand  copyright  enforcement,  these  scholars  have  advocated  for the
value  of preserving  individual  freedom  to  create  and  share  cultural
works.
These  arguments  have  been  phrased  in  terms  of  the  public
interest, liberty, creativity, and economic development. Rarely, however,
have they been phrased in terms of international human rights.6
Now  is the time  to do  so.  The United Nations  Committee  on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has recently breathed new life into
a long-obscure  provision  of the  International  Covenant  on Economic,
Social and Cultural  Rights (ICESCR).7  In November of 2009, it issued
the first  concrete  guidance  to  States  Parties  to  the  ICESCR on  their
responsibilities with respect to  "the right to take part in cultural life."8
2  See generally LAWRENCE LESSIG, FREE CULTURE: How BIG MEDIA USES TECHNOLOGY AND
THE  LAW  TO  LOCK  DOWN  CULTURE  AND  CONTROL  CREATIVITY  (2003),  available at
http://www.free-culture.cc/.  See also Lawrence Lessig, Foreword, 70 LAW & CONTEMP. PROBS.
1 (2007),  available at http://www.law.duke.edu/journals/lcp/leptoc70spring2007;  Lawrence
Lessig, Free(ing) Culturef or Remix, 4 UTAH L. REV. 961 (2004); Lawrence Lessig, The Failures
of Fair Use and the Future of Free Culture, in CUT: FILM AS FOUND OBJECT INC ONTEMPORARY
VIDEO (2005); FreeCulture.org - Students for Free Culture, http://www.freeculture.org.
3 YOCHAI  BENKLER,  THE  WEALTH OF  NETWORKS:  HOW  SOCIAL PRODUCTION  TRANSFORMS
MARKETS  AND  FREEDOM  (2006),  available at  http://yupnet.org/benkler/  (arguing  that
recognition of knowledge as a non-rivalrous  good requires questioning the efficiency of strong
exclusive rights on intellectual property, particularly in the digital era).
4 JONATHAN ZITTRAIN, THE FUTURE OF THE INTERNET: AND HOW TO STOP IT (2009), available at
http://yupnet.org/zittrain/  (highlighting  concern  that  the  increasing  trend  toward  a  more
controlled Internet experience threatens its very cultural generativity). See also RON DEIBERT ET
AL.,  ACCESS DENIED: THE PRACTICE AND POLICY OF GLOBAL INTERNET FILTERING (2008),
available at http://opennet.net/accessdenied  (contextualizing  the  practices  of more  than  40
countries currently engaged in Internet filtering).
5 See generally Amy Kapczynski, The Access to Knowledge Mobilization and the New Politics of
Intellectual Property, 117 YALE L. J. 804 (2008) (examining the emergence of a global social
movement under the umbrella of "access to knowledge" through the lens of frame mobilization
theory, and its implications for IP law and politics).
6  But see Lawrence Heifer, Toward a Human Rights Frameworkf or Intellectual Property,4 0 UC
DAVIS L. REV.  971,  1017-18  (2007)  (suggesting the possibility of using the human  rights
framework to press for greater public access to patented and copyrighted goods).
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Jan. 3, 1976, 993 U.N.T.S. 3,
available at http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/a_cescr.htm  [hereinafter ICESCR].
8  The CESCR's General Comments offer interpretative guidance for States Parties to the ICESCR
and are looked to by courts adjudicating  socio-economic  rights claims as highly persuasive
 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1437319 Vol. 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Part in CulturalL  ife
This new "General  Comment" forms a key part of the international  law
that courts in many countries  look to as persuasive evidence of how to
domestically  interpret  human  rights.  As  such,  the  Committee's  work
should be understood as part of a larger, ongoing interpretative process.
This ongoing process  will  have a  strong  impact on the  future
development  of  legal  norms  related  to  creative  and  communicative
freedoms. At present, 160 countries  are parties to the ICESCR.9 In these
countries, the treaty's rights provisions have the same status as domestic
constitutional  law.  Although the United  States is not a member  of the
treaty, its legal norms are ultimately influenced by international law and
the legal reasoning practices of fellow democracies. "0
Although  the  Committee's  recently  issued  General  Comment
constitutes  an essential  starting point of interpretation, many aspects of
the right to take part in cultural life still await further clarification. This
includes  conceptualization  of the  important  relationship  between  the
right to cultural life and the protection of intellectual property.
The General  Comment includes  as a  "basic  premise"  that  "the
right of everyone to take part in cultural life is closely related to ...  the
right of everyone to benefit from the protection of the moral and material
interests resulting  from any  scientific,  literary  or artistic production  of
which they are the author.""  Nevertheless, the General Comment itself
does  not elaborate  on the nature of the interrelationship  between these
two  rights  and  their  important  implications  for  the  regulation  of
intellectual property. This article takes up this challenge.
In this article, we suggest how the right to take part in cultural
life should be interpreted so as to take advantage of the insights of recent
scholarship on free culture and access to knowledge. In so doing, we also
authority. The decision to develop a General Comment on the right to take part in cultural life
was  formalized by the United Nations Committee on Economic,  Social  and Cultural Rights
(CESCR) at its 37th Session, November 24, 2006. The CESCR offered an opportunity for public
input into the process with its Day of General Discussion on 'The Right to Take Part in Cultural
Life'  on May 9, 2008 during its 40th Session. The Committee published the final product of this
consultation  on  November  20,  2009.  U.N.  ECON  & SOC.  COUNCIL  [ECOSOC],  General
Comment No. 21: Right of everyone to take part in cultural life (art 15, para. I (a), of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), U.N. Doc. E/C.12/GC/21,
(Nov. 20, 2009) [hereinafter General Comment No. 21 ].
9  Status of ICESCR, http://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg-no=IV-
3&chapter=4&lang--en.
'0 See  Judith  Resnik,  Law's  Migration: American  Exceptionalism, Silent  Dialogues, and
Federalism'sM  ultiple Portso f Entry, 115 YALE L.J. 1564 (2006).
General Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  2.
 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1437319 Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
indicate  how  supporters  of free  culture  and  access  to  knowledge  can
frame their concerns in terms of human rights. Developing this additional
framing  is  not just  an  academic  exercise,  but  an  important  strategic
maneuver.  By  using  the  international  human  rights  framework,  free
culture advocates  can build cross-border alliances,  leverage  the support
of human rights organizations and institutions, and open up new avenues
for impact litigation.
Following the interpretative methodology  of the Committee, the
article begins by taking up the key terms  "cultural  life,"  "take part  in"
and "everyone."  Sketching out interpretive touchstones for these phrases,
with  special  reference  to  the  themes  of free  culture  and  access  to
knowledge,  we  offer  both theoretical  groundings  as well  as  practical
examples.
Next, the article examines the relevance of the right to take part
in cultural  life  to  the  Internet  and  digital technologies,  as  well  as  to
current debates over intellectual property law. Here, we suggest that the
current  historical  moment  offers  both unique  opportunities  as  well  as
urgent challenges for protecting this right.
Finally,  the  article  suggests  what  specific  steps  governments
should take to honor the right to take part in cultural life. Specifically, we
argue that states recognizing the right to take part in cultural life have a
legal obligation to ensure that their intellectual property frameworks do
not provide excessive protections at the expense of cultural participation.
II. FRAMEWORK AND DEFINITIONS
First and foremost, "the right to take part in cultural life" must be
understood within the broader human rights framework. 2 In the various
international human rights instruments recognizing the right to take part
in cultural life, it always appears alongside two additional components. 3
12 The recently issued General Comment underlines at the outset the close relationship between the
right to take part in cultural life and (i) the other cultural rights contained in Article  15; (ii)  a
number of other rights enshrined in the ICESCR - such as the right to education, the right to self-
determination and the right to an adequate standard of living; (iii) Article 27 UDHR, along with
a list of provisions from numerous international Conventions, cited in notes 1-10. See General
Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  2-3.
13  Closely  parallel  (but  not  identical)  language appears  at  Article 27  of the  1948  Universal
Declaration of Human Rights [hereinafter UDHR], Article 13 of the 1948 American Declaration
on the Rights and Duties of Man [hereinafter American  Declaration], Article  15 of the 1976
ICESCR, and Article 14 of the 1988 Additional Protocol to the American Convention on Human
Rights in the Area of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Protocol of San  Salvador.)  WeVol. 27, No. 4 The Right to Take Parti n CulturalL  ife
These three  provisions address  (a)  cultural participation,  (b)  access  to
science  and  technology,  and  (c)  protection  of authorship.14  Although
listed distinctly,  these  three are  identified by the treaty  as  interrelated
aspects of a single human right. 5 No consensus term has yet emerged to
refer to this overarching  right, of which the right to take part in cultural
life  is  but  one  aspect.16  We  suggest,  however,  that  the  three-part
focus here on Article  15 of the ICESCR as this is the treaty that is binding upon the greatest
number of countries. Article 27 of the UDHR similarly states: "(1)  Everyone has the right freely
to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific
advancement and its benefits.  (2) Everyone  has the right to the protection of the moral and
material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the
author." G.A. Res. 217A, U.N. Doc A/810 at 76, U.N. GAOR, 3d Sess.,  1st plen. mtg., U.N.
Doc. A/810 (Dec. 12,  1948). Similarly, Article 13 of the 1948 American Declaration mentions
"the right to take part in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts, and to participate in
the benefits that result from intellectual progress, especially scientific discoveries" alongside the
protection of authorship. American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, O.A.S.  Res.
XXX, Ninth Int'l Conf. of Am. States (May 2, 1948).
14  Typical of the pattern, Article 15 of the ICESCR reads:
Article 15
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone:
(a) To take part in cultural life;
(b) To enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its applications;
(c) To benefit from the protection of the moral and material interests resulting  from
any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.
ICESCR, supra note 7, at art. 15.
15 Immediately following the three-part elaboration as set forth in note 14 above, the text of Article
15 continues: "the steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present Covenant to achieve the
full realization of this right shall include those necessary for the conservation, the development
and the diffusion of science and  culture." Id. (emphasis added).  The Covenant's  use of the
singular noun "this right" rather than the plural formulation "these rights"  indicates that the
15(l)(a-c) provisions were understood as three interrelated aspects of a single right, rather than
as distinct and separable rights provisions.
16 The UDHR and the ICESCR do not designate short titles for each of their rights provisions.
Certain usages, however, have become common, such as "the right to health" and "the right to
education."  No  such key  phrase has yet  emerged  as generally  accepted  for this particular
provision. The American Declaration and the Protocol of San Salvador do designate short titles
for each provision. In these documents, the three provisions-referencing culture, science, and
moral and material interests-are grouped under the short title "Right to the Benefits of Culture."
The phrases "right to culture" and "access to knowledge" have also been used by some scholars.
See, e.g. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, The Right to Culture and the UniversalD  eclaration of Human
Rights, in  CULTURAL  RIGHTS  AS  HUMAN  RIGHTS  73  (UNESCO  1970),  available at
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0000/000011/001194eo.pdf  ("By the right of an individual to
culture, it is to be understood that every man has the right of access to knowledge, to the arts and
literature of all peoples, to take part in scientific advancement and to enjoy its benefits, to make
his contribution towards the enrichment of cultural life."). In the past two decades, however, the
phrase "cultural fights" has come to be used to refer to the rights of minority and indigenous
peoples to preserve their languages and traditions, as protected by Article 27 of a separate treaty,Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
framework is best understood as recognizing  a universal human right to
science  and culture,7  in which access and participation are touchstone
concepts. "8
As used by United Nations  documents,  the term "science  and
culture"  broadly  includes  all  fields  of  human  knowledge  including
technology,  arts  and  crafts,  science  and  social  science,  folk  wisdom,
etc.' 9 The  right to science  and culture thus recognizes  and protects  the
right  of everyone  to  participate  in the  advancement  and  share  in  the
benefits  of  human  knowledge-both  scientific  and  cultural."0  This
broader framework sheds light on how to interpret specific terms within
"the right to take part in cultural life."
A. "CULTURAL LIFE"
The  term  "cultural  life"  might  be  read  in  an  anthropological
sense, as  "the  distinctive  set of ideas,  social behavior, way of life  and
the International  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. To avoid confusion,  therefore,  we
advocate "the right to science and culture" as the best shorthand.
17  According to this perspective, see General Comment No. 21,  supra note 8,  47 ("Given the
interrelationship between the rights set out in Article 15 of the Covenant (... ), the full realization
of the right of everyone to take part in cultural  life also requires the adoption of the steps
necessary for the conservation, the development and the diffusion of science and culture, as well
as steps to  ensure respect for the freedom indispensable  for scientific research  and creative
activity, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, respectively, of Article 15").
'8  For a fuller elaboration of this framework, see Lea Shaver, The Right to Science and Culture,
2010 Wisc. L. REV. (forthcoming),  available at http://ssm.com/abstract=1354788  (outlining a
theory of the right to science and culture, with particular attention to the implications of the right
for intellectual property law, including both copyright and patents).
19 The  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO)  was
established in 1945 "to contribute to peace and security by promoting collaboration among the
nations through education, science and culture." Constitution of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization,  http://www.icomos.org/unesco/unescoconstitution.html
[hereinafter UNESCO Constitution], art. 1(1). See also id. at art. 1(2)(c): "To realize this purpose
the Organization will... Maintain, increase and diffuse knowledge; By assuring the conservation
and protection of the world's inheritance of books, works of art and monuments of history and
science, and recommending to the nations concerned the necessary international conventions; By
encouraging co-operation among the nations in all branches of intellectual activity, including the
international  exchange of persons active in the fields of education, science and culture and the
exchange  of publications,  objects  of artistic  and scientific  interest  and  other materials  of
information; By initiating methods of international co-operation calculated to give the people of
all countries access to the printed and published materials produced by any of them."
20  See Shaver, supra note 18.Vol. 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Part in CulturalL  ife
patterns  of  communication  of  a  particular  society  or  people."'"
Unquestionably,  the  right  of indigenous  peoples  to  live,  preserve  and
pass on their cultural traditions is an important element  of the right to
take  part  in  cultural  life.22 Indeed,  this  may  be  the  most  frequently
analyzed  dimension of this right  in prior scholarship,23 and extensively
informs the interpretative guidance recently given by the Committee.24
Conservation  of traditional  cultural  life,  however,  is  but  one
aspect. The Covenant's text places equal emphasis on the need to pursue
conservation, development, and diffusion.25 It is thus essential to have a
broader understanding  of "cultural  life"  that  more fully  captures  these
multiple possibilities.
As intended by the framers of "the right to take part in cultural
life,"  the  phrase  includes not only traditional  customs  that distinguish
each ethnic community but all the ways in which human beings express
creativity,  seek  beauty  and  truth,  exchange  ideas,  and  create  shared
meanings.  In  the  Committee's  own words,  the concept  "encompasses,
inter alia ways of life, language,  oral  and written  literature,  music and
song,  non-verbal  communication,  religion  or belief systems,  rites  and
ceremonies,  sport  and  games,  methods  of production  or  technology,
natural and man-made  environment, food, clothing and shelter, the arts,
customs and traditions, through which individuals, groups of individuals
and communities  express  their humanity  and the meaning they give to
21 Collective Dimensions of the Right to Take Part in Cultural Life, 2,  U.N. Doc. E/C.12/40/17,
(May 9, 2008) (Submitted by Mr. Ephraim Nimni to the Comm. on Econ., Soc. and Cultural
Rights, Fortieth Session) availablea t
http://www2.ohchr.org/englishlbodies/cescr/docs/discussion/EphraimNimni.pdf.
22 The cultural rights of indigenous groups and other ethnic minorities are also separately protected
other mechanisms.  See International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, G.A. Res. 2200
(XXI), art. 27, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (Dec. 16,  1966) [hereinafter ICCPR], Declaration of the Rights
of Persons Belonging to National  or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,  G.A. Res.
47/135, art. 2, 4, U.N.  Doe. A/RES/47/135  (Feb.  3, 1993), Convention on the Rights of the
Child, G.A. Res. 44/25, art. 30, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (Nov. 20, 1989).
23 See Stephen A. Hansen,  The Right to Take Part in Cultural LifeT:o ward Defining Minimum
Core of the Obligations Related to Article 15 (1) (a) of the InternationalC ovenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, in CORE OBLIGATIONS: BUILDING A FRAMEWORK FOR ECONOMIC,
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS 281 (Audrey Chapman & Sage Russell eds., 2002).
24 See General Comment No. 2 1,s upra note 8,  7, 16, 27, 36-37, 49(d), 50(c), 53, 55(c) & 73.
25 ICESCR, supra note 7, at  art. 15(2): "The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present
Covenant  to achieve the  full  realization  of this right shall  include those necessary  for the
conservation, the development and the diffusion of science and culture."Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
their existence, and build their world view representing their encounter
with the external forces affecting their lives."26
Cultural life takes many forms: traditional culture, high culture,
popular culture, and even digital culture.27 It includes folklore, scientific
journals,  how-to  books,  and  Wikipedia;  storytelling,  Haiku, detective
novels, and blogs. It includes folk song, gamelan, the Beatles, and mp3s;
Ndebele  house  painting,  Pablo  Picasso,  scrap-booking,  and  digital
photography.  Cultural  life  includes  ritual  performance  and  kabuki
theatre;  Bollywood  and  YouTube.  Twenty  years  from  now,  it will
include new media and genres not yet imagined.
The  choice  of the  phrase  "cultural  life"  rather  than  simply
"culture"  uniquely  suggests  an  understanding  of  cultural  life  as
something  vibrant and dynamic,28 a diverse phenomenon that  changes
and develops.29 Whether the society in question is "traditional"  or not,
cultural  life  is  ever-changing;  the  result  of  individual  creativity
reinterpreting existing knowledge as  a cultural resource.3" According to
26  General Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  13.
27  "Digital culture," according to Dr. Charlie Gere, Director of the Institute for Cultural Research at
the University of Lancaster, refers to "the vast range of applications and media forms that digital
technology has made possible, including virtual reality, digital special effects, digital film, digital
television, electronic music, computer games, multimedia, the Internet, the World Wide Web,
digital telephony and Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), as well as the various cultural and
artistic  responses to the ubiquity of digital technology, such as Cyberpunk novels and films,
Techno and post-pop music, the 'new typography,'  net.art and so on." CHARLIE GERE, DIGITAL
CULTURE 11-12 (2001). Professor John Palfrey of Harvard Law School describes a generation of
"digital natives" bom after 1980, for whom the digital culture is the norm. "Digital natives...
express themselves creatively in ways that are different from the ways their parents did at their
age. Many digital natives perceive information to be malleable; it is something they can control
and reshape  in new and interesting ways. That might mean editing a profile on MySpace or
encyclopedia entries on Wikipedia, making a movie or online video, or downloading a hot music
track-whether lawfully or not. Whether or not they realize it, they have come to have a degree
of control over their cultural environment that is unprecedented .... Digital natives, at their most
creative, are creating parallel worlds on sites like Second Life. And after they do, they record
parts of that world and post a video of it on YouTube...  in a new art form called 'machinima."'
JOHN PALFREY, BORN DIGITAL: UNDERSTANDING THE FIRST GENERATION OF DIGITAL NATIVES
6 (2008).
2g General Comment No. 21 describes the concept of culture as "an interactive process whereby
individuals and communities, while preserving their specificities and purposes, give expression
to the culture of humanity. This concept takes  account of the individuality and otherness  of
culture as the creation and product of society." See General Comment No. 21 supra note 8,  13.
29 This understanding  is, again,  highlighted  in  the recent guidance  issued by the  Committee.
General Comment No. 2 1, supra note 8,  11.
30 See generally FREDRIK  BARTH,  BALINESE  WORLDS  (1993)  (questioning  the  longstanding
anthropological conception of traditional  cultures as static and integrated, and offering a more
complex  theory  of continuous  cultural  reinvention  by  individuals  as  part  of the  larger
community).Vol. 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Parti n CulturalL  ife
the cultural theorist Fredrik Barth, culture "springs  not from one source
and is not of one piece" but is made when people "participate in multiple,
more or less discrepant, universes of discourse;  they construct different,
partial, and simultaneous worlds in which they move."31
To take an  example  from American  culture,  this phenomenon
may be observed in Jazz  music. This genre emerged  in a setting  where
many musicians borrowed and reinterpreted  each other's work; together,
they invented a new musical genre with worldwide appeal. This example
may  be  typical  of cultural  invention.  In  the  words  of Larry  Lessig,
"There is no art that doesn't reuse."32
The phrase  "cultural  life"  may also  suggest that  human beings
are not fully "alive" unless they are empowered to take part-in the ways
and  forms  that  they  choose-in  this  essential  aspect  of the  human
experience.
B. "TAKE PART IN"
Article 15 does not suggest that cultural life should evolve in any
certain  direction,  but  rather  emphasizes  the  need  for  encouragement,
freedom,  and  popular  participation.33  In  this  way,  rights-bearers
themselves act both individually  and collectively to shape the evolution
of cultural life, as co-creators of culture.
From  this perspective,  the  phrase  "to  take  part  in"  takes  on
central importance:  participation  is the essence of the right.34 Difficulty
3' Fredrik Barth, The Analysis of Culture in Complex Societies, 54 ETHNOS  120, 124, 130 (1989).
For further analysis, see Fredrik Barth,  Transnationalisin,i n BLOOMSBURY GUIDE TO HUMAN
THOUGHT 57 (Kenneth McLeish ed., 1993).
32 The context of Lessig's quote is  a criticism of the impact of strong IP protection on later
creativity. "There is no art that doesn't reuse. And there will be less art if every reuse is taxed by
the appropriator. Monopoly controls have been the exception in free societies; they have been the
rule in closed societies." Lawrence Lessig, May the Source Be With You, WIRED, Dec. 2001, at
78, availablea t http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/9.12/lessig-pr.html.
33 "The  States  Parties to  the present  Covenant recognize the benefits to be  derived from the
encouragement and development of international contacts and co-operation in the scientific and
cultural fields." ICESER, supra note 7, at art. 15(4). "The States Parties to the present Covenant
undertake to respect the freedom indispensable for scientific research and creative activity." Id.
at art. 15(3). "The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone: (a) To
take part in cultural life." Id. at art. 15(l)(a).
34 In defining the scope and the meaning of"to participate" or "to take part", the General Comment
No. 17 delineates three main components of the right protected under Article 15(1)(a), i.e. the
participation in cultural life, the access to cultural life and the contribution to cultural life. These
three elements are completely interrelated both in terms of general definitions and in terms of
policies required to implement them. General Comment No. 21, supra note 8, r 15.Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
in defining the sometimes slippery noun "cultural  life" may therefore in
large part be overcome by a careful explication of the verbs that cultural
participation implies.
The  right  "to  take  part  in"  culture  consists  in  the  ability  to
consume  and create,  individually  and with  others.  Culture exists to  be
shared,  and to  inhabit  a  culture  is to contribute  to  it.  To take part  in
cultural life implies the ability to access, enjoy, engage with and extend
the  cultural  inheritance;  to  enact,  wear,  perform,  produce,  apply,
translate,  modify,  extend  and remix;  to  manifest,  share,  reinterpret,
critique, combine and transform.
Cultural participation  also requires access to  cultural materials,
tools  and information  and the  freedom to create,  transform,  share  and
trade cultural works and techniques.35
C. "EVERYONE"
In  line  with  the  emphasis  on  participation  and  cooperation,
reference  to  the  right  of "everyone"  to  take  part  in  cultural  life  is
essential. "Everyone"  includes women as well as men, children as well
as  adults,  popular  classes  as  well  as  elites,  rural  dwellers  as  well  as
urbanites,  the  poor  as  well  as  the  wealthy,  and  amateurs  as  well  as
professionals.36
In this last respect, it is important to note that the right to science
and culture's provision on protection of moral and material interests does
not establish  special rights for a class of professional authors;  rather, it
takes pains to recognize the right of "everyone" in authorship.37 From the
human rights standpoint, everyone is called to be an author, not merely to
participate passively as a consumer.38
"5 See id.
36 This interpretation is supported by reference to Article 2.2 and Article 3 of the Covenant, on non-
discrimination. "The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to guarantee that the rights
enunciated in the present Covenant will be exercised without discrimination of any kind as to
race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status."  ICESCR, supra note 7,  at art. 2.2. "The States Parties to the present
Covenant  undertake  to  ensure the equal  right of men  and  women to  the enjoyment of all
economic, social and cultural rights set forth in the present Covenant." Id. at art. 3.
37 For exact language, see supra notes 14, 16.
38 It should be emphasized also that the "author" whose moral and material interests are protected
by human rights law  may not coincide with the "author" protected  by the contemporaneous
copyright laws. In the former, the attribution to "everyone" of the human right to be protected in
her role of "author" is strictly linked with her creative "paternity" of the cultural product. In theVol. 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Part in CulturalL  ife
Realizing the right of everyone to cultural participation requires
the elimination of discriminatory barriers, as well as special measures to
prevent  limitations  of  geography,  language,  poverty,  illiteracy  or
disability from blocking full and equal participation.39
For instance, persons with blindness or other reading disabilities
currently  face  enormous  obstacles  in  gaining  access  to  cultural
materials.4°  The  World  Blind  Union  has  been  pressing  the  WIPO
Standing Committee on Copyright and related Rights (SCCR) since 2003
to  make  it  easier  to  distribute  copyrighted  works  to  the  blind  in
accessible  formats.41  In  May  2009,  a  proposed  Treaty  for  Reading
latter, individual authorship may not be required to claim the material privileges of copyright
protection.  An  opposition between  users  and  consumers  is  also  introduced, based  on the
proprietary approach to intellectual creations, envisioned as goods to be commercialized in the
market.  Thus  the  Committee  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights  has  previously
emphasized that many aspects of intellectual property law cannot find support in human rights
law. Rather protection of "moral interests" refers to "the right of authors to be recognized as the
creators  of their  scientific, literary  or artistic  productions  and  to object to  any  distortion,
mutilation or other modification of, or other derogatory action in relation to, their productions
that would be prejudicial to their honour or reputation" and protection of "material  interests"
refers solely to measures  necessary "to enable those authors to enjoy an adequate standard of
living. The interest of corporate authors and other commercial "rights holders"  do not have a
place in human rights  law. U.N. COMMIrrEE  ON ECON.,  SOC. & CULTURAL  RTS.,  General
Comment No. 17: The right of everyone to benefit from the protection of the moral and material
interests resultingf rom any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author
(article 15, paragraph 1(c), of the Covenant),  13,  15, U.N. Doc. E/C.12/GC/17 (Nov. 7-25,
2005), availablea t
https://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/89856b Id c7b4043c I2 56a450044f331/03902145edbbe797c  12
5711500584ea8/$FILE/G0640060.pdf [hereinafter General Comment No. 17].
39 See U.N. COMMITTEE  ON ECON. SOC.  & CULTURAL  RTS.,  General Comment No. 20: Non-
Discriminationi n Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (art. 2, para. 2, of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), U.N. Doc. E/C.12/GC/20 (July 2,  2009),
available  at  http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/type,GENERAL,,,4a6096If2,0.html  (outlining the
obligations of States  Parties  to the Covenant to prevent  and  remedy discrimination  in the
enjoyment of rights); U.N. COMMITrEE ON ECON., SOC. & CULTURAL RTS., General Comment
No. 5, Persons with disabilities, U.N. Doc E/1995/22 at 19 (1995), reprinted in Compilation of
General Comments and General Recommendations  Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies,
U.N.  Doc.  HRI/GEN/I/Rev.6  at  24  (2003)  at
http://www 1. umn.edu/humanrts//gencomm/epcomm5e.htm  (specifically  discussing  the
dimension  of nondiscrimination  for persons with disabilities). The General Comment No. 21
devotes  an entire  part to "persons  and communities  requiring  special  protection,"  such  as
women,  children, older  persons,  persons with  disabilities, minorities,  migrants,  indigenous
people, persons living in poverty, General Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  25-39.
40 General  Comment  No.  21's  section  concerning  "persons  with  disabilities"  mentions  the
obligation  to "recognize  these persons'  right to access  cultural material  (...)  in  accessible
forms." General Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  31.
41 World  Intellectual  Property  Organization,  Information  Meeting  on  Digital Content  for the
Visually Impaired (Nov. 3, 2003) (prepared by Francisco Javier Martinez Calvo), available at
http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/mdocs/en/digvi-im_03/digviim-03-l-rev  1.html.Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
Disabled Persons was introduced for consideration  at the SCCR, which
would  create  internationally  harmonized  exceptions  and  limitations  to
copyright in  order to  reduce  barriers  to cultural  works  for those  with
blindness  or  other  reading  disabilities;  the  proposal  remains  under
consideration. 2
More broadly, the dominant model of selling  access to cultural
works  for  a standard  fee-enabled  by global copyright  enforcement-
creates  significant  barriers  to  cultural  participation  in  developing
countries. Empirical evidence suggests that rights holders not only fail to
discount cultural  goods for sale in developing countries, but that prices
are frequently  higher in such  countries than in the US. 3 This example
highlights  the  importance  of  designing  IP  regimes  to  promote
competition-and therefore affordability-in the markets for information
goods.
III. NEW OPPORTUNITIES ...A ND  CHALLENGES
The  right to  take  part  in  cultural  life was  first  recognized  in
1948."  Today, its realization faces new opportunities in the age of digital
culture, but also new challenges, in the form of expanding and tightening
intellectual property rules.
42  See Dan Pescod, The "Right to Read"-Why a WIPO Treaty for Print Disabled People? (April
2009), http://www.kestudies.org/ojs/index.php/kes/article/viewPDFInterstitial/43/79  (last visited
Feb. 23, 2010).
43 See, e.g. Lawrence  Liang & Achal  Prabhala,  Comment: Reconsidering the Pirate Nation, 7
SOUTH  AFRICAN J. OF INFORMATION  AND COMMUNICATION  108,  110-11 (2006), available at
http://www.sajic.org.zalindex.php/SAJIC/article/view/SAJIC-7-8/87.  Liang and Prabhala found
that a person could buy a copy of THE OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY, Arundati Roy's THE GOD
OF SMALL THINGS, and Nelson Mandela's  LONG WALK TO FREEDOM in the United States for a
grand total of $44.10. Purchasing the same books in South Africa, however, would require the
equivalent of $87.52. In India, in contrast, the books could be acquired for slightly less than the
U.S. prices, at a grand total of $36.10, a discount the authors attribute to publisher's need to
compete with widespread distribution  of "pirated" books sold at even lower prices. Id. at I11.
Relative to local incomes, however, the true cost of the books should be understood as equivalent
to $937.27  in South Africa, and an astonishing $2409.50 in India. Id. Clearly, access to these
cultural goods through legal market means is restricted to a very small slice of South African and
Indian societies. A similar study suggests that, when the gap in purchasing power is taken into
account, "the relative price of a book in Brazil is 270% higher than in Japan and 150% higher
than  in the United  States."  Pedro Nicoletti  Mizukami et al.,  "'Exceptionsa nd Limitations to
Copyright in Brazil: A Callfor Reform," in ACCESS TO KNOWLEDGE IN BRAZIL: NEW RESEARCH
ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 89 (Lea Shaver ed. 2008).
See UDHR, supra note 13, at art. 2; American Declaration, supran ote 13, at art. XIII.VoL 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Part in CulturalL  ife
A. THE INTERNET AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES
Technological  developments  of  the  past  twenty  years  have
greatly advanced the ability of everyone to take part in cultural life.
Public  and private  not-for-profit efforts  led to the formation  of
the Internet, the  first all-purpose global communications  network.  This
new  technology  enables  the  co-creation,  sharing,  and  enjoyment  of
cultural expressions across old barriers of geography and time.
Newspapers  that formerly  enjoyed limited  distribution are now
accessible  globally, preserved and searchable in online archives.45 Rural
radio stations are using the Internet to access cultural materials and read
them aloud in local  languages for common enjoyment and edification.46
Medical  personnel  have  much  greater  access  to  scientific  literature
thanks to online archives and search engines.47
The  Internet  has  also  created  a  fundamental  shift  in the  cost
structure of knowledge sharing and distribution.
In the  era  of print,  film,  and  tape,  cultural  works  had  to  be
produced  in  capital-intensive  facilities  and  then physically  shipped  to
customers  around  the  globe.  Recorded  knowledge  was  therefore
expensive and scarce.
Today,  cultural  works  may  be  digitally  rendered,  costlessly
reproduced  and  instantaneously  transmitted  at  the  touch  of a button.
Scientific and cultural  knowledge  no longer need to be  expensive  and
scarce, but may be freely  shared as widely  as the digital infrastructure
permits.
The  emergence  of  the  Internet  has  also  fueled  the  rapid
development  of digital technologies,  which  have brought new tools for
cultural creation into more hands.
When  the  ICESCR  was  signed  in  1966,  the  technology  for
recording  music was extremely  expensive. Now residents  of Brazilian
4  For  links  to  online  newspapers  from  around  the  world,  visit  Internet  Public  Library,
http://www.ipl.org/div/news/.
46  Lynne Gallagher and Djilali Benamrane, Rural Access by Radio and Internet Helps Close the
Digital  Divide,  INTERNET  SOCIETY,  Apr.  2001,  available  at
http://www.isoc.org/oti/articies/0401/gallagher.html.
47  See, e.g., Library of the National Medical Society, http://www.ccspublishing.com/ (last visited
Feb.  18, 2010). Many  medical journals  still impose access barriers to their online archives,
charging a steep subscription fee. The trend toward open access scientific publication, however,
is growing. In this model, revenues are realized through other means, so that online access may
be made available free to all.Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
periferias can  operate  a  home  studio,  record  their  own  music,  and
promote it from an Internet caf6.4" Digital video technology has similarly
enabled  the  flourishing  of the  world's  third-largest  film  industry  in
Nigeria.49
Software tools now exist to read digital text aloud to the illiterate
or  disabled."  Similar  tools  are  being  developed  to  provide  free,
instantaneous translation between languages.5
These  developments  greatly  enhance  access  to knowledge  and
the possibilities for  everyone  to take part in cultural life by helping to
overcome  earlier barriers  created by  geographic  distance  and  cost.  To
fully realize their promise, governments  should invest in efforts to close
the digital divide and ensure the freedom of the Internet.
B. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Intellectual property law is also a topic of particular importance
to cultural participation. The architects of the human rights treaties have
consistently  placed  language  recognizing  the  right  to  cultural
participation and the interests of authors side-by-side, always in the same
article."  This structure is no accident, but rather an acknowledgement of
the  inherent  tension  between  IP protections  and  widespread  access  to
science and culture.
It  is  well  established  in  human  rights  law  that  intellectual
property rights are not themselves human rights."  Rather, IP protections
48 The Brazilian genre of tecnobrega has flourished in these conditions, becoming a major source
of cultural participation and livelihood, facilitated also by the lack of copyright enforcement in
Brazil. See Pedro Nicoletti Mizukami & Ronaldo Lemos, From Free Software to Free Culture:
The Emergence of Open Business, in Shaver, supra note 43, at 26-63.
49 "Nollywood" refers to the young and dynamic film industry of Nigeria, which is now the third
largest in the world, after the United States and India. The Nigerian film industry thrives in an
environment where copyright law is not enforced, favoring a diverse industry of inexpensively
produced movies sold at prices affordable to all classes. To view a short film about the Nigerian
film  industry,  go to  THIS  isN OLLYWOOD,  http://www.thisisnollywood.com/trailer.htm  (last
visited Feb. 18, 2010)
50  For a demonstration of one such technology, available in several languages, visit http://text-to-
speech.imtranslator.net/speech.asp (last visited Feb. 23, 2010).
51 For  a  demonstration  of  one  such  technology,  courtesy  of  Google,  visit
http://translate.google.com/translatet#.  Enter text  in the language of your choice,  select the
destination language and hit "translate."  The translation software is still far from perfect, but is
being improved every day.
52  See UDHR, supra note 13; American Declaration, supra note 13; ICESCR, supra note 7.
53 "In contrast to human rights, intellectual property rights are generally of a temporary nature, and
can be revoked, licensed or assigned to someone else. While under most intellectual propertyVol. 27, No. 4 The Right to Take Part in CulturalL  ife
are a policy tool designed to serve specific social purposes. To the extent
that these rules conflict with fundamental norms of human rights law, the
IP rules must be adjusted.
The need for this balancing has been widely acknowledged in the
abstract. 4 Yet there has so far been little concrete  discussion of where,
systems, intellectual property rights, often with the exception of moral rights, may be allocated,
limited in  time and scope,  traded, amended and even  forfeited,  human rights  are timeless
expressions  of fundamental entitlements  of the human person.  Whereas the human right to
benefit from the protection of the moral and material interests resulting  from one's scientific,
literary and artistic productions safeguards the personal link between authors and their creations
and between peoples, communities, or other groups and their collective cultural heritage, as well
as their basic material interests  which are  necessary to enable authors to enjoy an adequate
standard of living, intellectual property regimes primarily protect business and corporate interests
and investments. Moreover, the scope of protection of the moral and material interests  of the
author provided for by article  15, paragraph I (c), does not necessarily coincide with what is
referred to as intellectual property rights under national legislation or international agreements."
General Comment No. 17, supra note 38, 12.
5  In 2001, the High Commissioner for Human Rights emphasized that Article 15 charges States
"...to design IP systems that strike a balance between promoting  general public interests in
accessing new knowledge as easily as possible and  in protecting the interests of authors  and
inventors in such knowledge."  The High Commissioner for Human Rights, Report of the High
Commissioner on the Impact of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights on Human Rights,  10, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/Sub.2/2001/13  (June 27, 2001), available at
http://shr.aaas.org/articlel5/Reference_Materials/ECN.4_Sub.2200112-Add.1_Eng.pdf  (last
visited Feb. 23, 2010).
In the same year, the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
cautioned  that ". ..[i]n  an  effort to provide  incentives  for creation  and innovation,  private
interests should not be unduly advantaged and the public interest in enjoying broad access to new
knowledge should be given due consideration." U.N. Committee on Econ., Soc. & Cultural Rts.,
Substantive Issues Arising in the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, Human rights and intellectualp roperty: Statement by the Committee
on  Economic Social and Cultural Rights, U.N.  Doe.  E/C.12/2001/15  (Dec.  14,  2001),
[hereinafter Statement on IP and Human Rights].
In 2005, the first ever UNESCO World Report affirmed: "It will...  be necessary to find a
balance between protecting intellectual property and promoting the public domain of knowledge:
universal access to knowledge m,,st remain the pillar that supports the transition to knowledge
societies."  UNESCO  WORLD  REPORT,  TOWARD  KNOWLEDGE  SOCIETIES  26  (2005),
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/00 14/001418/141843e.pdf (last visited Feb. 23, 2010).
Most recently, the Venice  Statement on the Right  to Enjoy the  Benefits of Scientific
Progress and its Applications acknowledged that "the right to enjoy the benefits of scientific
progress and its applications may create tensions with the intellectual property regime, which is a
temporary monopoly with a valuable social function that should be managed in accordance with
a common responsibility to prevent the unacceptable prioritization of profit for some over benefit
for all." Venice Statement on the Right to Enjoy the Benefits of Scientific Progress and  its
Applications,  July  16-17,  2009,  available  at
http://shr.aaas.org/articlel 5/ReferenceMaterials/VeniceStatementJuly2009.pdf  (last  visited
Feb. 23, 2010). The Statement stopped short of suggesting what specific measures  might be
required to ensure such a management. See id.
Even trade treaties uninformed by a human rights perspective have recognized the need to
balance protections for intellectual property with the public interest in access to knowledge. InWisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
precisely, IP rules might need to be adjusted in deference to the right to
take part in cultural  life. This last section provides  some starting points
for this vital discussion.
IV. LEGAL OBLIGATIONS OF STATE PARTIES
Each human right imposes three types of obligations upon States
Parties to the Covenant:  obligations to respect, protect, and fulfill.55 The
obligation  to  respect requires  States  Parties  to  refrain  from  taking
measures that interfere with the right of everyone to take part in cultural
life. The obligation to protect requires States Parties to take appropriate
measures  to  prevent  third parties  from  interfering  with  the  right  of
everyone  to take  part in cultural  life. The  obligation to fulfill requires
States  Parties  to  implement  programs  and  other positive  measures  to
ensure full enjoyment of the right to take part in cultural life.
A. RESPECT: CONSTRAINTS ON STATE ACTION
The obligation to respect human rights requires governments  to
refrain  from acting in ways that inappropriately  limit enjoyment of the
right. A right may be violated by extralegal state action, or by laws that
unjustifiably  constrain  the  right,  either  facially  or  as  applied  to  a
particular situation.
With  regard to the right  to take part in  cultural life,  laws  and
policies  should  be  designed  to  expand  access  to  knowledge  and
opportunities for participation, emphasizing  the participatory dimension
of all people-individually and collectively-as both consumers and co-
creators of culture.6
1996 the WIPO Copyright Treaty acknowledged "the need to maintain a balance between the
rights of authors and the larger public interest, particularly  education, research and access to
information."  World Intellectual Property Organization Copyright Treaty, pmbl., Dec. 20, 1996,
36 I.L.M. 65.
55 General Comment No. 17, supra note 38,  28-34. See also Meeting of Experts on the Limburg
Principles as to the Nature and Scope of Violations of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Jan.
22-26, 1997, Maastricht Guidelines on Violations of Economic, Social and CulturalR ights,  6,
availablea t
http://202.54.104.236/intranet/eip/legislation/uploads/Masstricht%20Guidelines%20on%20Viola
tions%20oP/20Economic.pdf (last visited Feb. 23, 2010); General Comment No. 21, supra note
8, 1148 (reiterating that the obligations to respect, protect, and fulfill apply equally to the right to
take part in cultural life).
56  See supra note 36 and accompanying text. One of the three components of the right protected
under Article 15 (1) (a) is the "contribution to cultural life", defined as "the right of everyone toVol. 27, No. 4 The Right to Take Part in CulturalL  ife
States'  self-reports on measures taken to respect the right to take
part  in  cultural  life  typically  focus  only  on  efforts  to  eliminate
discriminatory  barriers. 7 This sole focus overlooks  the possibilities that
poorly  designed  laws-such  as  an  imbalanced  IP  regime-may
negatively impact cultural participation across the entire society.8
Exclusive  copyright  privileges  necessarily  limit  the  ability  of
other people to take part in cultural life by interacting with that content.
Such  limits  must be  carefully  considered  and judged  to  be consistent
with  the  right  of everyone  to  take part  in cultural  life and  the  social
function of intellectual property. 9
be  involved  in creating the spiritual,  material, intellectual  and emotional expression of the
community." General Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  15.
57 Under the terms of the ICESCR, state parties are required to make periodic reports to the treaty's
standing committee; more than 80 State reports have been presented to the CESCR since 2001.
These are  publicly  available at http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cescr/sessions.htm  (last
visited  Feb.  23,  2010).  Within  these  reports,  the  dominant  view  treats  the  concept  of
discriminatory barriers in three senses: (a) all those obstacles hindering the physical access to
libraries, schools, theatres or, more generally, structures devoted to culture and education; (b) the
lack of infrastructures and cultural projects in rural areas; (c) any different treatment reserved to
ethnic minorities.  No  attention,  however,  is paid to  the discriminatory  impact  on visually-
disabled and minority-language groups of inadequate copyright exceptions and  limitations to
facilitate accessible translations and adaptations of cultural works; nor to the relevance of laws
and  regulations  that may  interfere  with the right to science  and culture for all segments of
society.
58 Very few state reports mention intellectual property at all. These typically mention IP only for its
relevance as an incentive to authors and inventors. The potentially negative impact of IP law on
those seeking to take part in cultural life is typically ignored. Only three reports pay attention to
the connection between IP and possible impacts on the right to take part in cultural life: those of
Brazil (2001), Belgium and Canada. U.N. Econ. & Soc. Council [ECOSOC], Implementation of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Initial Reports Submitted
by States Parties  under Articles  16 and  17  of the Covenant, Addendum, Brazil,  U.N.  Doc.
E/1990/5/Add.53  (Nov.  20,  2001),  available  at
http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/E. 1990.5.Add.53.En?Opendocument;  ECOSOC,
Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Second
periodic  reports  submitted  by  States  Parties  under  articles  16  and  17  of the  Covenant,
Addendum,  Belgium,  U.N.  Doc.  E/1990/6/Add.18  (Mar.  5,  1998),  available  at
http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/E. 1990.6.Add. 18. En?Opendocument;  ECOSOC,
Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural  Rights, Third
periodic reports submitted by States parties under articles 16 and 17 of the Covenant, Belgium,
U.N.  Doc.  E/C. 12/BEL/3  (Sept.  21,  2006),  available  at
http://shr.aaas.org/articlel 5/State-Reports[Belgium/Third-report-extractEng.pdf;  ECOSOC,
Implementation of the International  Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Fifth
periodic reports submitted by States Parties under articles 16 and 17 of the Covenant, Canada,
U.N.  Doc.  E/C. 12/CAN/5  (Aug.  30,  2005),  available  at
http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)E.C.12.CAN.5.En?OpenDocument  (underlining  the
nuances of the interplay between IPRs and consumer rights).
59 General Comment No. 17, supra note 38, R.3 5-38.Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
Cultural participation requires  access to  materials and  tools, as
well as  freedom to  create  and  share,6"  including freedom  from fear of
criminal or civil prosecution for acts of creativity and participation.  In
this sense, a balanced IP regime is one that adequately protects freedom
of expression, access to knowledge, and the public domain.6'
One  essential  means to  strike the appropriate  balance  between
cultural participation and protection of authorship is through  exceptions
and limitations to copyright.62 Common examples include exceptions to
permit  the  free  use  of  copyrighted  materials  for:  classroom  use,
scholarship,  personal  copies,  format  conversion,  library  lending,
archiving, criticism and comment, translation into lesser-used languages,
reverse-engineering  for  interoperability,  research  purposes,  disabled
accessibility, distance education, time-shifting, sampling, etc.
In  legal  systems  following  the  fair  use  or  fair  dealing
approaches,  exceptions  and  limitations  may  be  judicially  defined.  In
legal systems lacking this tradition, however, statutory lists of exceptions
and limitations  are  often inadequate to protect the right to take part in
cultural life. All governments should provide a legal mechanism whereby
6  Similar language  is  used by the General  Comment No.  21  when  defining  the concept  of
participation in cultural life: "Everyone also has the right to seek and develop cultural knowledge
and expressions and to share them with others; and to act creatively and take part in creative
activity." General Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  15. Furthermore, the Comment refers to the
concept of access in connection with the obligation to "respect", and namely with the adoption of
specific measures  aimed at achieving respect for the right of everyone to "enjoy freedom of
opinion, freedom of expression (...) and the right to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas of all kinds and forms."  General Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  49(b). It is specified that
this obligation implies "the right of all persons to access, and to participate in, varied information
exchanges, and to access cultural goods and services, understood as vectors of identity, values
and meaning." Id.
6'  For a scholarly examination of the importance of the public domain, see BOYLE, THE PUBLIC
DOMAIN,  supra note  I. For a discussion of how the participatory nature of digital culture in
particular is under threat today, see TARLETON GILLESPIE, WIRED SHUT: COPYRIGHT AND THE
SHAPE OF DIGITAL CULTURE (2007).
62  "The task of developing a global approach to limitations and exceptions (L&E's) is one of the
major challenges  facing international copyright law today. As mechanisms of access, L&E's
contribute to the dissemination of knowledge, which in turn is essential for a variety of human
activities and values, including liberty, the exercise of political power, and economic, social and
personal advancement. Appropriately designed L&E's may alleviate the needs of people around
the world who still lack access to books and other educational materials, and also open up rapid
advances in information and communication  technologies that are fundamentally transforming
the processes of production, dissemination and storage of information." P. BERNT HUGENHOLTZ
& RUTH L.  OKEDIJI,  CONCEIVING  AN  INTERNATIONAL  INSTRUMENT  ON  LIMITATIONS  AND
EXCEPTIONS  TO  COPYRIGHT,  FINAL  REPORT  3  (2008),  available  at
http://www.soros.org/initiatives/information/articles.-publications/publications/copyright-20080
506/copyright.20080506.pdf (last visited Feb. 23, 2010).Vol. 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Parti n CulturalL  ife
individuals can challenge laws that do not adequately respect the right to
take part in cultural life and petition for justified exceptions.63
Another  key  issue  is the  right  of public  participation  in  the
decision-making process when laws are adopted that impact the right to
take part in cultural life.'  Considering that taking part in cultural life also
includes  the right  to be  an  active  protagonist  of the  political  process
concerning it, particular importance  must be attributed to the procedural
right  to  "active  and  informed  participation  of  all  those  affected  by
intellectual property  regimes."65 The right to science and culture,  in this
sense,  has to be considered  as a prismatic  value, with both substantive
and procedural dimensions.
Care  must  also  be  taken  that  measures  adopted  to  enforce
copyright do not violate  human  rights.  Severe  penalties for copyright
infringement  must  not  be  permitted  to  create  a  climate  of fear  and
uncertainty  that leads to self-censorship of cultural participation. In this
respect,  the increasing use  of criminal  penalties for ordinary  copyright
infringement is cause for concern. So too are recent proposals in some
States  to ban  suspected copyright  infringers  from the  Internet  without
judicial process.66 Access to the Internet is not a privilege, but part of the
63  As an example of a justified exception not foreseen by statutory law, Internet  search engines
rely on the ability to access, copy and represent existing works in order to perform their function.
Yet the laws of many jurisdictions do not formally provide an exception for Internet search
engines. The Draft Treaty on Access to Knowledge has proposed establishing such an exception
as a matter of international law. Within this proposal, the exclusive rights of copyright holders
shall not apply to the use of works in connection with Internet search engines, "so long as the
owners of works do not make reasonably effective measures to prevent access by Internet search
engines, and the Internet  search engine  service provides convenient  and effective means  to
remove works from databases upon request of the right-owner." A2K Treaty Draft, Article 3-1-
IX, at http://www.cptech.org/a2k/a2k-treaty-may9.pdf.
'4  General Comment No. 21 includes in the category of the obligation to respect the adoption of
specific measures aimed to protect the right to "freely take part in an active and informed way
and without discrimination, in any important decision-making process that may have an impact
on his or her way of life and on his or her rights under Article 15 paragraph 1( a)." See General
Comment No. 21, supra note 8, at  49(e). A similar principle is applied to indigenous people:
State parties should respect their "free, prior and informed consent ( .... ) in all matters covered
by their specific rights." See General Comment No. 21, supra note 8, r 37.
65  Statement on IP and Human Rights, supra note 54,  9.
66 An example is the so-called "Creation and Internet Law", enacted the French Parliament last
spring after a heated debate. A provision allowing the HADOPI to disconnect alleged copyright
infringers from the Internet was recently redacted by the French Constitutional Council. See Nate
Anderson, French Court Savages "Three-Strikes" Law, Tosses it Out, ARS TECHNICA, June  10,
2009,  http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2009/06/french-court-savages-3-strikes-law-
tosses-it-out.ars. The European Parliament has rejected this approach at the regional level. Paul
Meller, Europe Rejects Plan to CriminalizeF  ile Sharing, INFOWORLD, Apr. 10, 2008, available
at  http://www.infoworld.com/article/08/04/1 O/Europe-rejects-plan-to-criminalize-file-Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
fundamental human right to take part in cultural life; any limitations on
that right must be consistent with human rights norms.
For  analogous  reasons,  governments  should  refrain  from
enacting  laws  on Internet  service  providers  that might  have a chilling
effect  on their  activities.  A  doctrine  of  limited  liability,  freeing  the
service provider from responsibility for users'  copyright infringement, is
infinitely preferable  to a  world  in which  Internet  managers  attempt  to
police and block private communications.
The  Committee  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights  has
previously recommended that every state conduct a general human rights
impact assessment of their IP regimes."  Such efforts offer an important
opportunity  to  evaluate  whether  these  legal  frameworks  adequately
respect the right to take part in cultural life.
B. PROTECT: REGULATING PRIVATE ACTORS
The duty to protect requires countries to take appropriate steps to
prevent third parties  from interfering with the right of everyone to take
part in cultural life. In this sense, governments  must address the impact
that misleading copyright claims, abuse of technical protection measures
(TPMs),  and  anti-competitive  practices  may  have  on  cultural
participation.
Misleading  copyright  notices  frequently  threaten  criminal
penalties  for  accessing  cultural  materials,  without  acknowledging  fair
uses  or relevant  exceptions  and  limitations.  Such practices  intimidate
individuals from exercising their human rights and have a chilling effect
on cultural participation.  Where  States Parties  allow third parties to so
sharingjlhtml; see also Resolution on European Agenda for Culture in a Globalising World,
EUR.  PARL.  Doc.  P6_TA  0124  38  52  (2007),  available  at  http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2009:247E:0032:004  1 :EN:PDF (last visited
Feb. 23, 2010). A similar measure has recently been introduced in Korea; the Korean proposal
would also give the Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism authority to shut down websites. IP
LEFT,  UNOFFICIAL  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  "THREE  STRIKE  OUT  (GRADUATED  RESPONSE)"
PROVISION  IN  THE  COPYRIGHT  LAW  AMENDMENT  BILL  PROPOSED  BY  THE  MINISTRY  OF
CULTURE,  SPORTS  AND  TOURISM  IN  JULY,  2008,  available  at
http://www.ipleft.or.kr/bbs/view.php?board=ipleft_5&id-488&page=l  &category 1= 3  (last
visited Feb. 23, 2010).
67  The Committee recommended  that States Parties  and other international  actors "should [..
consider undertaking human rights impact assessments prior to the adoption and after a period of
implementation of legislation for the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from
one's scientific, literary or artistic productions" General Comment No. 17, supra note 38,  35.Vol. 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Part in CulturalL  ife 657
abuse the right to take part in cultural life without penalty, a violation of
Article 15 (l)(a) exists.
To  take  part  in  cultural  life  requires  not  only  freedom  from
overly restrictive  laws,  but  also  freedom  from technological  barriers.
Recent efforts to "lock down" digital content through TPMs may impose
limits on access to cultural works beyond those authorized  by law. For
example,  a  balanced  copyright law  might  permit  sharing  or sampling
copyrighted  materials  for  educational  purposes;  yet third parties  may
employ TPMs to make such uses technologically impossible.68 Where the
law fails to prevent  or to  impose penalties for such abuse-or, worse,
facilitates  the  abuse  by  imposing  civil  or criminal  penalties  on TPM
circumvention  without  regard  to  whether  the  circumvention  was
justified-the right to take part in cultural life is violated.
More generally, both States Parties and third parties must ensure
that  the  technical  architecture  of the  Internet  is  designed  to  protect
access, freedom of expression  and privacy.  Software code may regulate
human behavior even more powerfully than legal code.69 Human rights,
including the right to take part in cultural life, must therefore  be made
part  of Internet  governance  and  corporate  social  responsibility  for
companies that manage Internet infrastructure.
It may also happen that a perfectly legitimate law produces, in its
application, distortive effects adverse to its original rationale.  Firms may
seek  to  exploit  legitimately  acquired  IP  rights in  order to  crowd  out
competitors,  resulting  in  higher  prices  or  diminished  innovation.7°  A
human  rights  assessment  of IP  law  must  be  sensitive  to  unintended
effects  on  market  competition  for cultural  goods  and  tools,  which  is
essential to maximize access and affordability.
68  "[C]ontent providers and lawmakers have begun to implement significant changes in the way
copyright is applied in a digital culture. At the core of these changes is a fundamental shift in
strategy,  from regulating the use of technology through law to regulating the design of the
technology so as to constrain use." GILLESPIE, supra note 61, at 6. For a complete comparative
analysis of the legal development of the TPMs system and its consequence in terms of limitation
of public  domain,  see  Nicola  Lucchi,  Intellectual Property Rights in  Digital Media: A
Comparative Analysis of Legal Protection, Technological Measures and New Business Models
under E.U. and U.S. Law, 53 BUFF. L. REV. 1111, 1160-61,  1167 (2005).
69 LARRY LESSIG, CODE 2.0 124-26 (2006).
'0 U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  JUSTICE  AND  THE  FEDERAL  TRADE  COMMISSION,  ANTITRUST
ENFORCEMENT  AND  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY  RIGHTS:  PROMOTING  INNOVATION  AND
COMPETITION 2-3 (2007),  available at www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/hearings/ip/222655.pdf  (last
visited Feb. 23, 2010).Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
Consumers'  interests  may  also  be  harmed  by  unfair  contract
terms."  The obligation to protect thus imposes duties on governments to
ensure that companies do not use unequal bargaining power for purposes
that would limit cultural participation.
C. FULFILL: POSITIVE MEASURES AND PROGRAMS
Cultural  participation  requires  effective  access  to  existing
cultural goods,  information  and tools;  these  are the  raw materials  for
future creativity and participation.  The obligation tofulfill requires States
Parties  to  adopt  appropriate  legislative,  administrative,  budgetary,
judicial, promotional  and other measures towards the full realization of
the right to take part in cultural life.
The text of Article 15 provides specific guidance on the nature of
obligations to fulfill the right: "The steps to be taken by the States Parties
to the present Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall
include  those  necessary  for the conservation,  the  development  and the
diffusion  of  science  and  culture."72  Article  15  also  points  to  "the
encouragement  and  development  of  international  contacts  and  co-
operation in the scientific and cultural fields."73
States'  self-reports on measures taken to fulfill the right to take
part in cultural  life have frequently emphasized the number of museums
and  cultural  centers  that  are  made  affordable  to  the  public.  The
Committee's  recent guidance  to  some  extent reinforces  this traditional
focus in identifying the importance of "guaranteed  access for all, without
discrimination  on grounds of financial  or any other status, to museums,
libraries,  cinemas  and  theatres  and  to  cultural  activities,  services  and
events."74 A  focus on traditional,  institutional modes of cultural access,
71 See Margaret Jane Radin, Regime Change in Intellectual Property Law: Superseding the Law of
the State with the "Law" of the Firm, I U. OTTAWA L. & TECH. J. 173,  184 (2003); Margaret
Jane  Radin,  Regulation  by  Contract,  Regulation  by Machine,  160  J. INSTITUTIONAL  &
THEORETICAL  ECON. 142,  147 (2004) (noting that TPMs and mass standardized contracts may
effectively rewrite the terms of the public-private copyright bargain). See also LUCiE GUIBAULT
& NATALi HELBERGER, EUROPEAN CONSUMER LAW GROUP, COPYRIGHT LAW AND CONSUMER
PROTECTION (2005) available at
http://www.ivir.nl/publications/other/copyrightlawconsumerprotection.pdf  (last  visited Feb. 23,
2010) (explaining a European perspective of copyright law).
72  ICESCR, at art. 15(2).
•" Id. at art. 15(4).
74 General Comment No. 2 1, supra note 8,  54(d).Vol. 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Parti n CulturalL  ife
however, may  overlook the many  new opportunities  for fulfilling this
right.
Governments can also fulfill the right to take part in cultural life
by  orienting  their  public  procurement,  education,  cultural  and
information  policies  to  promote  access  to  knowledge  and  knowledge
sharing.  State  support  for open  access  journals  and  archives,75  open
educational  resources,76   and  open  source  software77   should  be
highlighted.  Publicly  funded  research  and  artwork  should  be  made
available  through  open access  journals  or archives,  or under Creative
Commons licenses,78 to promote greater access to cultural materials and
possibilities  for  participation.  States  can  also  fulfill  the  right  to
knowledge  by  making  information  about  State  activities  publicly
available through access to information laws.79
Apart  from the realm  of IP,  States must  also make  efforts  to
close the  digital  divide  and  progressively realize  the  goal of universal
access  to  the  Internet.  Well-established  dimensions  of accessibility,
affordability, acceptability and quality developed in the context of access
to health care apply here as well.8 Because the ultimate end is to realize
' 
the right to cultural participation,  it is essential that prospective users are
7  For an explanation of Open Access scholarship and its importance to human rights, see Gavin
Yamey, Open Access to Health and Human Rights, PUBLIC LIBRARY OF SCIENCE, 23 July 2008,
http://www.plos.org/cms/node/384. See also Gavin Yamey & Calestous Juma, Improving Human
Welfare:  The  Crucial Role  of  Open  Access,  29  SCI.  EDITOR,  163,  163-65  (2006),
http://eprints.rclis.org/archive/00007963/02/Unbound-Edited-Final.pdf  (last visited Feb.  23,
2010).
76  For an explanation of Open Education and its importance to cultural participation, see The Cape
Town  Open  Education  Declaration,  Sept.  14-15,  2007,
http://www.capetowndeclaration.org/read-the-declaration  (last visited Feb. 23, 2010).
77 For an explanation of Open Source Software and its importance to human rights, see Andy
Oram,  Why  Human  Rights  Requires  Free  Software,  O'REILLY,  Nov.  10,  2002,
http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/network/2002/10/11/platform.html  (last visited Feb. 23, 2010).
Although  software  may at  first glance seem  to have  more to do  with "science"  than  with
"culture" there is substantial overlap. Consider the example of Wikipedia as an output of cultural
innovations in software design.
78 Creative Commons licenses  facilitate the free international exchange of cultural materials by
providing  advance  permissions  for others to  take  part  in  enjoying,  sharing,  extending or
transforming the materials without payment or special authorization. See CreativeCommons.org,
International, http://creativecommons.org/intemational/  (last visited Feb. 18, 2010).
'9 See, e.g.,  The  Right to Information  Act,  No.  22,  Acts of Parliament  2005,  available at
http://righttoinformation.gov.in/rti-act.pdf (last visited Feb. 23, 2010).
80 U.N. COMMITrEE. ON ECON., SOC. & CULTURAL RTS., General Comment No. 14, The right to
the highest attainables tandardo f health (Article 12 of the InternationalC ovenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights),  12-13, U.N. Doe. E/C.12/2000/4 (Aug. 11,  2000), available at
http://wwwl.umn.edu/humanrts/gencomm/escgencoml4.htm  (last visited Feb. 23, 2010).Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
empowered to use the Internet not only to access the work of others, but
also to share their own creations.
D. PROGRESSIVE REALIZATION AND CORE CONTENT
These  three-fold legal obligations can also be analyzed through
the  lens of "progressive  realization". and  "core  content."  This concept
distinguishes those aspects of the -right Whose implementation  is subject
to economic constraints and must be gradually implemented (progressive
realization),  versus  elements:  that  require  immediate  implementation
(core content).8'
Expanding access to: the Internet requires significant investments
in  infrastructure  and  is  therefore  subject  to  the  logic  of progressive
realization.  Many  other  aspects! of-expanding  access  to  knowledge,
however, can and should be inmediately implemented.
Unlike  access  to  education,  health  care  :or  water,  access  to
knowledge  is  less  dependent  on :t he  availability  of  resources.
"Knowledge  goods are...  fundamentally different from physical goods
and services. They can be copied. They can be'shared. They do not have
to be scarce.  The rich and'the po0r .can be more equal  with regard to
knowledge goods than to many other areas."82
It will be decades, 'at .least, before educational  opportunities are
expanded worldwide so as to-enable everyone to make maximum use of
their right to take part in cultural life. It does not need to take decades to
reform  IP  law  to  bring  about  the  environment  of encouragement,
freedom and public participation envisioned by the right to take  part in
cultural life.
The General Comment stresses that States Parties to the ICESCR
should "undertake whatever measures they can to ensure that the policies
and  decision"  of the  international  organizations  of which  they  are
members "in the field of culture and related areas are in conformity with
the obligations under the Covenant."83
8'  U.N. COMMITTEE ON ECON., SOC. & CULTURAL RTS., General Comment No. 3: The nature of
States parties' obligations (Art. 2,p ara. 1 of the Covenant) (Fifth session, 1990),  1-2, U.N.
Doc. E/1991/23 (Dec. 14, 1990), available at
http://wwwl.umnedu/humanrts/genconm/epcomm3.htm  (last visited Feb. 23, 2010).
82  CPTech.org, Access to Knowledge: Overview, http://www.cptech.org/a2k/  (last visited Feb. 18,
2010).
83 General Comment No. 21, supra note 8,  75.Vol. 27, No. 4  The Right to Take Part in CulturalL  ife
More specifically in the area of intellectual property, we can say
that  states  should work  nationally  and  internationally  to  immediately
implement  legal  reforms  to  eliminate  unjustified barriers  to  access  to
knowledge, expand exceptions and limitations, and ensure that penalties
for copyright infringement  are proportionate. Toward this end, a human
rights  impact  assessment  should  be  conducted  on  IP  frameworks  in
particular,  which  are too  often  adopted  without  broad public  input or
attention to human rights consequences. Adequate procedures  must also
be  made  available  for citizens  to  challenge  in court  laws  that  restrict
access to knowledge.
Going forward, any proposed expansion of copyright protections
must also be subjected to a human rights impact assessment to ensure it
does not constitute a retrogressive measure.
V. CONCLUSION
As this article has demonstrated, international  human rights law
provides a potentially  fertile source of legal norms to advance calls for
Internet  freedom,  Free Culture, Access  to Knowledge and  the Creative
Commons. Scholars and advocates in these camps should work to ensure
that the  right to  take part in cultural  life  is  interpreted and  applied  in
ways  that  support  the  push  for  a  more  open  approach  to  cultural
creativity. Recent work by the United Nations Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural  Life draws  new attention  to this right.  Yet further
work  is  still  needed  to  draw  out  the  implications  of the  right  for
intellectual property policy, particularly in the Internet age.
Pursuing  this  strategic  opportunity  will  require  advocates  of
intellectual  property  reform  to  pursue  greater  engagement  with
international  human rights  institutions and  national processes  based on
human  rights claims.  Copyright  laws that  inadequately  promote access
and opportunities for popular participation in cultural creation constitute
the  most  significant  barrier  to  cultural  participation  that  exists  today.
Human rights bodies should be encouraged to address this problem head-
on.
Attention should also be given to the national level, where many
countries  allow  for  domestic  litigation  of  international  human  rights
norms, or have related provisions in their national constitutions.  So far,
the right to take part in cultural life has been little litigated in these fora.
The process of reshaping IP law to better reflect human rights obligations662  Wisconsin InternationalL aw Journal
will  not be achieved  merely through  statements  of principle. Adequate
legal reforms are essential,  as is a jurisprudence that reflects awareness
of the human rights dimensions of copyright.