 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeals by the Prosecution 
 
Nancy J. King* 
Michael Heise** 
 
Scholarly and public debates about criminal appeals have largely taken 
place in an empirical vacuum. This study builds on our prior empirical work 
exploring defense-initiated criminal appeals and focuses on criminal appeals 
by state and federal prosecutors. Exploiting data drawn from a recently released 
national sample of appeals by state prosecutors decided in 2010, as well as data 
from all appeals by federal prosecutors to the United States Court of Appeals 
terminated in the years 2011 through 2016, we provide a detailed snapshot of 
non-capital, direct appeals by prosecutors, including extensive information on 
crime type, claims raised, type of defense representation, oral argument and 
opinion type, as well judicial selection, merits review, and relief. Findings 
include a rate of success for state prosecutor appeals about four times greater 
than that for defense appeals (roughly 40% of appeals filed compared to 10%). 
The likelihood of success for state prosecutor-appellants appeared unrelated to 
the type of crime, claim, or defense counsel, whether review was mandatory or 
discretionary, or whether the appellate bench was selected by election rather 
than appointment. State high courts, unlike intermediate courts, did not decide 
these appeals under conditions of drastic asymmetry. Of discretionary criminal 
appeals  reviewed  on  the  merits by  state high  courts,  41% were  prosecutor 
appeals. In federal courts, prosecutors voluntarily dismissed more than half 
the appeals they filed, but were significantly less likely to withdraw appeals 
from judgments of acquittal and new trial orders after the verdict than to 
withdraw appeals challenging other orders. Among appeals decided on the 
merits, federal prosecutors were significantly more likely to lose when facing a 
federal defender as an adversary compared to a CJA panel attorney. 
 
 
*  Lee S. & Charles A. Speir Professor of Law, Vanderbilt University Law School. We 
wish to acknowledge the superb research assistance provided by Griffin Farha, 
Mitchell Galloway, Mackenzie Hayes, and Megan Mitchell. We are also grateful for 
feedback on earlier drafts provided by Jonathan Wroblewski, Professors Tracey 
George, Jerold Israel, Terry Maroney, Chris Slobogin, and Marty Wells, participants 
in the faculty workshop at Florida State University College of Law, and anonymous 
referees. 
** Professor, Cornell Law School. 
1 
    
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
This Article presents results from the first nationwide empirical study 
of direct appeals by the government in both state and federal criminal cases. 
Examining recently released data drawn from the 2010 decisions of every state 
court  with  jurisdiction  to  hear  criminal  appeals,1  we  provide  a  detailed 
snapshot  of  non-capital,  direct  appeals  by  state  prosecutors,  including 
information on crime type, claims raised, type of defense representation, oral 
argument and opinion type, as well judicial selection, merits review, and relief. 
Data on appeals by the prosecution in federal cases presented here include 
similar information, drawn from data sets recently made public by the Federal 
Judicial Center that include every criminal appeal to the United States Courts 
of Appeals from 2011 through 2016,2 supplemented with information gathered 
from case filings available on PACER. In addition to this rich descriptive 
information,  we  report,  for  both  state  and  federal  appeals,  results  from 
analyses investigating which case and court-specific factors correlate with a 
higher likelihood of success for the government appellant. We also examine 
how state prosecutor appeals compare with both state defendant appeals and 
federal prosecutor appeals. The empirical information presented here provides 
an unprecedented portrayal of the real world of prosecutor appeals, with a 
number of surprising findings. 
Part II briefly summarizes the law authorizing government appeals in 
criminal cases and reviews existing scholarship on these appeals. Part III sets 
out our research questions. Part IV presents our study of state prosecutor 
appeals, including our empirical strategy, descriptive findings, and statistical 
analyses examining success by prosecutor-appellants. Part V contrasts these 
findings with earlier findings concerning defense appeals in state courts.3 Part 
VI turns to appeals by the government in federal criminal cases, presenting 
the  methodology  and  findings  for  our  study  of  those  appeals.  Part  VII 
addresses the similarities and differences between state and federal prosecutor 
appeals. Part VIII concludes with potential policy implications and suggestions 
for further research. 
II. APPEALS BY THE PROSECUTION: 
LEGAL CONTEXT AND EXISTING RESEARCH 
 
1 Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals, INTER-UNIVERSITY CONSORTIUM FOR POL. & 
SOC. RES. (2010), 
https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/36465?q=36465 
[https://perma.cc/BSC5-LDK2] [hereinafter Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals]. 
2 See infra notes 104-111; https://www.fjc.gov/research/idb/appellate-cases-filed- 
terminated-and-pending-fy-2008-present [https://perma.cc/7UNN-7SKW]. 
3 See Michael Heise, Nancy J. King & Nicole A. Heise, State Criminal Appeals 
Revealed, 70 VAND. L. REV. 1939 (2017). 
2 
    
The  Double  Jeopardy  Clause  bars  a  prosecutor  from  appealing  a 
judgment of acquittal to gain a second opportunity for a conviction.4 Beyond 
this  constitutional  restriction,  varied  statute  and  state  constitutional 
provisions control when a prosecutor may appeal.5 There are four categories  
of orders that Congress and a significant number of state legislatures have 
authorized prosecutors to appeal: orders granting a defendant’s motion to 
dismiss a charge,6 sentences the government alleges are too lenient, illegal, or 
the result of procedural error,7 new trial orders, and judgments of acquittal 
entered after a guilty verdict.8
 
 
 
 
4 The Double Jeopardy Clause does not bar appeals of a judgment of acquittal 
entered after a jury verdict of guilt because success would require only validating a 
conviction already obtained, and would not provide a second chance to obtain one. 
United States v. Wilson, 420 U.S. 332, 352-53 (1975). 
5 For example, a number of states restrict the prosecution’s authority to appeal more 
closely in misdemeanor cases than in felony cases. See, e.g., Minn. R. Crim. P. 28.04 
(authorizing appeals of sentences in felony cases only); State v. Mansfield, 104 N.E. 
1001, 1001-1002 (Ohio 1913) (Ohio Constitution gives the Ohio Supreme Court no 
appellate jurisdiction in misdemeanor cases, and the general assembly has no 
authority to confer appellate jurisdiction on the court in misdemeanor cases); State v. 
Smith, 2011 VT 83, 190 Vt. 222, 224, 27 A.3d 362, 364 (2011) (state cannot appeal a 
final judgment in a misdemeanor case). 
6 See Anne Bowen Poulin, Government Appeals in Criminal Cases: The Myth of 
Asymmetry, 77 U. CIN. L. REV. 1, 15 (2008); WAYNE LAFAVE, JEROLD ISRAEL, NANCY 
KING & ORIN KERR, 6 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE § 27.3(c) (4th ed. 2015) (noting that some 
states permit appeal from all final judgments, while others restrict appeals to 
dismissals for deficiency in the charge or the unconstitutionality of the underlying 
statute). In the federal courts, and a smaller number of states, the prosecution may 
appeal from midtrial orders dismissing a charge for procedural error. See 18 U.S.C. § 
3731 (authorizing appeal of orders dismissing the indictment or information before 
jeopardy attaches or on grounds unrelated to factual innocence, orders granting a 
motion for new trial or for judgment of acquittal or arresting judgment after a guilty 
verdict; orders granting a motion to suppress or exclude evidence, before jeopardy 
has attached and before a verdict or finding, if the government “certifies to the 
district court that the appeal is not taken for purpose of delay and that the evidence 
is a substantial proof of a fact material in the proceeding”). 
7 E.g., 18 U.S.C. § 3742 (appeal of sentence); TEX. CODE CRIM. P. Art. 44.01(b) (appeal 
of illegal sentence); WASH. R. APP. P. 2.2(b)(6) (2009) (authorizing appeal of a 
sentence outside the standard range for the offense). The Double Jeopardy Clause 
does not bar the government from seeking a higher sentence on appeal. See generally 
United States v. DiFranscesco, 449 U.S. 117 (1980). 
8 See LAFAVE ET AL., supra note 6, at §§ 25.3(a), 26.7(a) and (b), and 27.3 (describing 
the authority on prosecutorial appeals for new trial orders and judgments of acquittal 
after the verdict). Several states also have statutes authorizing the appeal of orders 
arresting judgment. E.g., OR. REV. STAT. § 138.060(1)(c) (2011); TEX. CODE CRIM. 
PROC. art. 44.01(a)(2) (2009). 
3 
    
It is these appeals challenging trial court decisions that dismiss a 
charge, impose a sentence, or grant either a judgment of acquittal or a new 
trial after a guilty verdict – together with appeals to a court of last resort 
contesting a decision of an intermediate appellate court9 – which we examine 
in this Article. To accommodate data limitations and facilitate comparisons 
with  existing  information  on  direct  appeals  by  defendants,  our  analyses 
exclude interlocutory appeals,10 petitions to appellate courts seeking relief by 
writ,11 and appeals seeking relief from orders entered after the final sentence, 
such  as  post-commitment  orders  sentencing  a  defendant  after  revoking 
release, or granting a defendant’s motion to reduce a sentence. 
Scholars continue to debate the appropriate scope of appeals by the 
prosecution  as  well  as  the  consequences  of  those  appeals.12    Some blame 
 
9 In jurisdictions with two levels of appellate courts, prosecutors may seek high court 
review of intermediate appellate court decisions favoring the defense. See e.g., CAL. 
RULES OF COURT, Rule 8.500 (2017) (“a party may file a petition in the Supreme 
Court for review of any decision of the Court of Appeal”); OR. REV. STAT. § 2.520 
(2017) (allowing any party to petition the Supreme Court for review of the Court of 
Appeals’ decision). 
10 Both the federal and state data sources we examine here did not code an appeal 
from a new trial order after the verdict as an interlocutory appeal. See Federal 
Judicial Center Integrated Data Base Appeals Documentation FY 2008 – Present, 
https://www.fjc.gov/sites/default/files/idb/codebooks/Appeals%20Codebook%202008%2 
0Forward_0.pdf [https://perma.cc/XWH2-MJJN] (hereinafter FJC Codebook); Survey 
of State Court Criminal Appeals, supra note 1, Codebook. Although none of the state 
prosecutor appeals we examine raised a claim challenging the grant of a new trial, 
many of the federal prosecutor appeals coded as direct (not interlocutory) appeals 
challenged new trial orders. See also LAFAVE ET AL., supra note 6, at §27.3(c) 
(discussing interlocutory appeals by prosecutors generally). 
11 Many jurisdictions provide judicial review of some trial court rulings through writs 
of mandamus or prohibition in addition to appeal, and in some states review by writ 
is more frequent than review on direct appeal. See LAFAVE ET AL., supra note 6, at § 
27.4(d) nn.37-50 (detailing state practice); see generally, Poulin, supra note 6. 
12 See generally Joshua Steinglass, The Justice System in Jeopardy: The Prohibition 
on Government Appeals of Acquittals, 31 IND. L. REV. 353 (1998) (describing various 
scenarios where review is not, but should be available to prosecutors, noting the 
perverse incentives resulting from attempts by judges to preempt reversal). On 
proposals to require trial judges to wait to enter any judgment of acquittal until after 
the jury delivered its verdict, in order to preserve the government’s opportunity to 
appeal, see Jeanne M. Kempthorne, Naked and Arbitrary Power: Judicial Judgments 
of Acquittal, 48 BOSTON BAR J. 30, 32 (2004); Richard Sauber & Michael Waldman, 
Unlimited Power: Rule 29(A) and the Unreviewability of Directed Judgments of 
Acquittal, 44 AM. U. L. REV. 433, 462 (1994); Minutes of the April, 2007 Meeting of 
the Advisory Committee on the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, 11-14, 
http://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/fr_import/CR04-2007-min.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/RP7D-HG53] (describing the consideration and rejection of a 
proposal to amend FED. R. CRIM. P. 29 to bar a judge from granting a motion for 
judgment of acquittal before the case goes to the jury, unless the defendant waived 
  4  
asymmetric appeal rights for various biases or errors in appellate review in 
criminal cases.13 Some praise centralized coordination of government appeals 
by state attorneys general,14 while others warn that because of its superior 
ability to coordinate the development of the law, the government enjoys unfair 
advantages over defendants.15 Still others argue that prosecutors are able to 
obtain judicial review when they need to,16 or that the effects of asymmetry are 
insignificant.17
 
These  debates, however, have  largely  taken  place  in an  empirical 
vacuum. State policy makers evaluating potential changes to the authorized 
scope of prosecution appeals have surprisingly thin empirical information to 
turn to for guidance and insight. In federal cases, statistics regularly posted on 
the  U.S.  Courts  website  do  not  track  government  and  defense  appeals 
separately, nor do the BJS Bulletins discussing information on federal criminal 
appeals. The most recent information in BJS publications addressing federal 
criminal  appeals  is  from  1999,  reporting  a  success  rate  for  government’s 
appeals of 37%.18
 
 
his double jeopardy rights barring the government from appealing that order); 
Minutes of the June, 2007 Meeting of the Committee on Rules of Practice and 
Procedure, 42 http://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/fr_import/ST06-2007- 
min.pdf [https://perma.cc/XT2U-VAVR] (same). 
13 See Kate Stith, The Risk of Legal Error in Criminal Cases: Some Consequences of 
the Asymmetry in the Right to Appeal, 57 U. CHI. L. REV. 1, 52 (1990) (suggesting that 
asymmetric appeal rights encourage a pro-defendant bias in the development of the 
law and pro-defendant trial court decisions). See generally Jonathan S. Masur & Lisa 
Larrimore Ouellette, Deference Mistakes, 82 U. CHI. L. REV. 643 (2015) (describing 
various “asymmetric deference regimes” that lead to appeals that always favor one 
type of party). 
14 See Rachel E. Barkow, Federalism and Criminal Law: What the Feds Can Learn 
from the States, 109 MICH. L. REV. 519, 572 (2011); James R. Layton, The Evolving 
Role of the State Solicitor:  Toward the Federal Model?, 3 J. APP. PRAC. & PROCESS 
522, 553 (2001) (predicting states will benefit from the growing prestige and influence 
of state solicitors). 
15 See Andrew Hessick, The Impact of Government Appellate Strategies on the 
Development of Criminal Law, 93 MARQ. L. REV. 477, 490–93 (2009) (suggesting ways 
appellate courts could counteract government manipulation). 
16 See generally Poulin, supra note 6. 
17 See Vikramaditya S. Khanna, Double Jeopardy's Asymmetric Appeal Rights: What 
Purpose Do They Serve?, 82 B.U. L. REV. 341, 367–74 (2002). 
18 Compare MARK MOTIVANS, FEDERAL JUSTICE STATISTICS, 2013 – STATISTICAL 
TABLES, NCJ 249150 (2017), 
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/fjs13st.pdf?utm_source=juststats&utm_medium 
=email&utm_content=fjs13_report_pdf&utm_campaign=FJS13&ed2f26df2d9c416fbd 
dddd2330a778c6=nrphbbxxuu-nrupounhx [https://perma.cc/QY7W-USV4] (not 
reporting government appeals separately), with JOHN SCALIA, U.S. DEP'T OF JUSTICE, 
BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS, NCJ 185055, FEDERAL CRIMINAL APPEALS, 1999 WITH 
  5  
The United States Sentencing Commission also reports information 
about some of the prosecution appeals decided in the past several years by the 
federal courts of appeals,19 but the data are, in the Commission’s own words, 
“biased due to the document submission practices of the various circuits.”20 As 
a result, “it is unknown to what extent these data are representative of all 
appeals in the federal system.” Not only is the Commission’s sample neither a 
comprehensive  nor  random  collection  of  all  government  appeals  filed  or 
terminated in the United States Courts of Appeals, the information collected 
from those appeals is incomplete. Disposition information, for example, is not 
available for prosecution appeals raising claims other than sentence claims, so 
there are no data on the outcome of appeals challenging dismissals, judgments 
of acquittal after guilty verdicts, or grants of new trials after guilty verdicts.21 
Disposition  information  and  very  limited  information  about  the  type  of 
sentencing issue raised is available, but only for appeals in the sample that 
either  1)  raised  solely  sentence  claims  or,  2)  included  an  appeal  by  the 
 
 
 
 
 
TRENDS 1985-99 (2001), https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/fca99.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/FCX5-F89Y], 2, 5, Tables 1 and 3 (noting 37.3% of the 506 
government appeals decided by the federal courts of appeals in 1999, which could 
have included interlocutory and post-conviction appeals, noting that were reversed, 
remanded, or only partially affirmed, while the remainder were procedural 
terminations, affirmances, or dismissals; 60% of government appeals terminated on 
the merits produced a reversal or remand; and that of the more than 10,000 criminal 
appeals filed in 1999, 95% were filed by the defendant and 5% by the government, 
and that 19% of interlocutory appeals were filed by the government compared to 6% 
or less of appeals challenging the sentence). See also Michael Heise, United States 
Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics, Federal Justice Statistics 
Program: Criminal Appeals Cases in Courts of Appeals, ICPSR26201-v1 (2008), 
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/26201?q=criminal+appeals 
[https://perma.cc/6AL9-LVTN] (examining defense appeals, excluding prosecutor 
appeals; the web page for the data lists no publications other than Heise using the 
data). 
19 See Monitoring of Federal Criminal Convictions and Sentences: Appeals Data 
Series, https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/series/75. Some descriptive 
information drawn from these data files is available in the Commission’s statistical 
sourcebooks on its website. See, e.g., U.S. SENTENCING COMMISSION SOURCEBOOK, 
FOR THE YEARS 2015, at Table 58, [https://perma.cc/S6NW-VWAW], and Table 56A, 
[https://perma.cc/GXG7-5MUK]. 
20 See Monitoring of Federal Criminal Convictions and Sentences: Appeals Data, 
2015, United States Sentencing Commission, Codebook, 3 (hereinafter Codebook, 
Commission Appeals Data 2015). 
21 See id. at 6 (noting as to disposition information: “Beginning in fiscal year 2005, 
this variable is only coded for sentencing appeals.”). 
  6  
defendant as well, and only after 2013.22 These information gaps greatly limit 
the utility of the Commission’s information on prosecution appeals.23
 
Another  source  that  could  shed  some  light  on  appeals  by  federal 
prosecutors is an article by Professor Anne Poulin in which she reports her 
examination of 310 federal prosecutor appeals “from 1980 to mid-2007.” She 
found a success rate of 74% (77% in post-verdict appeals and 66% in pretrial 
appeals). She also reported that “[a]pproximately 35% of appeals taken by the 
government  from  1980  to  mid-2007  challenged  pretrial  dismissals,  15% 
judgments of acquittal, 13% new trial orders, 12% exclusion of testimony or 
evidence, and 5% were pretrial orders.”24 The footnotes contain an extensive 
catalogue of issues federal prosecutors raised on appeal. Unfortunately, the 
article contains no explanation of how these cases were selected or identified, 
so it is difficult to know whether the sample was representative.25
 
As for state prosecutor appeals, aside from a handful of older studies of 
individual courts,26 nationwide statistics were not available until the  Bureau 
 
22 See id. at 52 (noting as to GOVTXDISP, issue disposition for sentencing issues in 
cross appeals for issues brought forth by the government, that this variable was 
created in fiscal year 2014); id. at 63 (describing variable REASONABLENESS 1-1, 
created in 2013). 
23 For what it is worth, we merged the Commission’s 2014 and 2015 appeals data sets 
to investigate. The combined file contained 151 government appeals; 78 conviction- 
only sole government appeals, 36 sentence-only sole government appeals, and 37 
government appeals in which the defendant also appealed – 8 of which were 
conviction-only appeals, and 4 sentencing-only appeals. Of the 40 sentence-only 
government appeals, 2 were dismissed, 6 were affirmed, the remainder reversed 
and/or remanded, for a success rate of 80%. See also note 115 infra, comparing 
information on dismissals. 
24 Poulin, supra note 6, at 24 n.69. 
25 See id. If these cases were, for example, only those that appeared on WESTLAW 
and LEXIS, then the study would have missed cases filed but resolved by order, as 
well as cases ending in opinions not included in these sources during those years. 
26 See JOY A. CHAPPER & ROGER A. HANSON, NAT’L CTR. FOR STATE COURTS, 
UNDERSTANDING REVERSIBLE ERROR IN CRIMINAL APPEALS: FINAL REPORT (1989), 
https://cdm16501.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/criminal/id/1 
[https://perma.cc/39YS-YJFK], at 43 n.5 (explaining that the study of five appellate 
courts excluded prosecutor appeals because they accounted for only 2 to 3 percent of 
the criminal appellate caseload and had a much higher reversal rate than defense 
appeals); DAVID T. WASSERMAN, A SWORD FOR THE CONVICTED: REPRESENTING 
INDIGENT DEFENDANTS ON APPEAL 105-106 (1990) (investigating criminal appeals in 
the appellate division of the New York State Supreme Court and the effects of 
defense representation, finding the reversal rate for government appeals of 80 
percent); Thomas Y. Davies, Affirmed: A Study of Criminal Appeals and Decision- 
Making Norms in a California Court of Appeal, 82 AM. B. FOUND. RES. J. 543, 551 
(1982) (finding a high reversal rate for prosecution appeals in one California court of 
appeal since World War II); Daniel J. Foley, The Tennessee Court of Criminal 
  7  
of Justice Statistics released the National Center for State Courts study we 
examine in this Article. State court statistics reports, driven in part by the 
State Court Statistics Project and initiatives designed to help courts dispose of 
their  caseloads  more  efficiently,  do  not  track  appeals  by  the  appellant’s 
identity.  Even  individual  states  that  today  collect  and  report  detailed 
appellate data do not break out information this way.27
 
Only two other publications report information from the new state 
criminal  appeals  data  we  examine  here:  Our  published  study  of  defense 
appeals,28 which we reference throughout this Article, and a BJS “Bulletin” 
summarizing  various  descriptive  information  from  both  defense  and 
prosecution appeals.29 The information on prosecution appeals in the Bulletin 
consists of three sets of aggregated descriptive statistics: frequency, rate of 
merits review, and success rate, each by level of appellate court, without 
distinguishing  between  appeals  of  right  and  discretionary  appeals.  The 
Bulletin notes that 4% of criminal appeals to state high courts and 2.5% of 
criminal appeals to state intermediate courts were filed by the government. Of 
the estimated 69,000 direct criminal appeals decided by state courts in 2010, 
that  suggests  that  approximately  2,000  were  filed  by  the   government.30
 
 
Appeals: A Study and Analysis, 66 TENN. L. REV. 427, 433 (1999) (finding 2% of 
appeals were by the prosecution, which succeeded in two thirds of those appeals); 
Brian L. Zavin, The Right to Appointed Counsel on Prosecution Appeals: Hard 
Realities and Theoretical Perspectives, 25 N.Y.U. REV. L. & SOC. CHANGE 271, 300, 
app. tbl. 1 (1999) (noting of 188 prosecution appeals to the New York Appellate 
Divison, First Department, between 1995 and 1998, of which the prosecution won 
115 (61%)). See also George Castelle, Reversals, Per Curiams, and the Common Law: 
A Survey of the Opinions of the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals, 11–JUL. W. 
VA. LAW. 16. *16 (1998) (noting prosecutors received relief in every case the high 
court agreed to hear, but noting “no available data regarding the number of appeals 
that the prosecution may have filed that the Court declined to hear”). 
27 See, e.g., JUDICIAL COUNCIL OF CALIFORNIA, 2016 COURT STATISTICS REPORT: 
STATEWIDE CASELOAD TRENDS 2005-2006 THROUGH 2014-2015 (2016), 
http://www.courts.ca.gov/documents/2016-Court-Statistics-Report.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/DA2Q-US53]; FLORIDA COURTS, 2016-2017 ANNUAL REPORT COURT 
ADMINISTRATION AND COURT DATA, at Court Filings FY 2015-16 (2017) 
http://www.flcourts.org/core/fileparse.php/676/urlt/ar-16-17-dca-circuit-county-filings- 
2015-16.pdf [https://perma.cc/U8TR-8L4R]. TEXAS JUDICIARY, FISCAL YEAR 2016 
ANNUAL STATISTICAL REPORT, AT DETAIL 1–7 (2016) 
http://www.txcourts.gov/media/1436989/annual-statistical-report-for-the-texas- 
judiciary-fy-2016.pdf [https://perma.cc/J7DL-3BE4]. 
28 See Heise, et al., supra note 3. 
29 NICOLE L. WATERS, ANNE GALLEGOS, JAMES GREEN, AND MARTHA ROZSI, BUREAU OF 
JUSTICE STATISTICS, NCJ 248874, CRIMINAL APPEALS IN STATE COURTS (2015). 
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/casc.pdf [https://perma.cc/KVR2-RCX8]. 
30 Of the nearly 19,000 appeals challenging final judgments in criminal cases and 
decided by courts of last resort in 2010, only an estimated 760 (4%) were appeals 
brought by the state rather than the defendant. Id. at 4. Of the more than 50,000 
  8  
According to the Bulletin, the rate of merits review for government appeals 
was 49% in high courts and 75% in intermediate appellate courts; the rate of 
success was 40% in high courts and 38% in intermediate courts.31
 
The  existing  scholarship  leaves  a  considerable  gap  in  our 
understanding of contemporary appeals by the prosecution. To help fill this 
gap,  we  examine  a  nationwide  sample  of  appeals  by  state  prosecutors, 
reporting both descriptive findings and results from regression analyses. And, 
unlike existing information about selected appeals by federal prosecutors, we 
draw detailed information from every direct appeal by the government in a 
criminal case available in the Federal Judicial Center’s datasets from 2011 
through 2016. 
III. RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
Given the paucity of empirical information about prosecutor appeals, 
unanswered questions about this litigation abound. We focused our attention 
on the likelihood that an appeal by the prosecution will secure merits review 
or a favorable decision, as well as factors related to the likelihood of merits 
review and ultimate success. In addition to examining these issues for state 
and federal appeals separately, we also compared state prosecutor appeals to 
state defendant appeals, and compared state prosecutor appeals to federal 
prosecutor appeals. 
Before turning to our specific research questions, we mention some of 
the questions we did not investigate, and why. Because our data include only 
appeals  that  prosecutors  actually filed,  and  include  no  information  about 
orders that could have been appealed but were not, we were unable to learn 
whether opportunities for appeal were more limited for prosecutors than for 
defendants, or more limited for state prosecutors than for federal prosecutors.32 
Nor could we use our data to investigate how selective prosecutors actually 
were in deciding which appeals to file, what types of appeals were more or less 
likely to be filed, or whether federal prosecutors were more selective than state 
prosecutors.  We have hypotheses about these issues that we could test if   we 
 
similar appeals decided by intermediate appellate courts, only an estimated 1269 
(2.5%) were prosecutor appeals. Id. at 5. Interlocutory appeals, and appeals in 
juvenile, post-conviction, or revocation proceedings were excluded from these figures. 
Id. at 10. 
31 Id. at 4–5. 
32 To the extent trial court orders and outcomes tend to favor the prosecution (most 
felony prosecutions, for example, end in some conviction), then there may be fewer 
adverse orders for the prosecution to challenge. See BRIAN A. REAVES, STATE COURT 
PROCESSING STATISTICS, NCJ 243777, FELONY DEFENDANTS IN LARGE URBAN 
COUNTIES, 2009 – STATISTICAL TABLES, Table 21, 
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/fdluc09.pdf [https://perma.cc/BJ86-54YP] 
(reporting that of 48,939 felony charges, 66% resulted in a felony or misdemeanor 
conviction with 26% dismissed, acquitted, or diverted). 
  9  
had appropriate data,33 but the information we have addresses only those 
appeals that prosecutors selected for appeal, and can provide no information 
about potential appeals never filed.34 We were also unable to examine other 
interesting questions we would have liked to explore because our data did not 
include enough appeals with the factor of interest. For example, assessing 
whether the pro se status of an appellee correlates with greater success by a 
prosecutor appellant was not possible given that our state data includes only 
two such appeals.35
 
A. Questions Relating to Merits Review and Success for Both Federal and 
State Appeals 
Drawing in part on our earlier study of state defense appeals, we 
expected that several factors available to us for analysis might correspond with 
a higher rate of merits review and ultimate success for prosecutors in either 
state  or  federal  court.  These  factors  fall  into  three  general  categories: 
advocacy; type of crime; and type of claim. 
1. Advocacy. 
First,  more opportunities for the appellant to advocate its position 
might affect outcome. Research on defense appeals implies that the presence 
of an oral argument (increasingly less common in state and federal criminal 
appeals) corresponds with a greater likelihood of success for the   appellant.36
 
 
33 As for comparative opportunities to appeal for state and federal prosecutors there 
are at least two competing hypotheses: There could be comparatively more 
opportunities for federal prosecutors to appeal than state because appeal authority is 
not as restricted as it is in many states; or, there could be comparatively fewer 
opportunities because an even smaller proportion of cases end in orders favorable to 
the defendant. For more on selection rates, see infra text accompanying notes 55-63. 
34 Moreover, even among the appeals that were selected for appeal and appear in our 
data set, it is possible—indeed, likely—that any such prosecutorial filtering varied 
across prosecutors, states, and appeal types. Consequently, while our default 
empirical strategy was to model merits review and outcome with two separate logit 
specifications, in unreported supplemental analyses, we also explored alternatives 
(probit and bivariate probit) to model an appeal’s success conditioned on that appeal’s 
persistence to merits review. With regard to state appeals, our main substantive 
results were largely impervious to various alternative empirical specifications. See 
infra Tables 4, 8 & 9. 
35 At least one prior examination of prosecution appeals reported more frequent self- 
representation. See Brian L. Zavin, The Right to Appointed Counsel on Prosecution 
Appeals: Hard Realities and Theoretical Perspectives, 25 N.Y.U. REV. L. & SOC. 
CHANGE 271, 272 (1999) (lamenting that indigent defendants are frequently 
unrepresented by counsel in prosecution appeals). 
36 See Heise, et al., supra note 3, at 1958 (reporting results showing oral argument is 
linked to greater success rates for defendant appellants in first appeals of right in 
state courts). On oral argument’s influence generally, see Warren D. Wolfson, Oral 
Argument: Does It Matter? 35 IND. L. REV. 451, 454 (2002) (estimating argument 
  10  
The presence of an oral argument not only provides an appellant with an 
additional  opportunity  to  persuade, but  seeking  oral  argument  also  may 
indicate generally more zealous advocacy.37
 
Appeals in which the defendant appellee has retained counsel could be 
associated  with  less  success  for  the  prosecutor  than  appeals  defended  by 
publicly funded counsel, if retained counsel benefitted from more resources or 
expertise to defend against the government’s claim of error. We did not find 
support in our study of defense appeals for the hypothesis that defendants who 
retained counsel for appeal were more likely to succeed than those who did not, 
even though defendants who must pay attorney’s fees have an incentive to 
forego losing cases not shared by other defendant appellants.38 In this study, 
we considered whether retained counsel performed better when defending 
against a government appeal. 
2. Crime type and severity. 
The  seriousness  of  a  crime  may  also  affect  the  likelihood  that  a 
reviewing court will decide to review on its merits an appeal contesting a 
conviction or sentence for that crime. This relationship would exist if a court 
with the discretion to do so chooses not to spend its limited resources on cases 
with minor penalties and lower stakes, or if prosecutors are more likely to 
abandon the effort and withdraw their appeals in such cases, or both. Crime 
seriousness could also influence the outcome of appeals reviewed on the merits. 
Appellate courts may be less concerned about leaving error uncorrected in 
minor cases, for example, or more willing to find errors harmless.39
 
The type of offense may also correspond with likelihood of relief, as we 
found in our study of defense appeals.40 For reasons similar to those    posited 
 
 
affects outcome in only a small percentage of appeals); Jay Tidmarsh, The Future of 
Oral Argument, 48 LOY. U. CHI. L.J. 475, 479 nn.18–19 (2016) (collecting sources on 
the impact of oral argument). 
37 In addition, granting oral argument could also signal the court’s perception of the 
appeal’s importance or merit. A similar signal is provided by the court’s decision to 
produce a full judicial opinion. Also, a full opinion may be more common when the 
decision being appealed is reversed, as it provides an opportunity for explanation a 
court may decide is not necessary when affirming an order or dismissing an appeal. 
38 See Heise, et al., supra note 3, at 1960–61 (presence of a private attorney had the 
same favorable association with outcome that the presence of a public attorney had 
when each compared to appeals with all other forms of representation). 
39 The data do include variables about harmless error findings, but only for those 
appeals that produced a reasoned decision of the court. See infra text accompanying 
Figure 8. 
40 We found, for example, that among discretionary appeals to courts of last resort, 
drug trafficking cases appealed by defendants were significantly associated with a 
higher likelihood of being granted review, and of defense appeals granted review, sex 
  11  
for a greater likelihood of success for more serious crimes, courts may be more 
likely to grant review and relief to prosecutors in appeals involving violent 
crimes,  as  compared  to  other  crimes.  A  prosecutor  may  have  additional 
incentive to appeal an unfavorable ruling in a violent crime case if the presence 
of a victim increases the incentive to appeal, or if appeals in violent crime cases 
are more likely to be covered by the media or salient to the community. 
3. Claim type and part of judgment appealed. 
Success for prosecutors who appeal may also vary with the type of error 
they contest on appeal, just as the likelihood of success varied with the type of 
claim raised by state defendants who appealed. We found a higher rate of relief 
for  defendant-appellants  who  raised  claims  involving  certain  trial  issues 
(competency, interpreters, mistrial, and joinder), as compared to those who 
raised  issues  described  by other  categories.41 For  our  study  of  prosecutor 
appeals, we were particularly interested in three specific types of claims. First, 
we expected that prosecutors may be more likely to win an appeal challenging 
a judicial decision that overturned for insufficient evidence a jury’s guilty 
verdict, compared to an appeal raising other claims by prosecutors. Appellate 
judges might be more inclined to reverse a trial judge’s ruling when that 
reversal restores a jury’s verdict, given that judges give great deference to jury 
decisions, and apply a standard for review of sufficiency that is quite favorable 
to  the  government.  Information on  the  extent  to  which  appellate  review 
regulates  judicial  assessments  of  sufficiency  is  also  a  topic  of  particular 
interest  to  researchers  interested  in  wrongful  convictions.42  Second,  we 
explored  whether  courts  were  more  likely  to  grant  relief  to  prosecutor- 
appellants when reviewing suppression claims compared to other claims.43 
Finally, we wondered if prosecution appeals that question a sentence could be 
associated with a greater probability of success than appeals challenging only 
conviction, as we found in our study of defense appeals,44 since correcting 
 
 
 
offenses were significantly associated with greater likelihood of relief. See Heise, et 
al., supra note 3, at 1962–63. 
41 See id. at 1960–61 (reporting results for first appeals of right); id. at 1962–64 
(reporting results for discretionary appeals to courts of last resort). 
42 See, e.g., BRANDON L. GARRETT, CONVICTING THE INNOCENT: WHERE CRIMINAL 
PROSECUTIONS GO WRONG 204 (2011) (discussing sufficiency claims that failed when 
raised by defendants later exonerated). Other claims such as faulty eyewitness 
identification, Brady violations, ineffective assistance of counsel, and joinder, also are 
of interest to wrongful conviction researchers, but the sample size prohibited us from 
evaluating each of these separately. 
43 See note 80 infra, noting how suppression issues could appear in prosecutor 
appeals to state high courts  from intermediate appellate court decisions. 
44 See Heise, et al., supra note 3, at 1960 (reporting results for first appeals of right); 
id. at 1965–66 (discussing findings). 
  12  
sentencing error may be easier for an appellate court and less costly for the 
district court.45
 
B.  Questions Relating to Merits Review and Success, State Appeals 
Only 
Because several factors did not vary among federal appeals, we    were 
able to examine their relationship with merits review and success only in our 
state appeals data. These factors included: 1) whether review was mandatory 
or discretionary; 2) whether the appeal challenged a decision by a trial court 
or appellate court; 3) whether the appeal was managed by the local prosecutor 
or a state-wide appellate office; and 4) whether the judges on the appellate 
court were appointed or selected by election. 
1. Discretionary v. mandatory review. 
In our prior study of state defense appeals, we found that defendant 
appellants experienced much lower rates of merits review and success in 
discretionary appeals than they did in of-right (“mandatory”) appeals.46 We 
expected this result, as some discretionary appeals will be denied review, 
whereas all mandatory appeals will be considered on their merits absent 
voluntary dismissal or procedural error requiring dismissal. We investigated 
whether this was also true for state prosecutor appellants. Because not all of 
the state prosecutor appeals were mandatory,47 our analyses accounted for 
 
 
45 Although defendants’ first appeals of right from the sentence were associated with 
a higher likelihood of success, at the court of last resort level it was conviction-only 
appeals – not sentence appeals –that proved significantly related to the success of 
appeals by defendants. Id. at 1962–63, 1966. 
46 Id. at 1952–53 (finding that of defendants who filed discretionary appeals in courts 
of last resort, only 2.8% were successful, compared to the 14.9% success rate for first 
appeals of right). 
47 At either level, state appellate review can be mandatory or discretionary. In 2010, 
approximately one dozen states had no intermediate appellate court, and in all but 
two of these states, review of trial court orders in the only court of appeals was 
mandatory. See WATERS, ET AL., supra note 29, at 2. Additional states with 
intermediate courts authorized the prosecution to appeal certain categories of trial 
court rulings, such as rulings in capital cases, directly to the court of last resort, 
skipping the intermediate court. See, e.g., HAW. REV. STAT. § 602-58 (2017) 
(providing right to appeal to the high court any ruling invalidating a statute or 
constitutional provision, and judgments in cases carrying life sentences). 
Discretionary review at the intermediate appellate court level is also possible. 
Even today, the state of Virginia maintains only discretionary review for criminal 
appellants in its courts of appeal. See VA. CODE ANN. § 17.1-407. Another variation 
can be found in states where all appeals from trial court orders in criminal cases are 
filed in the high court, which retains some and refers others back to the intermediate 
court. These states are termed “deflective” states, and include Iowa, Idaho, and 
Mississippi.  See WATERS, ET AL., supra note 29, at 2–3. 
  13  
whether the appeal was one that the court was required to review, or one the 
court could have declined to review. 
2. Challenges to trial court v. appellate court decisions. 
Because reviewing courts may provide greater deference to trial court 
fact finding and exercises of discretion than they provide to decisions of another 
appellate  court,  we  expected  that  state  prosecutor  appeals  challenging 
intermediate appellate court decisions might be more likely to succeed than 
appeals that challenge trial court decisions. The federal data contain only 
appeals  challenging  trial  court  decisions  and  no  appeals  challenging 
intermediate appellate court decisions. As the state data set contains both, we 
exploited this variation in our analyses. 
3. Central coordination. 
Expert  screening  and  staffing  of  government  appeals  provide  the 
opportunity for strategic and consistent case selection and better advocacy, as 
compared to appeals that lack such central coordination.48 This coordinating 
function is the rule in federal court, where the Solicitor General must approve 
all appeals by the government.49 It is much less pervasive, however, in the 
states. 
In  some  states,  assistance  in  the  form  of expertise  and  dedicated 
resources is provided regularly for prosecution appeals by a state-wide agency 
or  organization,  usually  part  of  the  Office  of  Attorney  General.  This 
coordinating body may be able to screen out losing claims or shape claims to 
be more successful, while pursing longer-term litigation strategies, with staff 
specializing  in  appellate  advocacy.  Most  states  authorize  the  Attorney 
General’s office to screen and staff criminal appeals by prosecutors to the 
state’s  high  court.50 State  level  coordination  of  prosecutor  appeals  to  the 
intermediate  appellate  court  is  less  common.  Instead,  either  the  county 
prosecutors’ offices themselves handle these intermediate appeals with only 
minimal  input,  if  any,  from  the  Attorney  General’s  office,  or,  there  is  a 
combination of approaches – with the largest urban counties handling their 
own appeals and a statewide office handling appeals for the smaller counties. 
We expected that appeals screened or staffed by a statewide organization   or 
 
 
48 See, e.g., Davies, supra note 26, at 635-36 (attributing high success rate for 
prosecutors on appeal to careful case selection). 
49 See 18 U.S.C. § 3742(b); 28 C.F.R. § 0.20. See also United States v. Hare, 269 F.3d 
859, 861 (7th Cir. 2001) (“United States Attorneys lack any right to control appeals 
by the United States, through plea agreements or otherwise; that right belongs to the 
Solicitor General.”); infra text accompanying note 65 (describing screening process for 
criminal appeals by the United States). 
50 See Barkow, supra note 14, at 560–61, 560 nn.226–37 (2011) (collecting state law 
regulating appellate authority between local prosecutors and the state’s attorney 
general for appeals to state courts of last resort). 
  14  
office would be more likely to succeed than appeals that local prosecutors 
controlled, because of more effective filtering and more experienced advocacy.51
 
4. Judicial selection. 
We suspected that a decision favorable to the prosecution would be more 
likely  when  the  bench  was  selected  or  retained  by  election  rather   than 
 
51 We explored but eventually abandoned an additional hypothesis concerning 
“advisory” or “moot” appeals by state prosecutors. Statutes in about a dozen states 
permit the prosecution to file an appeal after an acquittal in order to obtain the 
appellate court’s resolution of a legal question that would otherwise be unreviewable 
because of the acquittal. See State v. Ashley, 66 S.W.3d 563, 565 (Ark. 2002) (citing 
ARK. R. APP. P.—CRIM. 3(c), appeals to Supreme Court only); People v. Jackson, 972 
P.2d 698, 700–01 (Colo. App. 1998) (citing COLO. REV. STAT. § 16-12-102(1) (2017), 
appeals to both intermediate and high courts); State v. Anonymous, 739 A.2d 298, 
300 (Conn. App. Ct. 1999) (citing CONN. GEN. STAT. § 54-96 (2017), appeals to both 
intermediate and high courts); State v. Barnes, 116 A.3d 883, 887 n.17 (Del. 2015) 
(citing DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 10, § 9903 (2017)); State v. Walton, 715 N.E.2d 824, 825 
(Ind. 1999) (citing IND. CODE § 35-38-4-2(4) (2017), appeals to both intermediate and 
high courts); State v. Grice, 515 N.W.2d 20, 22 (Iowa 1994) (citing IOWA CODE § 
814.5(2)(d) (2017)); State v. LaPointe, 390 P.3d 7, 12–13 (Kan. 2017) (citing KAN. 
STAT. ANN. § 22-3602(b)(3) (2017), appeals to both intermediate and high courts); 
Commonwealth v. Derringer, 386 S.W.3d 123, 125 (Ky. 2012) (citing KY. CONST. § 
115, appeals to Supreme Court only); State v. Shaw, 880 So. 2d 296, 298 (Miss. 2004) 
(citing MISS. CODE ANN. § 99-35-103(b) (2017), appeals to both intermediate and high 
courts); State v. Hall, 691 N.W.2d 518, 522 (Neb. 2005) (citing NEB. REV. STAT. § 29- 
2315.01 (2017), appeals to both intermediate and high courts); State v. Campbell, 965 
P.2d 991, 992 (Okla. Crim. App. 1998) (citing OKLA. STAT. tit. 22, § 1053(3) (2017), 
appeals to Court of Criminal Appeals); State v. Keffer, 860 P.2d 1118, 1124 (Wyo. 
1993) (citing WYO. STAT. ANN. § 7-12-102 (2017)). 
Review in these cases does not provide a second chance at conviction. It 
creates binding precedent for subsequent cases only, with no effect on the acquittal in 
the case appealed. (These states do not follow the same “case or controversy” doctrine 
as the federal courts, which precludes such an appeal.) See generally James A. 
Strazella, The Relationship of Double Jeopardy to Prosecution Appeals, 73 NOTRE 
DAME L. REV. 1 (1997); see also Nancy J. King, State Criminal Appeals, in ACADEMY 
FOR JUSTICE: A REPORT ON SCHOLARSHIP AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM 271-72 (Erik 
Luna ed., 2017), http://academyforjustice.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2017/10/12_Reforming-Criminal-Justice_Vol_3_Appeals.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/NWX2-6AWU] (recommending the use of advisory appeals to allow 
appellate courts to address important issues shielded from scrutiny when they recur 
in cases ending in acquittal). 
Prosecutors may enjoy more success in these “advisory appeals,” often 
selected for their importance, but because we could identify only the court in which 
an advisory appeal might have been filed, not which individual appeals actually were 
advisory, we did not include this in our analysis. In our regression models, we were 
already clustering on state, and there was no meaningful difference between the 
success rate of the 14 appeals in courts that allowed advisory appeals and the success 
rates of appeals in all other courts. 
  15  
appointment, because of the incentive to appear tough on crime. Some prior 
research suggests that elected judges are less likely than appointed judges to 
side with criminal defendants.52 While we did not find that association in our 
study of defense appeals when we controlled for whether a state’s initial 
judicial selection method for the relevant court involved any form of election 
rather  than  appointment,53  we  considered  whether  this  factor  has  more 
salience when the prosecutor appeals. 
C. Questions Comparing Appeals by State Prosecutors and Defendants 
Our data permit comparisons of defense and prosecution appeals. We 
posited four potential reasons to expect state appellate courts to accept a 
greater percentage of prosecutor appeals for review and grant relief in a 
greater proportion of prosecutor appeals, as compared to defense appeals: 1) 
differences in rulings appealed; 2) case selection by prosecutors; 3) better 
advocacy; 4) pro-prosecution bias of judges. As noted below, our ability to 
investigate each of these hypotheses was limited. 
1. Claims available to appeal inherently more likely to succeed. 
Compared to pro-prosecution rulings subject to appeal by the  defense, 
pro-defendant rulings subject to appeal by the prosecution may be, as a class, 
systematically different in ways that would suggest a greater likelihood of 
success when challenged on appeal. First, the trial court dismissals, post- 
verdict judgments of acquittal, new trial orders, and sentencing errors that 
prosecutors appeal might be easier for reviewing courts to identify as erroneous 
than the various errors appealed by defendants if they involve more objective 
standards of review, for example. Our state data permitted us to examine this 
only indirectly, by controlling for type of claim included in the appeal. 
Second, the errors that prosecutors allege on appeal might be more 
likely to be preserved for appeal than errors that defense counsel raise on 
appeal. If prosecution and defense appeals show differing rates of merits 
review for various claims, that may inform this supposition. 
Third, a greater percentage of errors alleged by prosecutors may not be 
subject  to  harmless  error  analysis  compared  to  errors  appealed  by 
defendants.54 Our data include information on the application of harmless 
error review for the select portion of appeals ending in reasoned opinions. But 
 
52 See generally Michael S. Kang & Joanna M. Shepherd, Judging Judicial Elections, 
114 MICH. L. REV. 929 (2016) (presenting study findings showing that judicial 
decisions become more hostile to criminal defendants as attack advertising in judicial 
elections increases). 
53 See Heise, et al., supra note 3, at 1968. 
54 See Davies, supra note 26, at 635 n.287 (suggesting that the differences in the 
types of issues raised probably contributes to differences in outcomes for defendant 
and prosecutor appeals, noting erroneous orders dismissing charges are not subject to 
harmless error review). 
  16  
because this information was not available for the bulk of appeals, which were 
denied  review  or  terminated  without  a  reasoned  decision,  we  could  not 
evaluate what association, if any, there might be between harmlessness and 
likelihood of success overall. 
2. Appeal selection and screening. 
Even if there is nothing inherent in the rulings appealed that would 
suggest  a  higher  rate  of  success  for  prosecutors,  research  suggests  that 
prosecutors, unlike defendants, probably selected for filing those appeals that 
were more likely to succeed.55 This was something we could not test with data 
available, for reasons noted earlier,56 but because it is such an important 
explanation for differences if they exist, we spell out that explanation here. 
Prosecutors are likely more selective about the appeals they file, first 
because they do not face the same incentives to appeal unfavorable decisions 
that defense counsel face. Prosecutors have the authority to select which 
appeals to file – unlike defense counsel who have an ethical duty to file an 
appeal whenever the client wants to file one. Also, in some cases, prosecutors 
have an alternative avenue, other than appeal, to secure a conviction or higher 
sentence. Especially when an unfavorable final order is entered prior to the 
attachment of jeopardy, such as an order dismissing a charge before trial, trial 
prosecutors understand that starting over by filing a new charge may be a 
cheaper and faster way to obtain a conviction and sentence than appeal. 
Defendants lack this alternative option and must appeal in order to seek relief 
from an unfavorable decision.57
 
Not only are there fewer incentives for prosecutors to file appeals, 
prosecutors have reasons to carefully select which appeals they file, reasons 
that defendants and defense counsel do not share. Prosecutors may avoid filing 
appeals because they are concerned about: 1) avoiding appeals that risk a 
negative impact on other cases, preferring those that are likely to generate 
favorable precedent for future prosecutions; 58 2) the impact of the appeal   on 
 
55 See, e.g., WASSERMAN, supra note 26, at 106 (attributing high success rate of 
prosecutors in New York appellate courts to selection of appeals likely to succeed). 
56 See supra text accompanying notes 33-35. 
57 And when an appealable order weakens but does not kill a case, such as the 
dismissal of some but not all counts or the grant of a motion for new trial, offering a 
sweeter plea bargain might provide an option more attractive to a prosecutor than 
appeal. Both parties can seek a more favorable outcome through negotiation instead 
of appeal, but prosecutors probably have on balance more negotiating leverage once a 
defendant is convicted. 
58 See, e.g., UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION, 2012 REPORT TO THE CONGRESS: 
CONTINUING IMPACT OF UNITED STATES V. BOOKER ON FEDERAL SENTENCING 106 
n.441 (2012) (federal prosecutors reportedly appeal sentences infrequently “because 
of the deferential standard of review”). Prosecutors may also cherry pick for appeal 
cases that could settle destabilizing inconsistency in lower courts. 
  17  
the  prosecutor’s  future  election,  selecting  cases  with  more  salience  to 
constituents  and  foregoing  appeals  with  less;  3)  the  opportunity  cost  of 
spending office resources on appeals involving losing claims, minor crimes, or 
defendants already incarcerated for other crimes;59 4) a victim’s request to 
forego an appeal to secure finality; 5) cultivating a winning reputation with 
reviewing court by bringing only the strongest appeals;60 6) avoiding harm to  
a good “working relationship” with the trial judge, by appealing only rarely;61 
or 7) securing, in a plea negotiation, a defendant’s waiver of right to appeal 
sentencing  error,  which  could  entail  waiving  the  state’s  right  to  appeal 
erroneous sentencing rulings favoring the defense, for example.62 Defendants 
and defense counsel, by contrast, are not concerned about other defendants or 
future cases, elections, the cost of litigation (except if counsel is retained),63
 
 
 
59 County prosecutors who must finance their own appeals know that resources spent 
on appeals are resources that will not be available for trial work. When state-level 
attorneys screen or handle appeal requests from county prosecutors, it is the state 
and not the local budget that limits the number and type of appeals prosecutors can 
pursue. Tight budgets would mean that complicated, costly appeals with a low 
likelihood of success are much less likely to be filed than appeals less costly to pursue 
or more likely to succeed. 
60 Cf. Khanna, supra note 17, at 372 (referencing “ire from the court for bringing 
baseless appeals” and noting “we would expect prosecutors to screen cases they 
appeal, and hence that the appeals process should have some separation effect”). 
61 See Hon. Stephen R. Shaw, Prosecution Appeals Taken Midtrial and Following 
Acquittal: Changing the Trial and Review of Criminal Cases in Ohio, 22 OHIO N.U. L. 
REV. 729, 730 (1996) (remarking on the rarity of prosecution appeals midtrial or after 
acquittals, stating: “apprehension by prosecutors that frequent challenges to the 
rulings of a particular trial judge, especially following an acquittal, might jeopardize 
a working relationship with that judge may be a significant reality deterring such 
appeals”). 
62 Terms in agreements expressly barring appeal are widespread in federal cases, 
perhaps less so in state cases. See Nancy J. King & Michael E. O’Neill, Appeal 
Waivers and the Future of Sentencing Policy, 55 DUKE L.J. 209, 255–56 (2005); Susan 
R. Klein, Aleza S. Remis & Donna Lee Elm, Waiving the Criminal Justice System: An 
Empirical and Constitutional Analysis, 52 AM. CRIM. L. REV. 73, 80–81 (2015). There 
is some authority in the Fourth Circuit requiring that ambiguous appeal waivers 
should be interpreted as mutual, see United States v. Zuk, 874 F.3d 398, 407 (4th Cir. 
2017) (quoting United States v. Bowe, 257 F.3d 336, 342 (4th Cir. 2001)) (“ ‘a plea 
agreement provision that bars the defendant from appealing, but is silent as to the 
Government’s right to appeal, must be construed as imposing a reciprocal limitation 
on the Government’s right to challenge a judgment or sentence imposed by the 
district court’ ”). 
63 About 80% of felony defendants are indigent with publicly funded counsel, and 
have no fiscal incentive to forego losing appeals. See BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS, 
U.S. DEP’T OF JUSTICE, DEFENSE COUNSEL IN CRIMINAL CASES, NCJ 179023 (2000), 
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/dccc.pdf [https://perma.cc/6SMT-G5BM]. 
  18  
victim’s wishes, their reputation with trial or appellate judges, or securing a 
waiver of the prosecution’s right to appeal. 
3. Better advocacy. 
Even if nothing inherent in the rulings appealed predicts a higher rate 
of success, and even if defense and prosecution were equally selective about 
which appeals to file, the advocacy by state prosecutor appellants may be more 
effective than advocacy by counsel representing state defendant appellants. 
This may be the case if prosecutor appellants are better resourced, more 
experienced, or have superior training compared to defendant appellants. The 
only potential indicators available in both defense and prosecutor data on these 
issues was the presence of oral argument and the type of counsel for the 
defense. 
4. Judicial bias. 
Finally, even if nothing inherent in the rulings appealed imply a higher 
rate of success, defense and prosecution are both selective (though perhaps in 
varying  degrees)  about  which  appeals  to  file,  and  defense  counsel  and 
prosecutors equally effective advocates, prosecutors who appeal may benefit 
from any pro-prosecution bias of appellate judges. For example, if judges 
systematically  lean  in  favor  of  finding for  the government  rather  than a 
criminal defendant, all other things equal, then this could help explain higher 
rates  of  leave granted,  and higher  rates  of  success  among  those appeals 
reviewed on the merits. The only measure of potential pro-prosecution bias 
available to us – judicial selection by election -- may be more salient for 
prosecutor than defendant appeals. 
D.  Questions Comparing Appeals by State and Federal Prosecutors 
We expected that some of the factors potentially associated with the 
variation in merits review or success rates could impact state and federal 
prosecutor appeals differently. First, some research suggests that at the trial 
level, appointed “panel attorneys,” also known as “CJA attorneys,” are less 
effective representatives than federal defenders.64 We posited that in appeals 
too, the presence of a federal defender would correspond with a lower likelihood 
that the government would win its appeal, as compared to appeals in which 
 
64 See generally James M. Anderson & Paul Heaton, How Much Difference Does the 
Lawyer Make?: The Effect of Defense Counsel on Murder Case Outcomes, 122 YALE 
L.J. 154 (2012) (finding shorter sentences and rates of conviction when defendants 
were represented by public defenders rather than panel attorneys, and offering 
explanations for those results); Erwin Chemerinsky, Lessons from Gideon, 122 Yale 
L.J. 2676, 2682 (2013) (collecting research finding public defenders provide more 
effective representation than court-appointed attorneys); Thomas Cohen, Who is 
Better at Defending Criminals? Does Type of Defense Attorney Matter in Terms of 
Producing Favorable Case Outcomes, 25 CRIM. JUST. POL’Y REV. 29 (2014) (concluding 
that defendants with assigned counsel receive less favorable outcomes compared to 
their counterparts with public defenders). 
  19  
defense counsel was appointed from outside a federal defender’s office. Our 
state data do not identify whether a publicly funded attorney was from a 
defender office, so we were able to examine this question only in our federal 
analyses. 
We also expected that some of the reasons state prosecutor appeals may 
succeed more often than state defendant appeals could also explain why federal 
prosecutor appeals may succeed more often than state prosecutor appeals. The 
errors appealed by federal and state prosecutors may differ systematically, 
being,  on average,  easier  to  prove,  better  preserved, or  less  likely  to  be 
considered harmless than errors raised by state prosecutors. Screening and 
selection of appeals by the local United States Attorneys, and the various 
attorneys in the Appellate Section of the Criminal Division and the Office of 
Solicitor General could be more rigorous and strategic than the screening that 
prosecutors’ appeals receive in the states. Consider one description of the 
screening process, lifted from a motion for extension of time filed by the United 
States in one of the appeals in our data set: 
The United States Attorney must report each adverse, appealable 
decision to the responsible component of the United States Department 
of Justice in Washington, D.C., and must provide that component with 
the  United  States  Attorney’s recommendation  as  to  whether the 
Solicitor General should authorize an appeal of that decision. United 
States Attorneys’ Manual §§ 2-2.110-2-2.112, 9-2.170B and D. Once the 
responsible  component  of the  Department  of  Justice receives the 
recommendation of the United States Attorney, that component must 
prepare its own recommendation as to whether the Solicitor General 
should authorize an appeal. United States Attorneys’ Manual  § 9- 
2.170F; see United States Attorneys’ Manual § 2-3.110. Responsible 
attorneys  in  the  Office  of  the  Solicitor  General  also  prepare 
recommendations for the Solicitor General. See id. Based on all of these 
recommendations,  the  Solicitor  General  determines  whether  to 
authorize an appeal. 28 C.F.R. § 0.20(b); United States Attorneys’ 
Manual §§ 2-2.121, 2-2.311, 2-2.600, 9-2.170A. This process is intended 
to assure that the United States pursues only appeals of relative 
importance and merit.65 
Not  only  may  screening  be  more  rigorous,  appellate  advocacy  by 
experienced appellate attorneys from the Department of Justice may be more 
effective,  on  balance,  than advocacy  by  state  prosecutors.  As  pointed  out 
earlier, our data permit only very limited examination of the first and third of 
these hypotheses, and do not permit examination of the relative effectiveness 
of screening.66
 
IV.  PROSECUTOR APPEALS IN STATE COURTS 
 
65 United States Unopposed Motion for Extension of Time, United States v. Reid, No. 
13-12860-BB (11th Cir. Aug. 12, 2013). 
66 See supra text accompanying notes 32–34. 
  20  
A.  Data, Methodology, and Research Design 
For our study of state prosecutor appeals, we examined the decisions 
identified as part of two nationally representative probability samples of the 
2010 decisions of all state appellate courts with criminal jurisdiction. Both 
samples include only direct appeals in criminal cases.67 After combining the 
two samples,68 we dropped all appeals that defendants had filed,69 as well as 
appeals in capital cases.70 A total of 154 non-capital, state-initiated appeals 
remained.  Of  those  noncapital  appeals,  130  involved  felonies,  17  were 
misdemeanors, and 7 were of unknown severity.71
 
Because ours is the first detailed examination of any nationwide sample 
of  prosecutor  appeals  in  state  courts,  we  provide  extensive  descriptive 
information about  a variety  of  features  (or  “variables”)  in  Part  B,  below. 
Results from our regression models, reported in Part C, below, report each 
variable’s independent influence on: (1) whether an appeal was reviewed on 
the merits, and (2) whether the government appellant succeeded on appeal. 
One final note about our data set construction warrants brief mention. 
Combining the two random samples of state criminal appeals was important 
to help provide a sample size that would facilitate our statistical analyses. 
However, it did introduce the potential for bias. Specifically, although one of 
the random samples was created by pulling decisions from every intermediate 
appellate court and court of last resort with criminal jurisdiction, and produced 
133 of the 154 appeals examined here, the other random sample, contributing 
21 of the 154 appeals, drew only from decisions by state high courts reviewing 
decisions  of  intermediate  courts.  Our  combined  set  of  154  appeals  thus 
overrepresents  state  high  court  decisions  reviewing  appellate  decisions  in 
2010. This means that the mix of mandatory and discretionary review cases 
and high court and intermediate court cases examined here is not necessarily 
random.72 To account for the potential biasing effects of adding these 21 cases, 
 
67 “Writ” litigation, as well as appeals in juvenile, revocation, and post-conviction 
proceedings, were excluded from the data, as were interlocutory appeals such as a 
prosecutor’s pretrial appeal of an order granting a defendant’s motion to suppress 
evidence. To the extent that writ litigation in the courts of appeals supplants or 
supplements direct appellate review, see sources cited supra note 11, our findings 
could understate the extent to which judicial review benefits prosecutors seeking 
relief from trial court orders in criminal cases. See generally Poulin, supra note 6. 
68 The raw merged data set includes 5,045 criminal appeals (4,673 from the main 
data set and 432 from the supplemental data set). 
69 We included an appeal only if the state was identified as the appellant or petitioner 
for that appeal. 
70 Removing the capital cases decreased the set of appeals by five. 
71 See infra Table 3. 
72 Combining these two sets of cases in our earlier article evaluating the defense 
appeals in these same data sets had no similar effect, because there the number of 
  21  
we added to our regression analyses a control variable that signaled whether 
an appeal was one of the 21 cases from the second “supplemental” sample. For 
the descriptive findings, we report below information about the combined set, 
as a foundation for the regression analysis, but we also carefully evaluated 
whether including those 21 cases made any substantive difference, and note 
when it did. Appendix Table A2 also reports descriptive information without 
the supplement sample. 
1. Dependent variables. 
Merits  review.  Our  data  include  for  each  appeal  whether  it  was 
terminated for a reason unrelated to the merits or was instead reviewed on its 
merits. Appeals terminated for reasons other than the merits include appeals 
denied review by the appellate court, appeals dismissed by the appellate court 
for a procedural problem unrelated to the merits, and appeals withdrawn by 
the government appellant. 
Decision Favored the Prosecution. We defined a decision as favoring the 
government if it involved anything other than an affirmance, a dismissal, a 
denial of review, or a withdrawal. In addition to full and partial reversals, 
remands as well as modifications of one of several sentences were considered 
favorable outcomes for the appellant, as the data offer no reliable method to 
distinguish significant modifications or remands from less meaningful ones.73
 
2.  Independent variables.74
 
State. The combined sample of 2010 appellate decisions in every state 
produced government appeals from 28 different states. Ohio appeals make up 
a disproportionate 16% of those decisions.75 Although other variables already 
account for differences among states, we also examined in our descriptive and 
 
 
 
 
 
cases allowed us to use separate models for COLR discretionary cases. As well, as 
results in Table 4, infra, illustrate, the 21 additional state high court appeals drawn 
from National Center for State Court’s Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals, 
2010, Supplement data set, did not systematically vary from the appeals drawn from 
the Center’s Main data Set. See generally Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals 
supra note 1. 
73 This approach comports with prior empirical work examining appeals. See, e.g., 
CHAPPER & HANSON, supra note 26, at 5; Theodore Eisenberg & Michael Heise, 
Plaintiphobia in State Courts Redux? An Empirical Study of State Court Trials on 
Appeal, 12 J. EMPIRICAL LEGAL STUD. 100, 115 n.72 (2015). 
74 For many of the variables described below, one reason to construct them as we did, 
in addition to the reasons explained in the research question section, was to facilitate 
comparisons with our prior defense appeal study. 
75 See infra Table 1. 
  22  
regression analyses whether the appeals that prosecutors filed in Ohio 
systematically differed from prosecutor appeals filed in other states.76
 
Mandatory/Discretionary Review; Court of Last Resort/Intermediate 
Appellate Court. Our data indicate for each appeal whether the appeal was “of- 
right” (mandatory) or “by permission” (discretionary), and we constructed a 
dummy variable to investigate whether this distinction correlates with an 
appeal’s likelihood of success. Unlike the thousands of appeals examined in 
our study of defense appeals, the smaller number of prosecutor appeals would 
not comfortably permit separate analysis of decisions by courts of last resort 
and  those  of  intermediate  appellate  courts.  We  therefore  controlled  for 
whether the appeal was decided by an intermediate court (which would be 
reviewing trial court orders only) or a court of last resort (which may review 
either a trial court order or an intermediate appellate court), to investigate 
whether success was less likely when the appellant challenged a trial court 
order. 
Appeal from sentence or conviction. To investigate whether sentence 
appeals are associated with a greater likelihood of success than appeals from 
conviction, we used two dummy variables identical to those used in our study 
of defense appeals. One indicates whether the appeal included a challenge to 
the sentence, the other whether the appeal challenged only the conviction.77
 
Felony/Misdemeanor. To investigate the potential significance of crime 
seriousness to the likelihood of success, we created a dummy variable signaling 
whether each appeal involved a felony or misdemeanor.78
 
Crime type. To investigate whether the type of crime made a difference 
in appellate success for prosecutors, we first collapsed the twenty-three crime 
types available in the data into eight categories,79 then collapsed these further 
into three broad categories: 1) violent offenses (homicide, robbery, assault, sex 
offenses); 2) drug trafficking, weapons, and DUI offenses (all cases likely to 
involve search and seizure issues and each showing relatively high rates of 
relief  in  descriptive  analyses),  and 3) non-violent  offenses  and unknown, 
capturing every appeal other than those in the first two categories. We also 
created two dummy variables allowing us to examine whether an appeal of  a 
 
76 We also ran models, unreported here, that included controls for Louisiana cases, 
making up more than 10% of the combined sample. 
77 Reference for each of these two dummy variables were cases in which the part of 
the judgment appealed from was neither (e.g., an appeal from dismissal) or unknown. 
78 This information was not included in our study of defense appeals, as we excluded 
misdemeanor appeals from the cases examined. In upcoming research, we plan to 
study these misdemeanor appeals by defendants and how they differ from felony 
appeals by defendants and misdemeanor appeals by the prosecution. 
79 These were the eight categories examined in our study of appeals by defendants 
using the same data set. Descriptive findings for these categories are not reported 
here. 
  23  
violent offense systematically varied with success, as compared to the appeal 
of a drug trafficking, weapons, or DUI offense, and whether the appeal of a 
violent offense was significant as compared to an appeal of a non-violent 
offense. 
Claim included in brief. We condensed the various claim categories 
available in the data into four categories: (1) claims contesting a post-verdict 
judicial decision assessing the sufficiency of evidence; (2) claims addressing the 
suppression of evidence; 80 (3) claims contesting the sentence or sentencing; 
and (4) all other claims, including claims contesting dismissal of the charge or 
granting a new trial for various reasons, and claims coded as unknown in the 
data. We created dummy variables for each, indicating whether the appeal 
included the type of claim, with all other appeals as a reference.81 Because we 
were able to track these same four categories in the state defense appeal data 
and the federal prosecutor appeal data, and defined our variables identically 
in each, this facilitated state-federal comparisons. 
Whether  prosecutor  appeals  are  coordinated  statewide.  To  examine 
whether central coordination advantaged prosecutor appeals, we created a 
dummy variable for each court in each state that indicates whether prosecutor 
appeals to that court were coordinated.82
 
Type of defense representation. To test whether the type of defense 
representation relates to success, we created two separate dummy variables 
that   signal   the   presence   of   publicly   funded   or   a   private     attorney 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 Assuming interlocutory appeals (where orders granting suppression motions are 
also litigated) were all excluded from the data sources we used here, these appeals 
included prosecutor appeals of intermediate court decisions finding that a trial court 
should have granted a motion to suppress but did not. 
81 As noted infra in text accompanying note 89, for our regression analysis, we opted 
to measure whether the appeal raised a sentencing claim with an alternative dummy 
variable – whether the appeal included a challenge to the sentence. 
82 See Table A4, infra (Appendix). For each state with at least one case from an 
intermediate court in our sample, information about coordination for intermediate 
appellate courts was collected by phone and email communications with the offices of 
the attorney general, the prosecutors’ association, and/or state appellate defender 
office. For courts of last resort, we used research by Professor Rachel Barkow, supra 
note 14, corrected in a few instances based on information received directly from the 
conversations noted above. When a state provided coordination for all but the very 
largest counties, we counted that state as coordinated.  For example, the state 
handles appeals in Michigan for prosecutors in counties with a population of less 
than 75,000. Similarly, a statewide association manages criminal appeals for 
prosecutors in Illinois for all but two counties. 
  24  
representation, respectively.83
 
Oral Argument, Full Opinion. We  tested for  the  importance  of oral 
argument and type of opinion using dummy variables identical to those used 
in our analysis of state defense appeals. One indicates whether oral argument 
took place or not, and the other whether the court’s decision appeared in a full 
opinion, or some other form of decision.84
 
Judicial selection method. We used the same dummy variable that we 
used in the defense appeals study to test the significance of this distinction in 
judicial selection for the outcome of state prosecutors’ appeals, coding a specific 
appellate court as “elected” if the initial judicial selection method for the 
relevant court involved any form of election rather than appointment.85
 
B.  Descriptive Findings: State Prosecutor Appeals 
The  most  striking  aspect  of  prosecutor  appeals  is  their  scarcity. 
Although the main national sample of appellate decisions identified more than 
4,500 direct appeals by defendants, with every state represented,86 it identified 
only 133 direct appeals in non-capital cases filed by prosecutors, from 28 of the 
50 states. Table 1 shows the state breakdown for the full set of 154 prosecutor 
appeals. 
 
 
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF PROSECUTOR APPEALS AND SUCCESS, BY STATE 
 
          Mand  Disc       IAC  COLR 
Mand  Disc  P succ.  P succ  IAC  COLR  P succ  P succ 
(N)  (%)  (N)  (N)  (%)  (%)  (N)  (N)  (%)  (%) 
  AL   1  0.7  1  0  0.0  ---  1     0   0.0   --   
 
83 The reference for each variable is all other types of representation, which includes 
cases in which the appellee was pro se and cases that were missing information on 
the type of representation. 
84 We did not include in our analysis of prosecutor appeals a variable for court 
workload. First, we found workload was not related to any variation in merits review 
or success in our analyses of appeals by criminal defendants. Second, we expected its 
importance to be even more attenuated for prosecution appeals because those appeals 
made up such a small portion of total caseload for these courts, as compared to 
defense appeals. Given the importance of limiting the number of factors included in 
our models to only those most theoretically salient, this workload control did not 
make the cut. 
85 See Heise, et al., supra note 3, at 1950. We also used an alternative measure of 
election – retention instead of initial selection. The results, not reported here, did 
not materially differ. 
86 See WATERS, ET AL., supra note 29, at 10. Based on BJS estimates, this is a random 
sample of more than 6% of all appeals decided in 2010. Id. at 1, 4-5, tbls. 1 & 2 
(estimating prosecutors filed a total of 2,029 of the 69,349 direct criminal appeals 
decided by state courts in 2010). 
  25  
          Mand  Disc       IAC  COLR 
Mand  Disc  P succ.  P succ  IAC  COLR  P succ  P succ 
(N)  (%)  (N)  (N)  (%)  (%)  (N)  (N)  (%)  (%) 
AZ  9  5.8  3  6  66.7  16.7  3  6  66.7  16.7 
CA  12  7.8  1  11  0.0  54.6  1  11  0.0  54.6 
FL  12  7.8  10  2  30.0  0.0  10  2  30.0  0.0 
HI  2  1.3  1  1  0.0  0.0  1  1  0.0  0.0 
IA  6  3.9  0  6  ---  50.0  2  4  100.0  25.0 
IL  5  3.3  2  3  50.0  0.0  2  3  50.0  0.0 
IN  1  0.7  0  1  ---  0.0  0  1  ---  0.0 
KS  1  0.7  0  1  ---  0.0  1  0  0.0  --- 
KY  5  3.3  1  4  0.0  100.0  0  5  ---  80.0 
LA  15  9.7  0  15  ---  46.7  0  15  ---  46.7 
MA  2  1.3  2  0  0.0  ---  2  0  0.0  --- 
MI  6  3.9  0  6  ---  83.3  3  3  66.7  100.0 
MN  4  2.6  0  4  ---  0.0  0  4  ---  0.0 
MO  1  0.7  0  1  ---  100.0  0  1  ---  100.0 
NC  1  0.7  1  0  0.0  ---  1  0  0.0  --- 
ND  1  0.7  1  0  100.0  ---  0  1  ---  100.0 
NE  1  0.7  1  0  0.0  ---  1  0  0.0  --- 
NJ  4  2.6  4  0  25.0  ---  4  0  25.0  --- 
NM  3  2.0  0  3  ---  33.3  0  3  ---  33.3 
NY  10  6.5  7  3  85.7  0.0  7  3  85.7  0.0 
OH  26  16.9  9  17  33.3  5.9  10  16  30.0  6.3 
OR  6  3.9  2  4  50.0  50.0  2  4  50.0  50.0 
PA  5  3.3  0  5  ---  20.0  0  5  ---  20.0 
TX  6  3.9  1  5  0.0  100  1  5  0.0  100.0 
VT  1  0.7  1  0  0.0  ---  0  1  ---  0.0 
WA  7  4.6  4  3  75.0  0  4  3  75.0  0.0 
WI  1  0.7  0  1  ---  100.0  0  1  ---  100.0 
%    100  33.8  66.2  40.4  37.3  36.4  63.6  42.9  35.7 
N  154    52  102  21  38  56  98  24  35 
SOURCE: Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals, 2010. 
 
 
As Table 1 shows, Ohio had the most appeals by the prosecution, 17% 
of the sample. Nationwide, discretionary appeals outnumbered mandatory 
appeals,  and  more  appeals  were  filed  in  courts  of  last  resort  than  in 
intermediate appellate courts.87
 
Turning to the rates of success, Table 2 reports that prosecutors secured 
a  favorable  decision  in  approximately  38%  of  all  appeals  combined.  Of 
discretionary  appeals  reviewed  on  the  merits,  prosecutors  were 
overwhelmingly successfully and prevailed more than 79% of the time. 
 
 
 
87 While in our total data set state high court appeals account for 63.6% of our sample 
and discretionary appeals account for 66.2%, after backing-out the 21 appeals drawn 
from the supplemental sample, see text accompanying note 72 supra, the percentage 
of high court appeals drops to 57.9%.  The percentage of mandatory appeals rises 
from 33.8% to 39.1%. See infra Appendix Table A2. 
  26  
 
TABLE 2: DECISION FAVORING STATE PROSECUTOR, BY TYPE OF APPEAL 
 
  (1)  (2)  (3)  (4) 
      % of 
discretionary 
 
% of  % of  appeals 
% of all  mandatory  discretionary  reviewed on 
appeals  appeals  appeals  merits 
N  154  52  102  48 
Dependent Variables:         
Reviewed on merits  57.1  76.9  47.1  --- 
Decision favored prosec.  38.3  40.4  37.3  79.2 
N (w/o supp. cases)  133  52  81  41 
Dependent Variables:         
Reviewed on merits  60.9  76.9  50.6  --- 
Decision favored prosec.  40.6  40.4  40.7  80.5 
SOURCE: Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals, 2010. 
 
 
Several of the factors we tracked appear to correlate with success, as 
suggested  by  the  comparisons  in  Table  3.  These  included  appeals  that 
addressed the conviction alone and did not contest a sentence, felony appeals 
(as opposed to misdemeanors), appeals from drug trafficking, weapons, and 
DUI prosecutions, appeals that raised suppression, sufficiency, or sentence 
issues,  appeals  with  oral  argument  or  full  opinions,  appeals  coordinated 
statewide, and appeals from California and Louisiana. Factors that appeared 
to decrease the likelihood of appellant success included appeals with various 
categories of unknown information,88 appeals in violent crime cases, appeals 
involving pro se defendants, and appeals from Ohio. 
 
 
TABLE 3: INDEPENDENT  VARIABLES, BY DECISION FAVORING STATE 
PROSECUTOR 
 
   (1)  (2) 
  % cases with  % cases w/o 
variable receiving  variable receiving 
 
decision favoring  decision favoring 
Independent Variables:  P  P 
Court of last resort [n=98]  35.7  42.9 
Mandatory review appeal [n=52] †  40.4  37.3 
 
88 This is not surprising, given that records available for appeals terminated before 
briefing were less likely to include detailed information needed to code many of the 
variables. 
  27  
    (1)  (2) 
    % cases with  % cases w/o 
  variable receiving  variable receiving 
 
  decision favoring  decision favoring 
Independent Variables:  P  P 
 
Appeal from:     
 
Conviction (alone) [n=83]  43.4  32.4 
 
Sentence (included) [n=38]  36.8  38.8 
 
(unknown/missing) [n=33]  27.3  41.3 
  Offense severity     
  Felony [n=130]  40.0  29.2 
  Misdemeanor [n=17]  35.3  38.7 
  (severity unknown/missing) [n=7]  14.3  39.5 
  Crime type:     
Drug Trafficking, weapons, dui [n=52]  55.8  29.4 
 
Violent (sex, homic., rob, assa) [n=59]  28.8  44.2 
 
Nonviolent and unknown crime [n=43]  30.2  41.4 
 
Claim included in brief:     
 
Evidence suppression [n=24]  54.2  35.4 
 
Insufficient evidence [n=15]  66.7  35.3 
  Sentence [n=11]  63.6  36.4 
  Claims other than above [n=48]  41.7  36.8 
  (claim unknown) [n=61]  18.0  51.6 
  Court factors:     
Elected judges [n=92]  39.1  37.1 
 
CA state [n=12]  50.0  37.3 
 
FL state [n=12]  25.0  39.4 
 
LA state [n=15]  46.7  37.4 
 
OH state [n=26]  15.4  43.0 
  Process & advocacy factors:     
  State coordinates appeal [n=84]  41.7  34.3 
  Oral argument held [n=46]  65.2  26.9 
  Full judicial opinion [n=63]  66.7  18.7 
  Private defense attorney [n=24]  41.7  37.7 
  Public defense attorney [n=85]  41.2  34.8 
Pro se defendant [n=3]  0.0  39.1 
 
(unknown representation) [n=42]  33.3  40.2 
 
N  154 
S OURCE: Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals, 2010. 
† Comparison switched direction once supplemental cases were removed. For a 
discussion of the supplemental cases, see supra text accompanying note 72. 
 
 
C.  Modeling State Prosecutor Appeals 
Given  the nature  of  our  dependent variables, we  turned  to  logistic 
regression  analyses  to  assess  whether  the  correlations  suggested  in  the 
descriptive comparisons reported in Tables 2 and 3 would withstand more 
rigorous  empirical  testing.89  Once  other  factors  were  controlled,  only one 
 
89 Because of sample size concerns, we could not include in our models all of the 
factors in Table 3. The variables we chose to include in our models were those we 
thought would best inform our research questions.  So, for example, we opted for 
  28  
variable correlates with an increased likelihood of success at a statistically 
significant  level  in  one  or  more  of  the  two  models:  the presence  of  oral 
argument.90 Two variables also correspond to a lowered likelihood of success. 
In  Ohio,  the  state  with  the  largest  number  of  appeals  in  the  sample, 
prosecutors were less likely than prosecutors in other states  to receive a 
favorable decision when they appealed, even after controlling for other factors, 
in each of the models. That the appeal was to a court of last resort was 
associated with a lower likelihood of success in one model. 
 
The salience of an oral argument comports with our initial hypothesis; 
we expected prosecutors were more likely to succeed when given a chance to 
argue the case before the bench.  But several surprises also emerged. 
 
TABLE 4: LOGISTIC MODELS, DECISION FAVORING STATE PROSECUTOR 
 
  (1)    (2)   
  (s.e.)    (s.e.) 
Decision favored prosecutor         
Case specific variables:         
Court of last resort  -1.49*  (0.72)  -1.35  (0.75) 
 
“Appeal from sentence (included)” as a better measure of whether the appeal 
challenges a sentence than “sentence claim included in brief,” which, because of 
missing claim information, did not capture all sentence appeals. Of the two 
remaining claim-included variables, we omitted the variable for suppression claims 
and kept the variable for sufficiency claims for two reasons. The suppression variable 
was captured in a limited way by the crime category “drug trafficking, weapons, and 
DUI,” which was defined both because of a higher than average rate of relief for each 
of the three included crime types and because all three had in common frequent 
search and seizure issues. Second, the suppression variable was insignificant in 
every one of our alternative unreported models. 
Of the counsel variables, we opted to examine our hypothesis about the 
impact of private retained counsel, and included that dummy variable. And of the 
states, we controlled only for Ohio, with the largest proportion of cases. 
90 The presence of a full opinion in models not reported was also significantly 
associated with a greater likelihood of appellant success, as predicted, but we decided 
not to include it in the models for two reasons. First, both logic and unreported 
supplemental analyses made clear that the two separate variables “full opinion” and 
“oral argument,” while not perfect substitutes, were essentially capturing the same 
variance, signaling perhaps how potentially important the appellate court considered 
an appeal. We remained careful throughout our study to not “over-load” our models 
on the “right-side” of the regression equation. As between the two variables, we 
selected oral argument partly because, unlike the decision to produce a full judicial 
opinion, a reviewing court typically decides whether to grant oral argument before 
settling on the appropriate resolution of the appeal. To the extent that we sought to 
model judicial outcomes, we felt variables reflecting actions that preceded those 
outcomes were more appropriate and probative. 
  29  
Mandatory appeal  -1.02  (0.79)  -1.05  (0.78) 
Appeal of conviction (alone)  0.50  (0.56)  0.52  (0.55) 
Appeal of sentence (included)  0.54  (0.63)  0.50  (0.65) 
Offense severity = felony  0.54  (0.58)  0.55  (0.54) 
       
Crime types: 
Violent crime type (ref.)         
Nonvio. and unknown crime type  0.80  (0.69)  0.81  (0.72) 
Drug traffic, weapon, or dui  0.91  (0.61)  1.01  (0.66) 
       
Claim in brief: 
Insufficient evid. claim included  0.70  (0.87)  0.70  (0.91) 
       
Court specific factors: 
Elected judges  0.25  (0.39)  0.27  (0.39) 
OHIO state  -1.85**  (0.51)  -1.91**  (0.50) 
       
Process & advocacy: 
Oral argument  1.83**  (0.48)  1.79**  (0.50) 
Private attorney  -0.48  (0.62)  -0.55  (0.62) 
State coordinates appeal  0.06  (0.48)  0.05  (0.47) 
 
Supp. data  ---  -1.03  (0.65) 
Constant  -1.12  (1.32)  -1.09  (1.33) 
N  154    154   
Log likelihood  -81.35    -80.16   
Psuedo R2  0.21    0.22   
 
NOTES: We report results from logistic regression models of prosecutor success with appeals 
initiated by the state. The dependent variable is whether the appellate court outcome favored 
the prosecutor (success is construed as something less than a full affirmance or dismissal and 
involved upsetting, to some degree, the lower court decision). Robust standard errors (clustered 
on the state level) are in parentheses. * p<0.05; ** p<0.01. We estimated the models using the 
“logit” command in Stata (v.15.1). Results from alternative unreported analyses simultaneously 
modeling the appeal outcome conditioned on a merits review did not materially differ from those 
presented above. 
SOURCE: Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals, 2010. 
 
Contrary  to  our  expectations,  many  factors  made  no  systematic 
difference.91 The first surprise was that whether the reviewing court had the 
option of declining review made no statistical difference to the likelihood that 
a state prosecutor appeal, once filed, would succeed. In other words, after 
controlling  for  other  factors  --  including  whether  the  appeal  was  to  an 
intermediate or a court of last resort -- a prosecutor was just as likely to win a 
discretionary appeal as an appeal the court must review. This does not  mean 
 
91 We are mindful of the limited analytic weight we can properly place on our null 
findings due to our limited sample size (N=154) and the number of variables included 
on the right side of our estimation (13-14). Various power calculations estimate that 
a slightly larger sample size (or slightly fewer independent variables) would enhance 
our statistical power and confidence in the null findings. In unreported alternative 
(and more parsimonious) model specifications, the main results we report here 
remain largely unchanged. 
  30  
that state courts with the discretion to decline a prosecutor’s appeal never did 
so. It suggests only that the exercise of that discretion has such little impact 
on probable success that as far as prosecutor appellants are concerned, those 
discretionary appeals did not systematically differ from mandatory appeals. 
 
We also expected state prosecutors to be more likely to win appeals in 
felony cases than to win the 17 misdemeanor appeals in our data, but once 
other  factors  were  controlled,  this  difference  did  not  achieve  statistical 
significance. Perhaps prosecutors were particularly selective when appealing 
in  misdemeanor  cases,  choosing  to  devote  appellate  resources  to  these 
relatively minor cases only when a court’s ruling was especially egregious. Also 
contributing to this null finding may be the comparatively small number of 
misdemeanor appeals launched by prosecutors. 
 
Unexpected also was that whether the appeal was from a conviction only 
or was one that included a challenge to the sentence made no systematic 
difference in terms of the likelihood of success. Finally, whether an appeal was 
decided by a state high court was significantly associated with a lower, not 
higher likelihood of success for the prosecutor appellant in Model 1.92 This 
conflicts with our prediction that courts will be more likely to find in favor of 
an appellant when reviewing another appellate decision than they are when 
reviewing a trial court decision, especially given that another variable controls 
for whether the appeal is mandatory or discretionary. 
 
V. COMPARING STATE PROSECUTOR AND DEFENSE APPEALS 
 
Comparing the results from the study of prosecutor appeals above with 
the results of our earlier study of state criminal appeals filed by defendants 
reveals several striking differences. All of the comparisons that follow must be 
interpreted with caution, however, because the two study samples, although 
drawn  from  the  same  databases,  include  some  structural  differences. 
Specifically, the prosecutor appeal sample includes the following categories of 
appeals that the defense appeals sample does not: appeals from “deflective” 
states,93  discretionary  appeals  to  intermediate  (as  opposed  to  last  resort) 
 
92 In Model 2, however, where we control for whether an appeal is one of the 21 court 
of last resort cases reviewing an intermediate court decision from the supplemental 
data, see supra text accompanying note 72, the same distinction just barely falls out 
of significance. That these two variables interact, however, makes sense. Only 23.8% 
of these supplemental court of last resort cases succeeded (compared with 40.6% of 
the 133 “main” appeals), and only 35.7% of all high court appeals succeeded 
(compared with 42.9% of intermediate court appeals). Thus, in Model 2, the inclusion 
of the supp data dummy variable diluted the independent influence of our COLR 
dummy variable enough to pull the COLR variable out of the conventional range for 
statistical significance. 
93 See supra note 47 (describing “deflective” appeal structure). 
  31  
courts,94 and appeals in misdemeanor cases. The numbers of these appeals in 
the prosecutor data set are small, and if their inclusion had any influence on 
the results, it likely would have slightly depressed the rate of success by 
prosecutor appellants.95
 
A.  Comparing Descriptive Findings 
Comparisons of descriptive findings for state prosecution and defense 
appeals generated several interesting findings.96
 
1.  Differences in the sub-pools of prosecution and defense appeals. 
Among  mandatory  appeals,  fewer  prosecutor  than  defense appeals 
included a challenge to the sentence (31% compared to 43%), although about 
half of both prosecutor and defense appeals challenged the conviction alone. 
Just under a third of appeals by both the prosecution and defense involved 
nonviolent  (and  unknown)  crimes.  Violent  crimes  constituted  the  largest 
category of mandatory appeals for both prosecution and defense, but made up 
a larger portion of defense appeals than prosecutor appeals. Drug trafficking, 
weapons, and DUI cases made up a larger portion of prosecutor appeals than 
defense appeals. Defendants raised claims involving the sufficiency of evidence 
more often than prosecutors did (29% compared to 17%), but prosecutors raised 
suppression issues more often (19% compared to 13%). 
Among discretionary appeals in courts of last resort, the case mix that 
state high courts ultimately considered on the merits was similar in some 
respects  to  the  mix  in  mandatory  appeals.  More  defense  appeals  than 
prosecutor appeals involved violent crime, sentencing challenges, and claims 
pertaining  to  the  sufficiency of  evidence,  for  example.  Unlike  mandatory 
appeals,  however,  slightly  more  of  the  discretionary  appeals  filed  by 
defendants and reviewed on the merits included a suppression claim (29% 
compared to 26% of discretionary appeals by prosecutors), and violent crime 
was not the largest category for prosecutor appeals. Instead, drug trafficking, 
weapons, and DUI cases made up 42% of the appeals by prosecutors heard on 
the merits at this level. 
2.  Comparing rates of merits review. 
Appellate courts reviewed most appeals of right on their merits, no 
matter who appealed. Appeals of right by the defense were more likely to be 
reviewed on the merits compared to those filed by the government (90% of the 
 
94 The discretionary intermediate court appeals were mostly from Virginia where all 
direct appeals are discretionary, and Michigan, where appeals from guilty pleas are 
discretionary. See supra note 47; Heise, et al., supra note 3, at 1945. 
95 The 17 misdemeanor appeals had a lower rate of success (35.3%), while the seven 
discretionary appeals in intermediate courts had higher rates of success (57.1%), as 
did the six deflective state appeals (50%). 
96 Figures in this section are drawn from Tables found in the Appendix, infra. 
  32  
2,080 defense of right appeals compared to 77% of the 52 prosecution of right 
appeals).  Among  mandatory appeals,  15% of  the  prosecutor appeals were 
withdrawn, compared to only 4.5% of the defense appeals. But discretionary 
appeals filed by the defense in state courts of last resort were far less likely to 
be reviewed on their merits than those filed by prosecutors. This relationship 
is illustrated in Figure 1, showing the difference between the prosecutor’s 
almost 50-50 odds of securing merits review for a discretionary appeal filed in 
a state’s high court (45.3% merits), compared to the 20 to 1 odds facing the 
defendant appellant (4.6% merits). 
 
 
Figure 1: Comparing rates of merits review, by appeal type. 
 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
All  All Defense  % mand.  % mand.  % disc.COLR % disc.COLR 
Prosecution    appeals  appeals (P appeals (D  appeals (P appeals (D 
appeals  appellant)    appellant)  appellant)    appellant) 
 
Although  the  number  of  appeals  filed  by  defendants  eclipsed  the 
number filed by prosecutors, at the state high court level that asymmetric mix 
changed among cases considered on the merits. As Appendix Table A2 reports, 
in the random nationwide sample, state high courts heard 52 discretionary 
defense  appeals  and  36  discretionary  prosecution  appeals,  not  nearly  as 
skewed a difference as the disparity in the number of appeals filed. 
 
3.  Comparing success of prosecutor and defense appeals. 
 
Turning to comparative rates of ultimate success in these appeals, 
prosecutor appellants enjoyed a total rate of success roughly four times   that 
  33  
experienced by defendants (38% compared to 10%).97 Figure 2 illustrates the 
greater likelihood of success for prosecutors compared to defendants. This 
difference persists even among those discretionary appeals granted review in 
high courts, where the appellant – prosecutor or defendant – was generally 
more likely to win than the appellee. Appendix Tables A1 and A2 reveal 
defendant-appellants had a higher success rate than prosecutor-appellants in 
only two of the dozens of comparisons reported. Among discretionary appeals 
reviewed on the merits in state high courts, defendant appellants were more 
likely  to  win  than  prosecutor  appellants  when  the appeal  was  from  the 
sentence (73% v. 63%) and also when the appeal raised a claim other than 
insufficient evidence, suppression, or sentence (65% v. 60%). Other than that, 
prosecutors were more successful in every category.98
 
 
 
Figure 2: Comparing rates of a favorable appeal, by appeal type. 
 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
% mand.  % mand.  % disc. COLR    % disc.COLR    % disc. COLR    % disc.  COLR 
appeals (P  appeals (D  appeals (P  appeals (D    appeals  appeals 
appellant)  appellant)  appellant)  appellant)  reviewed on     reviewed on 
merits (P   merits (D 
appellant)  appellant) 
 
The pattern of greater success for prosecutors in discretionary appeals 
heard on the merits is also evident when comparing appeals of different crime 
types (Figure 3), different claims (Figure 4), and even when the appellant was 
provided oral argument or the court decided to issue a full opinion (Figure 5). 
 
97 Without the supplemental data, the prosecutor success rate was 41%. See Table 2, 
supra; Heise, et al., supra note 3, at 1948 (reporting that 349 of 3505 defense appeals 
in sample were successful). 
98 Appendix Table A2 does show defendant appellants were more likely to succeed 
than prosecutor appellants in mandatory appeals filed in California, but there was 
only one such appeal for the prosecution (most in that state were discretionary). 
  34  
 
Figure 3: Comparing success rates, discretionary merits appeals, by crime 
type. 
 
  100 
  80 
  60 
  40 
  20 
 
0 
  Drug Trafficking, weapons,  Violent (sex, homic, robb,  Nonviolent and unknown 
  dui  ass.)  crime 
 
Disc. appeals reviewd on merits w/ variable, % w/ decision favoring P 
.  COLR disc. rev’d on merits  with variable % w/ decision favoring D 
 
 
Figure 4: Comparing success rates, discretionary appeals reviewed on merits, 
by claim included. 
 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
Insufficient  Evidence  Sentence  All other claims  (claims raised 
evidence  suppression  unknown) 
Disc. appeals reviewd on merits w/ variable, % w/ decision favoring P 
COLR disc. rev’d on merits  with variable % w/ decision favoring D 
  35  
Figure 5: Comparing success rates, discretionary appeals reviewed on merits, 
by arguments and opinion type. 
 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
Oral argument held  Full judicial opinion 
Disc. appeals reviewd on merits w/ variable, % w/ decision favoring P 
COLR disc. rev’d on merits  with variable % w/ decision favoring D 
 
 
As  illustrated  by  Figure  6,  compared  to  defendants  with  retained 
counsel,  defendant  appellants  represented  by  publicly  funded  attorneys 
enjoyed a much better chance of winning once a court of last resort granted 
review. Among prosecutor appeals, success rates did not vary as much by type 
of representation. 
 
 
Figure 6: Comparing success rates, discretionary appeals reviewed on merits, 
by type of defense counsel. 
 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
Private attorney  Public attorney  (unknown represent.) 
P appeals  D appeals 
  36  
 
As for mandatory appeals, the higher success rates for the prosecution 
are much more pronounced. For example, consider Figure 7 showing success 
rates for mandatory appeals with oral argument and full opinions. Almost all 
of these mandatory appeals were considered on their merits and courts opted 
to provide to them the highest level of attention – oral argument and a full 
opinion. Yet prosecutors were more than twice as likely to win. 
 
Figure 7: Comparing success rates, mandatory appeals by argument and 
opinion type. 
 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
Oral argument held  Full judicial opinion 
Of mandatory appeals with variable, % w/ decision favoring P 
Of mandatory appeals w/ variable, % w/ decision favoring D 
 
 
Although we were unable to examine the application of harmless error 
analysis in our regression analyses, we report here the descriptive information 
our state appeals data provide on this topic. For only those cases with reasoned 
opinions, a subset of the case sample (N=97 prosecutor appeals; N=1,616 
defense appeals), data include whether the court found no error, reversible 
error, or harmless error for each claim resolved by the opinion. Evaluating the 
first four claims resolved, Figure 8 shows what proportion of those resolutions 
indicated no error, harmless error, or reversible error, comparing defense and 
prosecution appeals. 
In this specific subset of cases, issues resolved in appeals by prosecutors 
compared to issues resolved in appeals by defendants were more than five 
times as likely to produce relief for the appellant. Reviewing courts found error 
more often for prosecutors than defendants, in 59% compared to 16% of the 
issues. And courts considered a larger portion of those errors harmless in 
defense  appeals  –  38%  compared  to  8%  in  prosecutor  appeals.  This  is 
consistent with our suspicion that the types of claims raised by prosecutors are 
less likely to be considered harmless and more likely to be preserved for appeal. 
But it is weak support at best, not only because other factors such as the 
  37  
government’s selection of which appeals to file could have distorted the mix of 
claims that appellate courts reviewed, but also because the subset of cases with 
reasoned opinions was itself the product of selection decisions by the reviewing 
courts. 
 
 
Figure 8: Comparing application of harmless error analysis, first four claims 
combined, appeals with reasoned opinions only. 
 
Prosecutor appeals (issues n=143)  Defense appeals (issues n=3,679) 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
No error  No error 
Harmless error  Harmless error 
Reversible error  Reversible error 
 
 
B. Comparing Findings of Regression Analyses for Defense and 
Prosecution Appeals. 
Our  descriptive  comparisons  of  raw,  averaged  rates  of  appellate 
success, while important and helpful, risk misleading insofar as descriptive 
analyses do not permit the more granular inquiry into how various important 
factors  may  interact  in  their  potential  influence  on  criminal  appellate 
outcomes.  Comparing  results  from  descriptive  and  regression  analyses 
provides  additional  insights  into  how  criminal  defendants’  appeals  may 
systematically differ from prosecution appeals. The analyses of prosecutor data 
were necessarily less refined and less statistically powerful than our defendant 
analyses, because of the smaller number of prosecution appeals available. 
Comparisons of regression results for state prosecution and defense 
appeals support our basic expectation that prosecutors win more often, overall, 
and by a wide margin. But the analyses tell us little about why that might be 
so. Consider our prediction that there might be something about the particular 
types of rulings that prosecutors appeal, as opposed to those that defendants 
appeal, that makes those errors easier to preserve for appeal or easier for a 
reviewing court to recognize as error. The findings do not suggest that any 
  38  
particular claim category fares better or worse than another for prosecutors, 
getting us no closer to determining whether the claims that prosecutors raise 
are different in some significant way. Also, the higher rate of merits review 
for appeals of right filed by defendants does not suggest that state prosecutors 
are substantially better than state defendants at preserving errors for appeal 
in the trial courts. 
 
Owing  to  data  limitations,  the findings  also  tell  us  little  about  the 
relative effectiveness of advocacy, a difference that could inform different 
success rates. Oral argument is significant to both prosecution and defense 
appeals, in the same direction – increasing the chances of a favorable outcome 
for the appellant. The fact that more of the prosecutors who appealed secured 
oral argument compared to defendant appellants might suggest more effective 
advocacy; but  it  could  reflect  instead  policies  or  preferences  of  the  court 
unrelated to an attorney’s efforts.99 And the absence of a relationship between 
the presence of some statewide coordination of appeals and success suggests 
that this potential advantage in advocacy either does not exist or is outweighed 
by other factors.100
 
 
Finally, we found no evidence suggesting that decisions in criminal 
appeals in state courts correspond with any pro-prosecutor bias that might be 
tied to the method by which a judge is selected, bias that might supply an 
alternative reason for disparate success rates. Neither defense nor prosecutor 
success on appeal was significantly correlated with whether the appellate 
bench was selected by election rather than appointment. If state appeals 
judges were, in fact, biased in favor of the prosecution, our analysis, using the 
only measure we had available, did not detect that. 
 
Other interesting comparisons between the regression results for state 
prosecution and defense appeals also warrant note. Looking at the review of 
sentences, we found both sides sought appellate review of sentences regularly 
– one quarter of prosecutor appeals and nearly a third of defense appeals 
overall. These appeals were significantly associated with a greater likelihood 
of success for defendants in their first appeals of right, but not significantly 
associated  with  success  for  the  prosecutor-appellant.  Combined  with  the 
 
99 See David R. Cleveland & Steven Wisotsky, The Decline of Oral Argument in the 
Federal Courts of Appeals: A Modest Proposal, 13 J. APP. PRAC. & PROCESS 119, 144 
(2012) (rejecting inference that the decline in oral argument for federal criminal 
appeals reflects a change in the rate at which appellate counsel requested oral 
argument, stating “[c]ommon sense strongly suggests that the operative variable is 
the courts’ screening out an increasing proportion of cases for oral argument because 
they think it is not particularly valuable”). 
100 Neither our defense study nor this study controlled which states provided 
statewide expertise for defense appeals in the form of public defender offices 
handling state appeals for defendants. 
  39  
higher rates of relief for defendants for sentence challenges heard on the merits 
by  high  courts,  the  findings  suggest  that  appellate  review  provides  an 
important oversight function for sentencing in the states. 
Turning to the type of representation for the defendant on appeal, the 
results did not support our hypothesis that private counsel might correlate 
with a higher likelihood of success for either the defendant appellee or the 
defendant appellant. Private counsel did represent a higher proportion of 
defendant  appellees  as  compared  to  defendant  appellants.  And  simple 
comparisons  suggested  private  counsel  gave  their  clients  an  edge  over 
defendants  with  publicly  funded  counsel.  But  once  other  factors  were 
controlled,  regression  analyses  showed  that  representation  by  a  retained 
attorney had no significant association with variation in the likelihood of relief 
in either prosecution or defense appeals. 
The type of claim included by the appellant, as noted earlier, also 
appears unrelated to success for both prosecutor and defendant appellants. 
Even though it looked as if high courts may have been more receptive to 
defendants’ claims of insufficiency than prosecutors’ claims of sufficiency,101 
regression analyses suggested that these claims were treated no differently 
once other factors were controlled. And for defendants who appealed, but not 
for prosecutors, crime type made some difference as well. Drug trafficking, 
weapons,  and  dui  appeals  were  significantly  associated  with  a  higher 
likelihood of success when compared to violent crime appeals for defendants, 
but our analyses showed no significant relationship between crime type and 
likelihood of success for prosecutor appeals. 
Turning to our findings concerning judicial selection, it is important to 
point out that compared to defense appeals, a smaller proportion of prosecutor 
appeals were filed in courts whose judges were appointed. It is unclear from 
our data whether prosecutors were deliberately selecting cases for appeal 
based upon expectations about how judges would rule, or rather, that the 
 
101 When a prosecutor makes this claim to a high court with discretion to hear the 
appeal, the prosecutor asks the high court to reject the decision of the trial judge or 
intermediate court and to reinstate the conviction, while a defendant who raises this 
claim in the high court asks the court to set aside both the conviction and another 
appellate court’s decision affirming that conviction. If courts give closer scrutiny to 
orders setting aside a jury’s verdict, it would make sense if prosecutors won this type 
of claim more often than defendants. An alternative hypothesis is that high courts 
are more concerned about wrongful convictions on weak evidence, disinclined to 
second-guess a trial court’s finding of insufficient evidence, and more willing to 
review cases in which defendants raise insufficiency claims.  Simple comparisons 
lend some support to both hypotheses.  Appeals including claims regarding 
sufficiency succeeded more often than the average rate in both mandatory appeals 
and discretionary high court appeals, when raised by either side. However, the 
regression analyses did not bear out any significant relationship between the 
presence of such a claim and outcome. 
  40  
number of prosecutor appeals were larger in states with appointed benches for 
other reasons. We found that the likelihood of appellant success was not 
significantly related to the method used to select the judges of the court 
deciding the appeal, for either defendants or prosecutors, regardless of whether 
we controlled for the presence of initial selection by election or the presence of 
retention elections. At least with the measures of selection applied here, the 
hypothesis that an elected bench might be associated with a higher win rate 
for prosecutors found little empirical support. 
Perhaps the most interesting finding is what this study revealed about 
the mix of prosecutor and defense appeals ultimately considered on the merits 
by state courts. In state intermediate courts hearing appeals of right on their 
merits, judges apply and develop the law that governs the investigation and 
adjudication of crime with a criminal docket made up of 98% defense appeals 
and only 2% prosecutor appeals. Under these conditions, allegations of error 
harmful to defendants may overwhelm allegations of error harmful to the 
state. State high courts, by contrast, confront an entirely different context. 
Courts with discretion to review criminal appeals exercise that discretion to 
hear nearly half (45%) of prosecutor appeals filed, but less than 5% of defense 
appeals. What results is a merits docket in state high courts with discretionary 
appellate jurisdiction that looks very different than the dramatically skewed 
filings would suggest. Of discretionary, direct criminal appeals reviewed on the 
merits by state high courts, 41% are prosecution appeals.102 Indeed, of appeals 
heard on the merits by state high courts, the percentage filed by prosecutors 
may be even larger if interlocutory appeals were included in the tally, because 
in many states the prosecutor may seek interlocutory review of suppression 
and other rulings while defendants cannot.103 Our findings show that state 
high  courts,  unlike  intermediate  courts,  do  not  decide  direct  appeals  in 
criminal cases under conditions of drastic asymmetry. Instead, in state courts 
of last resort, judges regularly consider appeals from both sides on a number 
of recurring issues. 
VI. APPEALS BY FEDERAL PROSECUTORS 
A.  Data, Methodology, and Research Design 
 
1.  Sample. 
 
102 See Appendix Table A2. Comparing all high court cases, both discretionary and 
mandatory, without supplemental sample cases added, our data show state courts of 
last resort heard on the merits approximately one prosecutor appeal for every two 
defense appeals. 
103 In the federal system if interlocutory and direct appeals by the government were 
combined, interlocutory appeals would constitute approximately 30% of that 
combined group. Although our state data did not include interlocutory appeals, we 
have no reason to believe that the proportion of interlocutory appeals to appeals from 
final judgment differs in state and federal court. 
  41  
 
The appeals that form the basis of the federal component of our study 
appear in the nations’ leading data source on federal appeals: The Federal 
Judicial Center’s (“FJC”) Integrated Data Base.104 The FJC’s data sets in its 
public archive include federal appeals data holdings, which, in turn, include a 
specific data set that includes the known universe of “modern” (from fiscal 
years 2008 through 2016) federal appeals.105 Sampling issues do not arise as 
the individual data files include the entire universe of known federal appellate 
activity for those years. 
 
To construct our final usable data set that focused on direct federal 
criminal appeals by the government, we began with each individual fiscal year 
data file that included detailed information about each appeal decided that 
fiscal year. For example, for fiscal year 2008, we began with a total of 59,096 
appeals.  To  identify  the  appropriate  sub-pool  of  federal  appeals  for  our 
analyses, we then, for each FY data file, eliminated all appeals where the 
United States was not the appellant as well as all non-criminal appeals.106 We 
then merged all nine separate FY data sets into a single data set for those 
appeals that remained, for a total of 1,718 criminal appeals in which the United 
States was the appellant. 
 
Due to important coding changes implemented by the FJC that took 
effect on October 1, 2011, we then eliminated all appeals filed prior to that 
date.107 Among the 343 appeals remaining, we excluded interlocutory and 
post-conviction appeals (including appeals of rulings on motions to reduce 
sentence), as well as appeals relating to capital, reopened, and “miscellaneous” 
cases.108 For the 247 appeals that remained one of us examined each appeal 
more closely by reviewing case documents available on PACER to confirm the 
nature of the appeal.  This review uncovered an additional 42 appeals that we 
 
104 See https://www.fjc.gov/research/idb [https://perma.cc/5EX7-GW4W]. The FJC, 
under an arrangement with the U.S. Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, 
provides public access to its Integrated Data Base. 
105 See https://www.fjc.gov/research/idb/appellate-cases-filed-terminated-and- 
pending-fy-2008-present [https://perma.cc/7UNN-7SKW] (hereinafter FJC Integrated 
Data Base, Appellate Cases). 
106 In each separate data set the “USAPT” variable identifies those appeals initiated 
by the federal government (USAPT=1) and the “APPTYPE” variable identifies the 
criminal appeals (APPTYPE>12). See FJC Codebook, supra note 10. 
107 As of October 1, 2011, new APPTYPE values were added indicating whether the 
appeal was direct, interlocutory, involved the appeals termed “post-conviction”, that 
is, any order post-sentencing. Email from George Cort, Federal Judicial Center, to 
Nancy King, Jan. 3, 2018. In other words, the coding did not distinguish between 
interlocutory, direct, and post-conviction appeals prior to October 1, 2011. 
108 We excluded from our analyses the 96 appeals that the FJC Codebook identified 
as APPTYPE (values=15, 20, and 22). See FJC Codebook, supra note 10. 
  42  
concluded were miscoded in the FJC data set -- some that were not, in fact, 
initiated by the prosecutor, and others that involved either interlocutory or 
post-conviction appeals. Excluding these appeals not germane to our study left 
us with a data set of 205 federal criminal appeals initiated by the United States 
between  October  1,  2011,  and  September  30,  2016,  and  terminated     by 
September 30, 2016. 
 
TABLE 5: SUMMARY OF FEDERAL PROSECUTOR APPEALS AND SUCCESS, BY 
CIRCUIT 
 
% of all  % of all  % appeals  % appeals 
appeals  appeals  from circuit  % appeals  reviewed on 
(205)  reviewed on  that were  from circuit  merits from 
from  merits (87)  reviewed on  with decision  circuit w/ decision 
    N  circuit  from circuit  merits  favoring gov’t  favoring gov’t 
               
  DC  2  1.0  1.1  50.0  50.0  100.0 
 
1  11  5.4  1.1  7.7  9.1  100.0 
 
2  19  8.3  11.5  58.8  52.9  90.0 
 
  3  4  2.0  2.3  50.0  0.0  0.0 
  4  13  6.3  6.9  46.2  38.5  83.3 
  5  17  8.3  10.3  52.9  35.3  66.7 
 
6  12  6.9  4.6  33.3  25.0  75.0 
 
7  20  9.8  11.5  50.0  20.0  40.0 
 
  8  29  14.1  17.2  51.7  17.2  33.3 
  9  12  5.9  4.6  33.3  33.3  100.0 
  10  6  2.9  3.4  50.0  50.0  100.0 
 
11  62  30.2  25.3  35.5  27.4  77.3 
 
Mean        42.4  28.3  66.7 
 
N  205  205  87       
S  OURCE: Federal Judicial Center, Integrated Database, Federal Appellate Cases: 
2011-16. 
 
2.  Variables. 
 
The dependent variables of interest we used for our federal analyses 
mirror those for the state prosecutor appeals: whether the appeal received 
review on its merits,109 and whether the appeal produced a decision favorable 
to the prosecution.110 We coded as a favorable decision any outcome other than 
a dismissal or affirmance. Using the docket number to find each appeal, we 
supplemented  the  factors  collected  in  the  FJC  dataset  with      additional 
 
109 Indicated by the FJC variable DISP. 
110 Indicated by the FJC variable OUTCOME. 
  43  
information  from  documents  available  on  PACER,  to  provide  a basis  for 
comparison with the state prosecutor appeals. Most of the variables we report 
are identical to those in the state appeal study,111 and are included for similar 
reasons.  Instead  of  controlling  for  the  state  with  the  most  appeals,  we 
controlled for the circuit with the most appeals, the Eleventh Circuit. The 
federal data do not indicate whether the decision produced a “full opinion,” so 
we created a dummy variable for “published opinion” as a substitute. 
 
Several of the factors in our state analyses had no variation in federal 
appeals, and as a result were dropped from our analyses. All federal appeals 
were  mandatory,  not  discretionary;  all  sought  relief  from  intermediate 
appellate  courts,  not  courts  of  last  resort;  all  involved  judges  who  were 
appointed, not  elected;  all  questioned  trial  court  orders,  not  decisions  of 
intermediate  appellate  courts;  and  all  were  centrally  coordinated  by  the 
Department of Justice and the Office of the Solicitor General. 
 
B.  Descriptive Findings 
 
Excluding interlocutory and post-conviction appeals, as well as appeals 
from revocations and orders regarding the reduction of sentence, the number 
of direct criminal appeals by the federal government is very small. Only 205 
appeals were decided by the courts of appeals in five years. As Table 5 notes, 
the circuit with the most appeals in the dataset is the Eleventh, with 30.2%. 
 
TABLE 6: DECISION FAVORING FEDERAL PROSECUTOR, BY TYPE OF APPEAL 
 
(1)  (2) 
  % of appeals 
reviewed on 
% of all appeals  merits 
N  205  87 
Dependent Variables:     
Reviewed on merits  42.4  --- 
Decision favored prosecution  28.3  66.7 
SOURCE: Federal Judicial Center, Integrated Database, Federal Appellate 
Cases: 2011-16. 
 
More than half of these 205 appeals were terminated without a review 
on the merits (N=118), even though all were appeals of-right, and the   courts 
 
111 Using information from PACER and the OFFENSE variable in the FJC dataset, 
we sorted each appeal into one of the three crime-type variables used in the state 
study. We coded from PACER documents the claims raised by the government, 
sorting them into the same claim categories and variables used in the state study. 
We also coded the same counsel categories, but in addition subdivided “public 
attorney” into two sub-groups, federal defender and CJA appointed. 
  44  
had no discretion to deny leave to appeal. These non-merits dispositions were 
overwhelmingly (N=97) voluntary dismissals by the government,112 where the 
clerk of court rather than a judge “take[s] or direct[s] the final termination 
action.”113 Another 19 appeals ended similarly, but with judicial involvement 
granting the government’s motion to dismiss,114 so that combined, voluntary 
dismissals accounted for 116 of the 118 non-merits dispositions. Overall, the 
government voluntarily dismissed 57.5% of the appeals it had filed.115 Given 
this high incidence of voluntary dismissal, the success rate for all appeals filed 
was less than 30%.116 Among appeals considered on the merits the average 
success rate was more than double that (66.7%), and varied across circuits. 
 
Simple comparisons presented in Table 7 also reveal that appeals from 
conviction (judgments of acquittal and new trial orders following a guilty 
verdict) were more likely to win than appeals from orders dismissing charges 
or  orders  that  could  not  be  determined (i.e.,  the  docket  was  sealed  and 
unavailable  on  PACER).  Felony  appeals  were  more  successful  than 
misdemeanor  appeals.  Prosecutors  had  more  success  in  appeals  involving 
nonviolent and unknown crimes than when appealing in violent crime cases. 
Including a sufficiency of evidence claim increased the rate of success among 
all appeals filed, as did the presence of oral argument or a published opinion. 
 
112 FED. R. APP. PROC.42(b). 
113 See FJC Codebook, supra note 10, at 11 METHOD (value=1). 
114 Id. at 10-11, PROCTERM (value=2). 
115 In the merged 2014-2015 set of appeals data from the Sentencing Commission, see 
supra note 23, only 3 of the government appeals (2%) were coded as dismissed for the 
years 2014 and 2015, suggesting that the Commission’s collection of appeals did not 
include most or all of the appeals filed but later dismissed. 
The documents available on PACER for appeals filed and later dismissed 
typically included a reference to the trial court order appealed, usually with a docket 
number or filing date to identify that order. In some circuits, the notice of appeal 
entry included a copy of the trial court order appealed. This allowed us to determine 
when the government was objecting to a judgment of acquittal, an order granting 
new trial, or an order of dismissal. Appeals from the sentence were in some circuits 
specified as such, some even noting what aspect of the sentence was being 
challenged. 
There were also appeals after convictions that identified the order being 
appealed only by referencing a specific judgment or judgment and commitment order. 
In these cases, we used a process of elimination to determine that the appeal was not 
from an order dismissing a charge, granting a motion for new trial or judgment of 
acquittal. Once these options were eliminated, and there were no orders docketed in 
the trial court record that could have been appealed by the government from the 
judgment other than the sentence, we coded the government’s appeal from judgment 
and commitment as an appeal from sentence. 
116 This is a lower rate than the 37.3% success rate reported in 1999. See supra note 
18. 
  45  
When facing retained counsel the government was more likely to lose; when 
facing a federal defender, more likely to win, when considering all appeals filed 
including those terminated for non-merits reasons. 
Comparing the rates of merits review separate from the rate of ultimate 
success  provided  additional  descriptive  insights.  Given  that  almost  all 
nonmerits  dispositions  were  voluntary  dismissals  requested  by  the 
government, the rate of merits review may serve as a proxy for the rate at 
which the government decided not to dismiss the appeal. Government appeals 
in drug trafficking, weapons, and DUI cases were less likely to proceed on the 
merits compared to appeals in other cases. More of the conviction-only appeals 
(appeals of judgments of acquittal and new trial orders after a jury verdict of 
guilt) were reviewed on the merits compared to appeals challenging a sentence, 
an  order  dismissing  charges,  or  an unknown  order.  Only  felony appeals 
proceeded; none of the four misdemeanor appeals made it to merits review. 
Appeals raising sufficiency of evidence claims were less likely to be dismissed 
than  appeals  including  other  claims.117  To  the  extent  these  voluntary 
dismissals reflect choices by the Department of Justice and the Office of the 
Solicitor  General  to  forego appeals  that  had  been filed,118 the  descriptive 
information sheds some light on that selection process. 
Descriptive results also suggest several factors that might correlate 
with government success rates among these merits cases. The overall success 
rate among merits cases was about 67%. As we expected, merits appeals 
challenging a judgment of acquittal or new trial order entered after a guilty 
verdict enjoyed a higher than average rate of success (70.6%), as did appeals 
raising sentencing claims (70.9%). As expected, appeals including a claim 
contesting an insufficient evidence finding (76.9% success) or a sentencing 
claim (71.4%) were more successful than appeals not raising those claims 
(50.0%). Interestingly, and also supporting our initial hypothesis, prosecutors 
were less likely to receive a favorable decision when they were up against a 
federal defender, winning only 42.9% of the time, compared to defendants with 
 
 
 
 
117 These statistics are reported infra in Table 10, comparing state and federal 
government appeals, in columns 5 & 6. 
118 Although we did not attempt to code the exact basis for the voluntary dismissal in 
the small portion of these federal appeals where that information was available, 
judging from information that was available documents on PACER, these dismissals 
appeared to be based primarily not on compromise or settlement with the defense, 
but instead on the decision of the Solicitor General’s Office not to proceed.  There 
were only a few cases, each involving a government’s cross appeal, in which it 
appeared that both parties had agreed to drop their appeals. The other voluntary 
dismissals appeared to be unilateral decisions with no indication that the defendant 
gave up anything in return. 
  46  
other representation. Against retained counsel, prosecutors won 82.1% of their 
appeals; against CJA counsel, 70.8%.119
 
 
 
TABLE 7: INDEPENDENT  VARIABLES, BY DECISION FAVORING FEDERAL 
PROSECUTOR 
 
  (1)  (2) 
% cases with  % cases w/o 
variable  variable 
receiving  receiving 
decision  decision 
favoring P  favoring P 
Independent Variables:     
Merits review [n=87]  66.7  --- 
Filed in dkt year 2011 [n=28]  57.1  23.7 
Appeal from:     
Conviction (alone) [n=21]  57.1  25.0 
Sentence (included) [n=138]  28.3  28.4 
(Dismissal/unknown) [n=46]  15.2  32.1 
Offense severity     
Felony [n=197]  29.4  0.0 
Misdemeanor [n=4]  0.0  28.9 
(severity unknown/missing) [n=4]  0.0  28.9 
Crime type:     
Drug Trafficking, weapons, dui [n=73]  20.6  32.6 
Violent (sex, homic., robbery, assault) [n=18]  27.8  28.3 
Nonviolent and unknown crime [n=114]  33.3  22.0 
Claim included in brief:     
Evidence suppression [n=2]  0.0  28.6 
Insufficient evidence [n=16]  62.5  25.4 
Sentence [n=139]  28.8  27.3 
Claims other than above [n=42]  19.1  30.7 
(claim unknown) [n=9]  11.1  29.1 
Court factors:     
CA11 [n=62]  27.4  28.7 
Process & advocacy factors:     
Oral argument held [n=62]  66.1  11.9 
Published opinion [n=52]  65.4  15.7 
Private defense attorney [n=73]  31.5  26.5 
Public defender [n=63]  19.1  32.4 
Public appointed (CJA) attorney [n=57]  29.8  27.7 
Pro se defendant [n=6]  50.0  27.6 
(unknown representation) [n=6]  50.0  27.6 
N  205 
SOURCE: Federal Judicial Center, Integrated Database, Federal Appellate Cases: 
2011-16. 
 
 
 
 
119 Only four of the merits cases involved pro se defendants, and the government won 
three of the four. 
  47  
Contrary to our expectations, results in Table 10 make clear that the 
government fared somewhat worse in violent crime appeals heard on the 
merits (62.5%) compared to nonviolent and unknown crime appeals heard on 
the merits (69.1%). Cases with oral argument or a published opinion also had 
a slightly lower than average win rate. We also noticed that as compared to 
cases filed in later years, the 28 direct appeals by the government filed during 
FY 2011 had higher rates of merits review and success among merits cases.120 
And although more of the cases filed in the Eleventh Circuit were dismissed, 
the appeals that remained in that circuit were more likely to win than the 
merits appeals in other circuits. 
C.  Factors Associated with Merits Review and Success: Regression 
Analysis 
To  determine  whether  these  relationships  survive  more  rigorous 
analysis we investigated them using regression models containing the same 
variables as in the state appeal models, along with the variable Filed in docket 
year  2011, and a  separate variable  for federal  defenders,  in  light  of  the 
descriptive finding regarding type of defense representation noted above. Table 
8 reports the results of models examining the relationship of these factors to 
the likelihood of merits review; Table 9 reports the results of models examining 
the likelihood of success among those appeals reviewed on the merits. 
Of the factors that simple comparisons suggested might correspond 
with merits review (that is, the likelihood of not being voluntarily dismissed), 
only three factors achieved statistical significance after controlling for other 
factors.121 Conviction-only appeals (appeals from judgments of acquittal and 
new trial orders) significantly correlate with an increased likelihood of merits 
review (a lower likelihood of voluntary dismissal), as compared to appeals 
challenging an order dismissing charges or an unknown order. Appeals filed 
in FY 2011 correspond with a greater likelihood of reaching merits review than 
appeals filed in later years. Also, appeals in the Eleventh Circuit correlate with 
a  significantly  lower  likelihood  of  merits  review  (a  higher  likelihood  of 
voluntary dismissal) as compared to appeals in other circuits. Crime type and 
 
 
 
 
120 The overall success rate of appeals filed in FY 2015 is understandably lower than 
the appeals filed in earlier years, as the 2016 termination set would have included 
only those appeals filed in FY 2015 that would have terminated by September 30, 
2016, and appeals decided on the merits tend to take longer than appeals that are 
dismissed before reaching the merits. But this does not explain the lower success rate 
for cases filed in FY 2012, unless a meaningful number took more than four years for 
the courts to complete and were still pending as of September 30, 2016. 
121 Our models examining merits review omitted the felony/misdemeanor variable, as 
there were no misdemeanor appeals that reached the merits stage; all four 
misdemeanor appeals filed were voluntarily dismissed by the government. 
  48  
claim type appear unrelated to the likelihood of merits review.122 For example, 
as far as predicting the likelihood of merits review, it made no difference 
whether the government’s appeal challenged the sentence, as measured by 
either the “appeal from sentence” variable, or the “sentence claim included” 
variable. 
If  selection  for  merits  review  essentially  reflects  which  cases  the 
government files but later chooses not to dismiss, as we suspect, our results 
suggest that Department of Justice attorneys and the Solicitor General’s Office 
were more likely to dismiss appeals filed in the Eleventh Circuit than appeals 
filed  in  other  circuits.  Explanations  for  this  might  include: (1)  local  U.S. 
Attorneys in that circuit were more likely than those in other circuits to file 
appeals  that  central  screening  attorneys  from  DOJ  and  the  SG’s  office 
preferred not to pursue; (2) Central screening attorneys had more difficulty 
evaluating all of the potential appeals from districts in the Eleventh Circuit in 
a timely fashion, so that local U.S. Attorneys in the Eleventh Circuit filed a 
greater  proportion  of  “protective  appeals”  before  the  notice  of  appeal 
deadline123 than in other circuits simply to preserve the opportunity to appeal; 
and (3) Central screening attorneys screened appeals to the Eleventh Circuit 
more rigorously than appeals in other circuits, retaining only those most likely 
to succeed. 
 
 
TABLE 8: LOGISTIC MODELS, MERITS REVIEW, FEDERAL APPEALS 
 
  (1)    (2)   
  (s.e.)    (s.e.) 
Appeal received merits review         
Case specific variables:         
Appeal of conviction (alone)  2.44*  1.16  2.36*  1.14 
Appeal of sentence (included)  0.41  0.40  ---   
Crime types:         
Violent crime type (ref.)         
Nonvio. and unknown crime type  0.13  0.63  0.12  0.63 
Drug traffic, weapon, or dui  -0.44  0.64  -0.45  0.64 
Claim in brief:         
Insufficient evid. claim included  -0.22  1.25  -0.12  1.28 
Sentence claim included  ---    0.45  0.42 
Court specific factors:         
CA11  -0.30*  0.13  -0.31*  0.13 
Appeal filed in 2011  1.19**  0.46  1.19*  0.46 
Process & advocacy:         
 
122 While the pseudo R2 value of 0.11 for both of our models in Table 8 implies that 
important variation is not explained by our model specifications, we are heartened by 
our results’ robustness across models. 
123 See FED. R. APP. PROC. 4(b)(1)(B) (providing government must file notice within 30 
days after the later of (i) the entry of judgment or order being appealed or (ii) the 
filing of a notice of appeal by any defendant). 
  49  
  Private attorney  -0.14  0.36  -0.14  0.36 
  Federal Defender  0.31  0.51  0.31  0.51 
  Pro se  1.05  0.72  1.04  0.71 
 
Constant  -0.88  0.70  -0.89  0.71 
 
N  205    205   
 
Log likelihood  -124.49   -124.40  
 
Psuedo R2  0.11    0.11   
NOTES: W  e report results from logistic regression models of prosecutor success with 
appeals initiated by the state. The dependent variable is whether the appeal resulted 
in a merits review. Robust standard errors (clustered on the circuit level) are in 
parentheses. * p<0.05; ** p<0.01. We estimated the models using the “logit” 
command in Stata (v.15.1). 
SOURCE: Federal Judicial Center, Integrated Database, Federal Appellate Cases: 
2011-16. 
 
 
Table 8 also suggests that the government was less likely to drop 
appeals that challenged a trial court’s judgment of acquittal or new trial order 
following a jury’s verdict of guilt than to drop appeals in which the order 
appealed  dismissed  a  charge.  Assuming  that  attorneys  who  screen  these 
appeals did so hoping to maximize the success of the appeal, predicting greater 
success in these appeals as compared to appeals of judicial rulings that did not 
upset a jury’s verdict of guilt provides support for our initial hypothesis.124
 
Turning to our models of appeals’ success, for cases reviewed on the 
merits,  results  reported  in  Table  9  identify  only  one  factor  significantly 
associated with either a lower or higher likelihood of success: whether the 
defendant appellee was represented by a federal defender as opposed to a CJA 
panel attorney.  Controlling  for  all  the  other  factors,  the  government was 
systematically more likely to lose its appeal if it faced a federal defender as an 
adversary than if it faced a CJA panel attorney. This too is consistent with our 
hypothesis  and  growing  research  indicating  the  favorable  performance of 
 
 
 
 
124 In our alternative simultaneous two-stage models, the relationship between the 
likelihood of merits review and appeals in the Eleventh Circuit did not achieve 
statistical significance. Also replacing the appeal of conviction alone variable with the 
insufficient evidence claim variable in the model generated statistical significance for 
insufficient evidence claims, which is to be expected since such claims are included in 
most of the appeals coded as appeal from conviction alone. Conservatively 
interpreting results from both the logistic and bivariate probit analyses suggests 
greater confidence in the finding of a significant association between the likelihood of 
merits review and both appeals filed in 2011 and conviction only challenges, than in 
the finding of a significant relationship between the likelihood of merits review and 
appeals filed in the Eleventh Circuit. 
  50  
defense attorneys from federal defender offices as compared to CJA panel 
attorneys.125
 
 
 
TABLE 9: LOGISTIC MODELS, APPEAL OUTCOME FAVORED FEDERAL 
PROSECUTOR, MERITS APPEALS 
 
  (1)    (2)   
  (s.e.)    (s.e.) 
Outcome favored prosecutor         
Case specific variables:         
Appeal of conviction (alone)  0.73  1.04  ---   
Appeal of sentence (included)  ---    0.79  0.72 
       
Crime types: 
Violent crime type (ref.)         
Nonvio. and unknown crime type  -0.31  1.11  -0.23  1.13 
Drug traffic, weapon, or dui  -0.40  1.05  -0.23  0.97 
       
Claim in brief: 
Insufficient evid. claim included  ---    0.86  1.18 
Sentence claim included  0.95  0.63  ---   
       
Court specific factors: 
CA11  0.45  0.40  0.44  0.45 
Appeal filed in 2011  0.81  0.72  0.79  0.72 
       
Process & advocacy: 
Private attorney  0.42  0.91  0.31  0.87 
Federal Defender  -1.24**  0.37  -1.30**  0.43 
Constant  0.34  0.85  0.43  0.74 
N  87    87   
Log likelihood  -47.48    -47.54   
Psuedo R2  0.14    0.14   
NOTES: We report results from logistic regression models of prosecutor success with 
appeals initiated by the state. The dependent variable is whether the appellate court 
outcome favored the prosecutor (success is construed as something less than a full 
affirmance or dismissal and involved upsetting, to some degree, the lower court 
decision). Robust standard errors (clustered on the circuit level) are in parentheses. * 
p<0.05; ** p<0.01. We estimated the models using the “logit” command in Stata 
(v.15.1). 
SOURCE: Federal Judicial Center, Integrated Database, Federal Appellate Cases: 
2011-16. 
 
125 In our alternative simultaneous two-stage models, type of counsel did not achieve 
statistical significance with respect to likelihood of success, but the “year filed 2011” 
and “appeal from conviction alone” variables did achieve significance, as they did in 
our model for decisions on the merits. Interpreting these findings conservatively, this 
suggests that the statistical support for a possible relation between an appellee’s 
counsel and success may not be as strong as the relationships that were confirmed by 
both logistic and bivariate probit analyses. 
  51  
 
Overall, while the picture that emerges from our initial preliminary 
analyses of federal prosecutor appeals remains hazy, certain basic features 
become discernable. First, the number of these appeals considered by the 
federal courts of appeals is very small. The courts resolved nationwide an 
average of 40 direct appeals per year during our study period. And because 
more than 57% of the appeals filed never reached merits review, ten out of the 
twelve circuits actually decided the merits of fewer than a dozen of these 
appeals over the entire five-year study period. When considered alongside the 
annual volume of defense appeals, our federal appellate judges encounter a 
highly skewed set of claims. For example, even though more than 64% of the 
government appeals heard on the merits challenged the sentence, the total 
number  is  only  a  tiny  fraction  of  the  number  of  sentencing  appeals  by 
defendants heard on the merits. 
Second, the process of choosing which appeals to advance persists long 
after filing in many of these appeals – more than half of those appeals filed 
never reached merits review because they were voluntarily dismissed by the 
government.  The  data  also  suggest  that  a  greater  proportion  of  appeals 
challenging  judgments  of  acquittal  and  new  trial  orders  survived  this 
screening compared to appeals from sentence, dismissal, or unknown orders. 
Also, a smaller proportion of appeals filed in the Eleventh Circuit survived this 
screening process. 
Third, among those appeals that were not voluntarily dismissed, the 
government won two of every three – good odds, perhaps attributable, at least 
in part, to the careful screening of which appeals to advance. Notably, the only 
factor found to make a statistically significant difference in the government’s 
chances of winning an appeal reviewed on its merits was whether the attorney 
representing the defendant appellee was a federal defender. 
VII. COMPARING APPEALS BY STATE AND FEDERAL PROSECUTORS 
For perhaps the first time, we have empirical information about state 
and  federal  prosecutor  appeals  that  reveals  that  they  differ  in  several 
important ways, some predictable, others less so. We begin this section with 
some observations about our descriptive findings, then turn to the regression 
results. 
Table  10  presents  key  descriptive  information  comparing  the  52 
mandatory appeals by state prosecutors in our random sample of state appeals 
(excluding the supplemental cases)126 with the 205 federal mandatory appeals. 
The overall win rate of federal prosecutors is lower than state prosecutors 
when comparing appeals filed (28.3% v. 40.8%), but when comparing appeals 
reviewed  on  the  merits,  federal  prosecutors  won  66.7%  of  their   appeals 
 
126 See supra text accompanying note 72. 
  52  
compared to state prosecutors who won only 52.6% of their appeals. These 
differences may be related in part to the routine practice in federal court of 
filing then voluntarily dismissing appeals, a practice that did not emerge in 
state courts. Compared to federal prosecutors, who withdrew more than half 
of the appeals they filed, state prosecutors withdrew less than 5% of all appeals 
filed, and about 15% of mandatory appeals filed. 
 
 
 
Table 10: Success Rates, Federal and State Prosecution Appeals of Right Compared 
(state data includes main sample only w/out supp. data) 
 
  % of    Of state  Of fed  Of state mand  Of fed mand 
mandatory  Of state  Of fed  mand  mand  appeals with  appeals with 
appeals with  mand  mand  appeals w/  appeals w/  variable  variable 
variable 127  appeals w/  appeals w/  variable, %  variable, %  reviewed on  reviewed on 
  variable, %  variable, %  reviewed  reviewed  merits, %  merits, % 
state  fed  favoring P  favoring P  on merits  on merits  favoring P  favoring P 
N  52  205  52  205  52  205  40  87 
COLR & IAC combined (state  100.0  ---  40.4  ---  76.9  ---  52.5  --- 
only) 
Intermediate appellate court  94.2  100.0  40.8  28.3  77.6  42.4  52.6  66.7 
(n=49 for state) (n=205 for fed) 
Filed in dkt year 2011  --  13.7  --  57.1  ---  67.9  ---  84.2 
Appeal from                 
Conviction (alone)  50.0  10.2  42.3  57.1  84.6  81.0  50.0  70.6 
Sentence (included)  30.8  67.3  43.8  28.3  93.8  39.9  46.7  70.9 
(dismissal/missing)  19.2  22.4  30.0  15.2  30.0  32.6  100.0  46.7 
Offense severity                 
Felony  86.5  96.1  42.2  29.4  80.0  43.7  52.8  67.4 
Misdemeanor  9.6  2.0  40.0  0.0  80.0  0.0  50.0  --- 
(severity unknown/missing)  3.9  2.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  25.0  ---  0.0 
Crime type:                 
Drug Trafficking, weapons,  28.9  35.6  66.7  20.6  100.0  32.9  66.7  62.5 
dui 
Violent (sex, homic, robb, ass.)  40.4  8.8  23.8  27.8  71.4  44.4  33.3  62.5 
Nonviolent and unknown  30.8  55.6  37.5  33.3  62.5  48.3  60.0  69.1 
crime 
Claim included in brief:                 
Insufficient evidence  17.3  7.8  66.7  62.5  100.0  81.3  66.7  76.9 
Evidence suppression  19.2  1.0  30.0  0.0  100.0  50.0  30.0  0.0 
Sentence  15.4  67.8  62.5  28.8  100.0  40.3  62.5  71.4 
All other claims  30.8  20.5  43.8  19.1  87.5  38.1  50.0  50.0 
(claims raised unknown)  23.1  4.4  8.3  11.1  16.7  22.2  50.0  50.0 
Court factors:                 
Eleventh Circuit  ---  30.2  ---  27.4  ---  35.5  ---  77.3 
                 
Advocacy factors:                 
 
127 For an explanation of the sample for the defense and prosecution appeal studies, 
see supra text accompanying notes 93-95. 
  53  
  % of    Of state  Of fed  Of state mand  Of fed mand 
mandatory  Of state  Of fed  mand  mand  appeals with  appeals with 
appeals with  mand  mand  appeals w/  appeals w/  variable  variable 
variable 127  appeals w/  appeals w/  variable, %  variable, %  reviewed on  reviewed on 
  variable, %  variable, %  reviewed  reviewed  merits, %  merits, % 
state  fed  favoring P  favoring P  on merits  on merits  favoring P  favoring P 
Central coordination of appeal  55.8  100.0  37.9  28.3  72.4  42.4  52.4  66.7 
Oral argument held  26.9  30.2  57.1  66.1  92.9  100.0  61.5  66.1 
Full/pub. judicial opinion  50.0  25.4  57.7  65.4  100.0  100.0  57.7  65.4 
Private attorney  19.2  35.6  40.0  31.5  80.0  38.4  50.0  82.1 
Public attorney  61.5  ---  43.8  ---  84.4  ---  51.9  --- 
defender  ---  30.7  ---  19.1  ---  44.4  ---  42.9 
appointed  ---  27.8  ---  29.8  ---  42.1  ---  70.8 
Pro se  ---  2.9  ---  50.0  ---  66.7  ---  75.0 
(unknown represent.)  19.2  2.9  30.0  50.0  50.0  50.0  60.0  100.0 
SOURCES: Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals, 2010; Federal Judicial Center, Integrated 
Database, Federal Appellate Cases: 2011-16. 
 
 
Other interesting contrasts in the descriptive findings include different 
rates of success among merits appeals defended by retained counsel. In federal 
appeals, retained counsel lost more than 82% of the time, while in state 
mandatory appeals retained counsel had a 50-50 chance of winning. Among 
these mandatory appeals resolved on the merits, oral argument boosted the 
rate of success for state prosecutors, but slightly depressed that rate for federal 
prosecutors. One possible explanation for the unexpected association of no oral 
argument with greater success by federal prosecutor appellants may be that 
some  of  these  appeals  challenged  rulings  that  were  clearly  wrong under 
existing precedent, and at least some circuits tend not to grant oral argument 
in  these  circumstances.128 The  rates  of  success  among  merits  appeals  for 
different types of orders appealed also varied – state prosecutors had their best 
chance with appeals of dismissal and unknown orders, with below average 
rates of success for both conviction only and sentence included appeals. By 
contrast, federal prosecutors did better with conviction only and sentence 
appeals than they did when appealing from dismissal and unknown orders. 
There are differences, too, in the success rates for crime types. The higher 
success rate among merits cases for state appeals in nonviolent cases and drug 
 
 
128 The language of Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 34 accommodates this 
practice.  See Fed R. App. P. 34(a)(2)(C) (providing that one of the reasons a panel 
may deem oral argument unnecessary is: “the facts and legal arguments are 
adequately presented in the briefs and record, and the decisional process would not 
be significantly aided by oral argument.) See also Cleveland & Wisotsky, supra note 
99, at 132 (2012) (quoting one circuit’s rule stating that it is usual to find argument 
unnecessary when the “outcome of the appeal is clearly controlled by a decision of the 
Supreme Court or this court”). 
  54  
trafficking, weapons, and DUI cases, as compared to violent crime cases, did 
not emerge in the federal appeals. 
But there is also much in common in these two systems, looking at both 
the descriptive and regression results. Prosecutors in both systems challenged 
similar rulings and were successful more often than not if an appeal was 
reviewed on its merits. In both state and federal courts, mandatory appeals 
contesting  insufficiency  findings  generated  higher  than  average  rates  of 
success. And in both systems, factors that seemed important to success in 
descriptive comparisons, turned out not to be significantly associated with the 
likelihood of success of merits appeals once other variables were taken into 
account. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
For decades, state and federal prosecutors have appealed sentences, 
new trial and dismissal orders, judgments of acquittal after jury verdicts of 
guilt, and intermediate appellate court decisions favoring defendants. Yet few 
researchers have attempted to test empirically what actually happens during 
this litigation or consider why. Using newly released nationwide data, the 
statistical analyses we present in this Article provide a unique glimpse into 
the  real  world  of  prosecutor  appeals  and  a baseline for  future  research. 
Informed by criminal appellate law, policy, and practice, it is the first research 
to examine both state and federal prosecutor appeals nationwide, and the first 
to investigate factors associated with merits review and criminal appeals’ 
success. 
Comparing appeals by state prosecutors and defendants we found that 
prosecutors enjoyed a rate of success for all appeals that was about four times 
that  experienced  by  defendants  (roughly  40%  compared  to  10%).  Oral 
argument correlated with greater success for state prosecutor-appellants, but 
outcome did not systematically vary with several factors, including whether 
review was mandatory or discretionary, whether the appellate bench was 
selected by election rather than appointment, and the type of crime, claim, or 
defense counsel. State intermediate appellate courts considered a drastically 
skewed docket; prosecutors filed only 2% of direct criminal appeals heard on 
the merits. By contrast, prosecutors filed 41% of all discretionary criminal 
appeals considered on the merits by state high courts, (30% of discretionary 
and mandatory appeals combined). In federal courts, prosecutors voluntarily 
dismissed more than half the appeals they filed, but were significantly less 
likely to withdraw appeals from judgments of acquittal and new trial orders 
after the verdict than appeals challenging other orders. Among appeals decided 
on  the  merits,  controlling  for  other  factors,  federal  prosecutors  were 
significantly more likely to lose when facing a federal defender as an adversary 
compared to a CJA panel attorney. 
Our findings shed light on several policy questions. For example, policy 
makers in states that bar prosecutors from appealing orders that other states’ 
  55  
prosecutors  successfully  appeal  might  use  these  findings  as  support  for 
expanding the government’s opportunities to appeal. The high rates of success 
for prosecutors’ challenges to judgments of acquittal after a guilty verdict 
might encourage trial judges who are interested in avoiding review to resolve 
more  insufficiency  claims  before  the  verdict,  while  at  the  same  time 
encouraging judges and policy makers interested in ensuring review of trial 
court rulings to favor efforts to postpone judgments of acquittal until after 
verdict. That we found no statistically significant advantage for prosecutor- 
appellants in state courts where appeals were centrally coordinated suggests 
that state policy makers considering new processes for centrally screening 
prosecutor appeals would be prudent to investigate more deeply which types of 
coordination and screening are most effective. On the federal side, the findings 
provide additional support to arguments by indigent defense reformers who 
favor expanding federal defender offices rather than the use of CJA attorneys 
for appeals. Also, the Department of Justice might consider why the percentage 
of appeals filed only to be later withdrawn is so much larger in certain circuits, 
and whether this particular expenditure of prosecutorial and judicial resources 
could be reduced with targeted attention. 
Several  findings  raise  intriguing  questions  for  further  research, 
particularly as additional data become available. We posit a handful of those 
questions here, in the hope that empirical investigation will continue to inform 
policy choices about the legal regulation of appeals by the prosecution. At the 
most basic level, state prosecutors have greater success in their appeals than 
state defendants do, and, considering only those appeals reviewed on the 
merits, federal prosecutors win more of their appeals than state prosecutors 
do. Our data imply several explanations for these differences that could be 
examined  by  future  research,  including  the  influence  of  different  choices 
concerning which rulings to appeal. Our state data do not include interlocutory 
or post-conviction appeals by prosecutors – do the factors associated with 
merits and success, and the rates of success in such cases resemble what we 
found for direct appeals? And what proportion of these prosecution appeals 
are primarily focused on correcting trial court errors in particular cases, as 
opposed to making new law (e.g., interpreting new statutes or addressing issue 
of first impression), or resolving lower court conflicts? 
Variations in the mix of defense and prosecution appeals considered by 
different courts raise additional questions. While markedly asymmetric access 
to appellate review is evident in federal and state intermediate courts of appeal 
hearing first appeals of right in criminal cases, the picture is quite different in 
state high courts. Additional research could investigate whether the behavior 
of litigants, trial judges, or reviewing courts differ systematically between 
jurisdictions with more symmetric review and jurisdictions with less. 
A number of advocacy-related questions emerged as well. What role do 
and should victims play in determining whether the government pursues an 
appeal? Why did oral argument appear to benefit the appellant in state court, 
  56  
both prosecution and defense, but not federal prosecutors appealing to the 
United States Courts of Appeals? The presence of retained counsel for the 
defendant appellee had surprisingly little correlation to appellate success for 
prosecutors in state and federal courts, but the presence of a federal defender 
was significantly related to a higher likelihood the United States would lose a 
criminal  appeal. If  new  data allowed for  a  comparison  of  state  appellate 
defenders and other appointed counsel, would it show a similar relationship? 
And what explains why centralized coordination or staffing of state prosecutor 
appeals made no significant difference in either merits review or success; 
which are the most effective state coordination processes? Additional data, 
including a larger number of appeals, may allow both more refined and more 
statistically powerful analyses that may help detect correlations undetectable 
with existing data sets, and insights into how these appeals may evolve over 
time. 
Even without further additional research, however, direct appellate 
review of claims raised by the prosecution, a critical piece of our nation’s 
criminal justice system, is no longer a matter of abject guesswork. The findings 
reported here help provide courts, litigants, lawmakers, and scholars with a 
more  complete  understanding  of  the  role  of  judicial  review  in  the 
administration of criminal sanctions. 
  57  
 
APPENDIX 
  58  
 
 
 
 
TABLE A1: SUCCESS RATES, STATE DEFENSE AND PROSECUTION APPEALS COMPARED, BY KEY VARIABLES AND TYPE OF APPEAL 
 
    Mandatory appeals  Discretionary appeals 
          COLR disc.    Disc. appeals  COLR disc.  COLR disc. 
  Mandatory  Mandatory  Disc  appeals  COLR disc.  reviewed on  reviewed on  reviewed on 
appeals with  appeals w/  appeals w/  with  appeals w/  merits w/  merits with  merits with 
% of total sample  variable % w/  variable, % w/  variable, %  variable %  variable, %  variable, % w/  variable %  variable % w/ 
with variable 129  decision  decision  w/ decision  w/ decision  w/ decision  decision  w/ decision  decision 
P  D  favoring P  favoring D  favoring P  favoring P  favoring D  favoring P  favoring P  favoring D 
N  154  3,505  52  2,080  102  95  1,425  48  43  65 
Court of last resort  63.6  45.1  33.3    35.8      79.1     
Intermediate appellate court  36.4  55.0  40.8    57.1      80.0     
Appeal from                     
Conviction (alone)  53.9  34.8  42.3  12.3  43.9  42.6  11.3  83.3  82.1  58.5 
Sentence (included)  24.7  31.0  43.8  20.5  31.8  26.3  7.0  58.3  55.6  77.8 
(unknown/missing)  21.4  34.2  30.0  1.6  26.1  27.3  0.2  100.0  100.0  33.3 
Offense severity                     
Felony  84.4  100  42.2  14.9  38.8  38.3  2.8  80.5  81.6  61.5 
Misdemeanor  11.0  ---  40.0  ---  33.3  27.3  ---  66.7  60.0  --- 
(severity unknown/missing)  4.6  ---  0.0  ---  20.0  0.0  ---  100.0  ---  --- 
Crime type:                     
Drug Trafficking, weapons, dui  33.8  16.4  66.7  16.6  51.4  45.6  6.1  86.4  83.3  66.7 
Violent (sex, homic, robb, assau.)  38.3  50.4  23.8  14.1  31.6  32.4  3.9  70.6  75.0  64.9 
Nonviolent and unknown crime  27.9  31.4  37.5  16.0  25.9  28.0  0.9  77.8  77.8  54.6 
Claim included in brief:                     
Insufficient evidence  9.7  18.2  66.7  16.9  66.7  66.7  32.4  100.0  100.0  73.3 
Evidence suppression  15.6  8.6  30.0  15.8  71.4  69.2  31.8  83.3  81.8  36.8 
Sentence  7.1  18.3  62.5  21.7  66.7  100.0  10.0  66.7  100.0  50.0 
All other claims  31.2  16.3  43.8  14.4  40.6  38.7  39.5  61.9  60.0  65.2 
(claims raised unknown)  39.6  47.2  8.3  4.0  20.4  17.8  0.4  100.0  100.0  71.4 
Court factors:                     
Elected judges  59.7  41.7  40.9  15.3  38.6  37.9  3.6  75.0  73.5  72.0 
CA state  7.8  25.2  0.0  19.3  54.6  54.6  0.4  100.0  100.0  33.3 
LA state  9.7  2.3  0.0  32.5  46.7  46.7  0.0  100.0  100.0  --- 
OH state  16.9  7.2  33.3  25.6  5.9  6.3  1.4  25.0  25.0  100.0 
Advocacy factors:                     
 
129 For an explanation of the sample for the defense and prosecution appeal studies, see supra Parts IV.A.1,2 & VI.A.1. 
59 
  
 
 
 
 
    Mandatory appeals  Discretionary appeals 
          COLR disc.    Disc. appeals  COLR disc.  COLR disc. 
  Mandatory  Mandatory  Disc  appeals  COLR disc.  reviewed on  reviewed on  reviewed on 
  appeals with  appeals w/  appeals w/  with  appeals w/  merits w/  merits with  merits with 
% of total sample  variable % w/  variable, % w/  variable, %  variable %  variable, %  variable, % w/  variable %  variable % w/ 
with variable 129  decision  decision  w/ decision  w/ decision  w/ decision  decision  w/ decision  decision 
P  D  favoring P  favoring D  favoring P  favoring P  favoring D  favoring P  favoring P  favoring D 
State coordinates appeal  54.6  ---  37.9  ---  43.6  40.0  ---  85.7  83.3  --- 
Oral argument held  29.9  12.6  57.1  24.4  68.8  68.8  52.4  75.9  75.9  52.4 
Full judicial opinion  40.9  34.6  57.7  21.5  73.0  73.5  61.1  73.0  73.5  61.1 
Private attorney  15.6  5.6  40.0  18.8  42.9  36.7  3.9  100.0  100.0  28.6 
Public attorney  55.2  52.0  43.8  16.9  39.6  37.3  9.8  77.8  76.0  72.5 
Pro se  2.0  7.8  ---  2.9  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0 
(unknown represent.)  27.3  34.7  30.0  7.1  34.4  36.7  1.0  84.6  91.7  52.9 
69 
  
 
 
 
 
TABLE A2: SUCCESS RATES, STATE DEFENSE AND PROSECUTION APPEALS COMPARED, BY KEY VARIABLES AND TYPE OF APPEAL 
(W/OUT SUPPLEMENTAL  DATA) 
 
    Mandatory appeals  Discretionary appeals 
          COLR disc.    Disc. appeals  COLR disc.  COLR disc. 
  Mandatory  Mandatory  Disc  appeals  COLR disc.  reviewed on  reviewed on  reviewed on 
appeals with  appeals w/  appeals w/  with  appeals w/  merits w/  merits with  merits with 
% of total sample  variable % w/  variable, % w/  variable, %  variable, %  variable, %  variable, % w/  variable,  %  variable, % w/ 
with variable 130  decision  decision  w/ decision  w/ decision  w/ decision  decision  w/  decision  decision 
P  D  favoring P  favoring D  favoring P  favoring P  favoring D  favoring P  favoring P  favoring D 
N  133  3,505  52  2,080  81  74  1,153  41  36  52 
Court of last resort  57.9  45.1  33.3    39.2      80.6     
Intermediate appellate court  42.1  55.0  40.8    57.1      80.0     
Appeal from                     
Conviction (alone)  51.8  34.8  42.3  12.3  46.5  45.0  10.7  83.3  81.8  55.9 
Sentence (included)  27.1  31.0  43.8  20.5  35.0  29.4  6.8  63.6  62.5  73.3 
(unknown/missing)  21.1  34.2  30.0  1.6  33.3  35.3  0.3  100.0  100.0  66.7 
Offense severity                     
Felony  84.2  100  42.2  14.9  43.3  42.9  2.8  80.6  81.8  61.5 
Misdemeanor  10.5  ---  40.0  ---  33.3  25.0  ---  75.0  66.7  --- 
(severity unknown/missing)  5.3  ---  0.0  ---  20.0  0.0  ---  100.0  ---  --- 
Crime type:                     
Drug Trafficking, weapons, dui  31.6  16.4  66.7  16.6  55.6  35.3  6.2  88.2  84.6  72.7 
Violent (sex, homic, robb, assau.)  39.9  50.4  23.8  14.1  34.4  35.5  4.2  68.8  73.3  60.0 
Nonviolent and unknown crime  28.6  31.4  37.5  16.0  31.8  35.0  1.0  87.5  87.5  60.0 
Claim included in brief:                     
Insufficient evidence  10.5  18.2  66.7  16.9  60.0  60.0  25.9  100.0  100.0  63.6 
Evidence suppression  15.8  8.6  30.0  15.8  72.7  70.0  27.8  88.9  87.5  33.3 
Sentence  8.3  18.3  62.5  21.7  66.7  100.0  11.8  66.7  100.0  50.0 
All other claims  30.1  16.3  43.8  14.4  41.7  39.1  39.4  62.5  60.0  65.0 
(claims raised unknown)  37.6  47.2  8.3  4.0  26.3  23.5  0.5  100.0  100.0  100.0 
Court factors:                     
Elected judges  57.9  41.7  40.9  15.3  40.0  39.2  3.6  75.9  74.1  75.0 
CA state  7.5  25.2  0.0  19.3  66.7  66.7  0.4  100.0  100.0  40.0 
LA state  8.3  2.3  ---  32.5  45.5  45.5  0.0  100.0  100.0  --- 
OH state  17.3  7.2  33.3  25.6  7.1  7.7  1.8  25.0  25.0  100.0 
 
130 For an explanation of the sample for the defense and prosecution appeal studies, see supra Parts IV.A.1,2 & VI.A.1. 
61 
  
 
 
 
 
    Mandatory appeals  Discretionary appeals 
          COLR disc.    Disc. appeals  COLR disc.  COLR disc. 
  Mandatory  Mandatory  Disc  appeals  COLR disc.  reviewed on  reviewed on  reviewed on 
  appeals with  appeals w/  appeals w/  with  appeals w/  merits w/  merits with  merits with 
% of total sample  variable % w/  variable, % w/  variable, %  variable, %  variable, %  variable, % w/  variable,  %  variable, % w/ 
with variable 130  decision  decision  w/ decision  w/ decision  w/ decision  decision  w/  decision  decision 
P  D  favoring P  favoring D  favoring P  favoring P  favoring D  favoring P  favoring P  favoring D 
Advocacy factors:                     
State coordinates appeal  54.9  ---  37.9  ---  50.0  46.2  ---  88.0  85.7  --- 
Oral argument held  30.8  12.6  57.1  24.4  66.7  66.7  51.4  75.0  75.0  51.4 
Full judicial opinion  42.9  34.6  57.7  21.5  74.2  75.0  59.1  74.2  75.0  59.1 
Private attorney  16.5  5.6  40.0  18.8  41.7  33.3  2.6  100.0  100.0  20.0 
Public attorney  54.9  52.0  43.8  16.9  43.9  41.0  10.0  78.3  76.2  68.6 
Pro se  1.5  7.8  ---  2.9  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  --- 
62 
  
 
 
 
 
TABLE A3: STATE DEFENSE AND PROSECUTION APPEALS COMPARED, BY KEY VARIABLES 
 
    Mandatory appeals  Discretionary appeals 
                   
            % disc.  % disc COLR  % disc. COLR 
appeals  appeals  appeals 
 
%  mand.  % mand.  % disc.  % disc COLR  % disc. COLR  reviewed on  reviewed on  reviewed on 
% of sample  appeals w/  appeals w/  appeals w/  appeals w/  appeals w/  merits w/  merits w/  merits with 
with variable 131  variable  variable  variable  variable  variable  variable  variable  variable 
P  D  (P appellant)  (D appellant)  (P appellant)  (P appellant)  (D appellant)  (P appellant)  (P appellant)  (D appellant) 
N  154  3,505  52  2,080  102  95  1,425  48  43  65 
Reviewed on merits  57.1  55.5  76.9  90.3  47.1  45.3  4.6  ---  ---  --- 
Decision favored appellant  38.3  10.0  40.4  14.9  37.3  35.8  2.8  79.2  79.1  61.5 
Court of last resort  63.6    5.8    93.1  ---    89.6  ---   
Intermediate appellate court  36.4    94.2    6.9  ---    10.4  ---   
Appeal from:                     
Conviction (alone)  53.9  34.8  50.0  48.4  55.9  56.8  15.0  62.5  65.1  63.1 
Sentence (included)  24.7  31.0  30.8  42.6  21.6  20.0  14.0  25.0  20.9  27.7 
(unknown/missing)  21.4  34.2  19.2  9.0  22.6  23.2  71.1  12.5  14.0  9.2 
Offense severity:                     
Felony  84.4  100.0  86.5  100.0  83.3  85.3  100.0  85.4  88.4  100.0 
Misdemeanor  11.0  ---  9.6  ---  11.8  11.6  ---  12.5  11.6  --- 
(severity unknown/missing)  4.6  ---  3.9  ---  4.9  3.2  ---  2.1  ---  --- 
Crime type:                     
Drug traffick., weapons, dui  33.8  11.2  28.9  13.6  36.3  34.7  7.6  45.8  41.9  23.1 
Violent (sex, homi, rob, assa.)  38.3  50.4  40.4  55.6  37.3  39.0  43.1  35.4  37.2  56.9 
Nonvio. and unknown crime  27.9  33.6  30.8  30.8  26.5  26.3  49.3  18.8  20.9  16.9 
Claim included in brief:                     
Insufficient evidence  9.7  18.1  17.3  28.9  5.9  6.3  2.4  8.3  9.3  23.1 
Evidence suppression  15.6  8.6  19.2  13.4  13.7  13.7  1.5  25.0  25.6  29.2 
Sentence  7.1  18.3  15.4  29.9  2.9  2.1  1.4  6.3  4.7  6.2 
All other claims  31.2    30.8  25.7  31.4  32.6  2.7  43.8  46.5  35.4 
(claims raised unknown)  39.6  47.1  23.1  15.6  48.0  47.4  93.2  20.8  18.6  10.8 
Court factors:                     
Elected judges  59.7  41.7  42.3  46.4  68.6  69.5  34.7  75.0  79.1  38.5 
CA state  7.8  25.2  1.9  15.0  10.8  11.6  40.1  12.5  14.0  9.3 
 
131 For an explanation of the sample for the defense and prosecution appeal studies, see supra Parts IV.A.1,2 & VI.A.1. 
63 
  
 
 
 
 
    Mandatory appeals  Discretionary appeals 
                   
            % disc.  % disc COLR  % disc. COLR 
            appeals  appeals  appeals 
%  mand.  % mand.  % disc.  % disc COLR  % disc. COLR  reviewed on  reviewed on  reviewed on 
% of sample  appeals w/  appeals w/  appeals w/  appeals w/  appeals w/  merits w/  merits w/  merits with 
with variable 131  variable  variable  variable  variable  variable  variable  variable  variable 
P  D  (P appellant)  (D appellant)  (P appellant)  (P appellant)  (D appellant)  (P appellant)  (P appellant)  (D appellant) 
LA state  9.7  2.3  ---  1.9  14.7  15.8  2.7  14.6  16.3  0.0 
OH state  16.9  7.2  17.3  8.7  16.7  16.8  5.0  8.3  9.3  1.5 
Advocacy factors:                     
State coordinates appeal  54.6  ---  55.8  ---  53.9  52.6  ---  58.3  55.8  --- 
Oral argument held  29.9  12.6  26.9  19.1  31.4  33.7  2.9  60.4  67.4  64.6 
Full judicial opinion  40.9  34.6  50.0  55.7  36.3  35.8  3.8  77.1  79.1  83.1 
Private attorney  15.6  5.6  19.2  6.9  13.7  11.6  3.6  12.5  9.3  10.8 
Public attorney  55.2  52.0  61.5  73.3  52.0  53.7  63.6  56.3  58.1  61.5 
Pro se  2.0  7.8  ---  4.9  2.9  3.2  11.9  4.2  4.7  1.5 
(unknown represent.)  27.3  34.7  19.2  14.9  31.4  31.6  63.6  27.1  27.9  26.2 
64 
  
 
TABLE A4: CENTRAL COORDINATION OF PROSECUTOR 
APPEALS, BY STATE 
 
State  Court Level  Coordination 
AL  IAC  Y 
AZ  COLR  Y 
  IAC  Y 
CA  COLR  Y 
  IAC   
FL  COLR  Y 
  IAC  Y 
HI  COLR   
  IAC   
IA  COLR  Y 
  IAC  Y 
IL  COLR  Y 
  IAC   
IN  COLR  Y 
KS  IAC   
KY  COLR  Y 
LA  COLR   
MA  IAC   
MI  COLR  Y 
  IAC  Y 
MN  COLR  Y 
MO  COLR  Y 
NC  IAC  Y 
ND  COLR  Y 
NE  IAC  Y 
NJ  IAC  Y 
NM  COLR  Y 
NY  COLR   
NY  IAC   
OH  COLR   
  IAC   
OR  COLR  Y 
  IAC  Y 
PA  COLR   
TX  COLR   
  IAC   
VT  COLR  Y 
WA  COLR  Y 
  IAC  Y 
WI  COLR  Y 
SOURCES: Rachel E. Barkow, Federalism and Criminal Law: 
What the Feds Can Learn from the States, 109 MICH. L. REV. 
519, 560-61, 560 nn. 226-37 (2011)); state prosecutor association websites; 
E-mail correspondence; telephone calls. 
 
65 
 