A Concise Legal and Economic Review of
Sanctions Imposed on Iran by the United States of
America and Its Effectiveness on Iranian
Authorities*
*
Mahdis Moharami
Department of Law
London School of Economics and Political Sciences
London, UK
Abstract—The economic impact and legal aspects of the sanc- these economic factors over the past three years (2015-2018).
tions imposed by the United States of America is summarised However, due to the lack of data for 2018, the last 10 years
here to study its effectiveness as means for persuasion.
have been analysed instead as a basis for predicting the
I. INTRODUCTION economy.
TherecenteventsandnewsanctionsimposedbytheTrump A. Iran’s Oil Exportation
administration on the Iranian economy and his decision to Interestingly, the large amount of oil in Iran results in the
withdraw from JCPOA [1], motivated me to write a review country being dependent on it, making it the biggest source
on both the economic and legal sides of the sanctions as of income for Iran [3]. The trend in Iran’s oil export can be
well as their effectiveness in restricting Iran’s activities in seen in Figure 1.
the region. Moreover, the re-imposition of sanctions has had
a signiﬁcant impact on Iranian individuals rather than the
government which will be clariﬁed later on in the paper.
II. SANCTIONSFROMANECONOMICPERSPECTIVE
To brieﬂy review the economic impact of sanctions on
Iran, one might not ﬁnd a better way but to choose a few
relevant economic factors and investigate their ﬂuctuations
over a time frame of interest. Firstly, however, a description
oftheeconomicsanctionsimposedisnecessary.Accordingto
the US Congressional Research Service [2], there will be a
trade ban on Iran for the following industries: Fig.1. IslamicRepublicofIranoilexportoverthelast10years
• Oil sale and transaction
Sanctions imposed previously on Iran by the Obama admin-
• Transshipment and brokering
istration decreased Iran’s production and oil export by more
• Iranian Luxury goods such as carpet and caviar
than 60% to as low as 1,086,000 barrels per day in 2014.
• Shipping insurance
The only favourable event for Iran during this period was the
• Commercial Airline sales
high price of oil which clearly peaked in 2014 according to
It seems only logical to focus on a few economic factors in
Figure 2. Figures 1 and 2 tell a rather disturbing story of
this paper. The ones most common citizens are affected by
Iran losing over 160 billion dollars of revenue from 2012
are: to 2015 [4]. JCPOA was signed on July 14th, 2015 and the
1) Iran’s Oil Exportation jump in early 2016 along with the sudden increase in Iran’s
2) Iran’s Exports and Imports production illustrates a positive consequence of the nuclear
3) Inﬂation, Gross Domestic Products (GDP) and Eco- deal. It is worth mentioning that despite Iran’s quick return to
nomic Growth fullproductioncapacity,muchlessrevenuewasearneddueto
4) Unemployment Rate and the Currency Exchange Rate the historic drop in oil market price. Therefore, with current
Since Iran’s economy started to drift away most signiﬁcantly sanctions reducing Iran’s production even more, not a very
during Trump’s administration, it is sensible to closely follow good fate could be predicted for the country.have paid off. Caution must be taken when analysing imports
and the BoT plots since the government has reduced imports
signiﬁcantly in the last 4 or 5 months to decrease the demand
for foreign currencies as means to control the chaotic market
and drastic drop in the value of Iranian Rial. Hence, the
decrease and increase predicted for the imports and BoT
respectively do not represent the forced economy of Iran.
C. Inﬂation, Gross Domestic Products (GDP) and Economic
Growth
Fig.2. PriceofOilperbarreloverthelast10years Inﬂation and GDP are the most relevant factors describing
the living standards and the economic pressure under which
people are currently living. Fluctuations in Inﬂation, GDP,
B. Iran’s Exports and Imports
GDP per capita and GDP growth rate are all summarised in
Since Iran has always been subjected to sanctions which Figure 4 for a straightforward comparison.
mostly target its oil production, the government started devis-
ing policies and regulations for an oil-independent economy.
GDP–in	USD	Billion GDP	per	capita	–in	USD	
Therefore,aquickreviewofIran’soil-independentexport,im-
port and balance of trade may give a more precise description
of the economy. Figure 3 summarises and predicts the trends
in all three factors [5].
GDP	Growth	Rate	–in	% Inflation	–in	%
Exports	–in	USD	
thousands
Fig.4. Iran’sGDP,GDPpercapita,GDPgrowthrateandInﬂationoverthe
courseofthelast10years
Figure 4 demonstrates how signiﬁcantly the economic sanc-
tions hit the everyday-life of people in Iran and how the
government seem to have lost complete control over the
economy during these periods. Iran’s GDP and GDP per
capita has very sudden drops in all years when the sanctions
Imports	–in	USD	
thousands were tightened. Yet again a sudden and abrupt jump in both
GDP and GDP per capita in the 2016-2017 transition period
indicates how much Iran’s economy is affected by sanctions
which could also be seen from the GDP growth rate changing
from -5% to over 15% during a 12-month period. Inﬂation,
as expected, follows the trend and always seem to rise when
political tensions are high and new sanctions are imposed.
There is one very distinct and alarming difference between
Iran’s economy today and 8 years ago in 2011. Iran went
Balance	of	Trade
in	USD	thousands through previous rounds of sanctions with a very high GDP
whereas Iran today has a much lower GDP entering the new
rounds of sanctions. This fact, combined with a peak inﬂation
rate, could possibly describe the few very bad years that
potentially lie ahead of Iranians.
D. Unemployment Rate and The Currency Exchange Rate
Unemployment rate might seem to be rather unrelated to
sanctions but It seems rather important to include that in the
Fig.3. Iran’sexports,ImportsandBalanceofTrade review as an economic indicator for ordinary people. The
unemployment rates and the trends are shown in Figure 6 for
Iran’sexporthasincreasedandispredictedtoincrease,demon- youths and for adults over the last 10 years [6]. The exchange
strating that, to some extent, policies on oil-free economy rateorthevalueofIranianRialhasdroppedverybadlyduringthe last 8 months, which has caused unimaginable problems. much less resources than before. Consequences are rather
Figure 5 demonstrates how chaotic and unstable the value of catastrophic for the people on an average income and below,
Rial is [7]. whichincludesmorethan80percentofindividualswholivein
IranbasedonGDPpercapitaandthepovertybaseline[4],[8].
Hence, questioning the effectiveness of sanctions on Iranian
authorities seems to be logical.
III. SANCTIONSFROMALEGALPERSPECTIVE
By using UN charter provisions and principles, I have
elaboratedontheillegitimacyofimposedeconomicembargoes
against Iran. The illegitimacy of such foreign policies by the
US then is examined in more detail in two speciﬁc cases of
human rights and the aviation industry.
A. Legitimacy of economic sanction on Iran
Fig.5. TheOfﬁcialValueofRialinUSDSince2009 It is clear that the most important obligation of the UN
charter is to preserve international peace and security under
There seems to be less clear and linear correlation between Article 24 of the charter, and in accordance with 7th chapter
sanctionsandunemploymentrates.However,sinceunemploy- of the charter [9] “the security council shall determine the
ment originates from economic issues, one could relate the existence of any threat to the peace, or act of aggression and
two. The youth unemployment rate is alarmingly high and shallmakerecommendation,ordecidewhatmeasuresshallbe
has increased rapidly in the last few years, which yet again, taken in accordance with Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or
does not imply a bright future. restore international peace and security.”
In recent years, Iran has been targeted by many different
sanctions by the U.S for its peaceful nuclear activities, with
Adult Unemployment Rate
respect to the fact that achieving peaceful nuclear activities
based on NPT is a certain right of states [10]. However,
liftinganembargohassevereimplicationsondifferentsectors
of Iran and will stagnate the economy and trade balance.
Imposing sanctions in the form of restricting imports and
exports contradicts the current economic system founded by
the West. In fact, by accepting these terms any violation of
theirfreedomisaviolationoftheirbasicrights.Sanctionsare
notthebestwaytoresolveconﬂictsbutthemosteffectiveway
to endanger peace. United Nations Conference on Trade and
Youth Unemployment Rate
Development (UNCTAD) stated that “These measures do not
help to create a peaceful atmosphere, which is necessary for
development”inaresolution;theyalsostatedintheresolution
titled “rejection of coercive economic measures” that “All
developedcountriesshouldavoidtraderestrictions,blockades,
bansontradeandothereconomicsanctionsincompatiblewith
theprovisionsoftheUNCharteragainstdevelopingcountries,
asaformofpoliticalcoercion,whichaffectstheeconomicand
social development of these countries” [9] [10].
Fig.6. Iran’sUnemploymentRatesOverTheLast10years
B. Human Rights Violation
The embargo imposed by the U.S produces considerable
E. Conclusion
humanitarian-related implications. For instance, it was re-
The unofﬁcial and market-priced Rialhas lost two-thirds of ported in 2018 that the re-imposition of sanctions against Iran
its value in the last 6 months, much of which was after the might inhibit the ﬂow of humanitarian goods to Iranians and
United States formally withdrew from the nuclear agreement contribute to a shortage of medicine to treat ailments due to
in May. It is clear from the economic factors considered that the evaporation of available transactions ﬁnancing [2].
Iran is about to be isolated again economically, which will Article2and28oftheUniversalDeclarationofHumanRights
decrease trade and prevents Tehran from selling oil unlike accordingly declares that “no distinction shall be made on the
the past two years. Unlike two years ago, it was observed basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of
that Iran is entering a period of ﬁnancial difﬁculty with the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether itbe independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any other IV. CONCLUSION
limitation of sovereignty and everyone is entitled to a social
A few conclusions could be drawn after spending a couple
and international order in which the rights and freedoms set
of pages reviewing sanctions from two different perspective.
forth in this declaration can be fully realised.” Therefore, the
It is clear from all economic factors that the newly im-
basic rights of people should not be threatened under any
posed sanctions have already and will hit Iran’s economy
condition. Many Iranians have a low standard of living and
extremely severely however, this embargo is inconsistent with
their complications have been escalated by imposed sanctions
international cooperation and governments are obliged not to
as brieﬂy demonstrated earlier in the paper as well as in
undertakesuchactionsbasedon[9].Moreover,sanctionswere
Figures 1 to 6.
imposedmainlytorestrictIran’sactivitiesintheregionyetthe
budget for Iranian revolutionary guard and army have been
C. The Aviation Industry in Iran and Safety
increased considerably in the last 12 months [13]. Therefore,
According to re-imposed sanctions, licenses for sales of despite the intentions behind such sanctions, Iranians seem to
commercial aircraft was revoked after November 2018. How- be targeted to face economic and social challenges. Economic
ever, based on article 44 of the Chicago convention “the aims sanctions should be imposed with legitimacy and proper
andobjectivesoftheorganisationaretodeveloptheprinciples regulationsuchthatitdoesn’tthreatenciviliansinthecountry.
andtechniquesofinternationalairnavigationandtofosterthe Hence, such actions should be prevented and even criticised
planninganddevelopmentofinternationalairtransport”which heavily by other countries because of its possible adverse
is summarised to: impact on international peace and security.
• Ensure the safe and orderly growth of international civil REFERENCES
aviation throughout the world;
[1] Jointcomprehensiveplanofaction. 2015.
• Encourage the arts of aircraft; design and operation for [2] Iransanctions. CongressionalResearchService,2019.
peaceful purposes [3] Reportonoilindependenteconomyforiran.
[4] WorldBankGroup. MPO,pages154–155,2018.
• Encourage the development of airways, airports, and air
[5] Irancentralbankreport,2010-2017.
navigation facilities for international civil aviation; [6] Statisticalcentreofiranannualreport,2010-2018.
• Meet the needs of the world for safe, regular, efﬁcient [7] Xeofﬁcialexchangerate.
[8] Povertyiniranbyisna-iranstudentsnewsassociation.
and economical air transport;
[9] Article39Chapter5UNCharter,2018.
• Prevent economic waste caused by unreasonable compe- [10] vali golmohammadi and peyman Imani. The legitimacy of economic
tition; sanctions against islamic republic of iran in the light of international
economiclaw. MCSER,7(3):61–71,2016.
• Ensure that the rights of contracting states are fully
[11] Article44ofchicagoconvention.
respected and that every contracting state has a fair [12] Fightglobalwebpage.
opportunity to operate international airlines; [13] Iran’s2018-2019budgetdetailedreportbbcpersian.
• Avoid discrimination between contracting states;
• Promote safety of ﬂight in international air navigation;
• Promote generally the development of all aspects of
international civil aeronautics.” [11]
Sanctions against importation of commercial aircraft and
parts to Iran took effect in early August 2018. However,
the International Court of Justice in The Hague states that,
while some of Irans rights under the treaty might have been
affectedbytheUSconsiderationofnationalsecurityinterests,
it views other rights such as those relating to the import
of humanitarian goods, or services to ensure civil aviation
safety as not being so. Some of these rights, it adds, are such
that disregardingthem “may entailirreparable consequences”,
notably if they expose people to threats to health and life. “In
[thecourt’s]opinion,themeasuresadoptedbythe[USA]have
the potential to endanger civil aviation safety in Iran and the
livesofitsuserstotheextentthattheypreventIranianairlines
from acquiring spare parts and other necessary equipment [or
services],” it says. The US government, in line with the 1955
treaty, “must remove” any impediments to the free export of
spares,equipmentandservicesnecessarytopreservesafetyof
civilaviation.Asimilarrulingcoveringtheexportofmedicine
and agricultural commodities has also been issued by the
primary judicial agency of the United Nations. [12].