INDIANS AND INVADERS:  THE CMZENSHIP CLAUSE AND
ILLEGAL AIENS
GerardN  . Magliocca*
The Fourteenth  Amendment affirms the ancient and fundamental rule  of
citizenship  by birth within  the  territory,  in  the allegiance  and  under the
protection of the country, including all children here born of resident aliens,
with the exceptions and qualifications (as old as the rule itself) of children of
foreign sovereigns or their ministers, or born on foreign public ships, or of
enemies within and during a hostile occupation of part of our territory, and
with the single additional exception  of children of members  of the Indian
tribes owing direct allegiance to their several tribes.
-United  States v. Wong Kim Ark'
A constitutional  amendment may be required  to change the rule whereby
birth in this country automatically confers U.S. citizenship, but I doubt it.
2
-Richard  Posner
INTRODUCTION
Immigration  both  defines  and  challenges  our  national  identity,
and hence few topics stir more intense feelings than the treatment of
illegal aliens (or undocumented workers).'  In the current debate on
this issue, the courts are taking a back seat to militias, street protests,
talk radio, and populist books that are all trying to redefine the legal
culture.4  Nonetheless,  one part of this cacophony that may spill over
*  Professor, Indiana University School of Law-Indianapolis.  J.D., Yale University  1998;
B.A., Stanford University 1995.  Thanks to my colleagues Dan Cole and Maria Lopez for
their thoughtful comments.
1  169 U.S. 649,693-94 (1898).
2  Oforji v. Ashcroft, 354 F.3d 609, 621 (7th Cir. 2003) (PosnerJ., concurring).
3  Even the terminology used to describe this phenomenon is controversial, as many observ-
ers think that "illegal alien" is a pejorative term.  This Article nonetheless uses that phrase
because it is the most common one in public discourse.
4  See, e.g., Peter Yoxall, Comment, The Minuteman Project, Gone in a Minute or Here to Stay?
The Origin, History and Future of Citizen Activism on the United States-Mexico Border, 37 U.
MIAMI INTER-AM. L. REv. 517 (2006) (describing a citizen militia that seeks to draw atten-
tion to illegal immigration); Sonya Geis & Michael Powell, Hundreds of Thousands Rally in
 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=965268 JOURNAL OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAVW  [Vol. 10:3
into litigation is the rule  that a child born here  to illegal aliens is a
•  •  5
citizen.  This constitutional custom was not contested for most of the
twentieth century but is now under sharp attack for rewarding unlaw-
ful action and providing an incentive for foreigners  to cross  the bor-
der.6  Indeed,  no less an  authority than Judge  Richard  Posner says
that  the  current  citizenship  policy  for  these  children  "makes  no
sense" and can be repealed by a federal statute.
The  origin  of a  challenge  to  constitutional  orthodoxy  is  often
hard to pinpoint, but in this case  the revisionism  can be traced to a
book written by Peter H. Schuck and Rogers M. Smith in the 1980s.s
They  argued  that the  Fourteenth  Amendment's  mandate-that  all
persons  born here must  also  be "subject to  the jurisdiction" of the
United States to be citizens-could be read to exclude the children of
illegal aliens.9 The historical support for this claim rests in large part
Cities Large and Small, WASH. POST, Apr. 11,  2006, at A8 (noting how hundreds of thou-
sands joined in a national "Day of Action" against what they saw as a punitive immigration
bill).  For some recent popular books that take a critical look at the issue, see generally
PATRICK J.  BUCHANAN,  STATE  OF  EMERGENCY:  THE  THIRD  WORLD  INVASION  AND
CONQUEST OF AMERICA  (2006);  LOU  DOBBS,  WAR ON THE  MIDDLE CLASS:  HOW THE
GOVERNMENT,  BIG BUSINESS,  AND SPECIAL INTEREST  GROUPS ARE WAGING WAR ON THE
AMERICAN DREAM AND HOW To FIGHT BACK (2006).
5  This principle does not rest on any judicial holding.  It is based instead on dictum from
the Wong Kim Ark case and longstanding practice.  See Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. at 693-94;
see also David A. Martin, Membership and Consent: Abstract or Organic?, 11 YALEJ. INT'L L.
278,  280-81  (1985)  (reviewing  PETER  H. SCHUCK  & ROGERS  M.  SMITH,  CITIZENSHIP
WITHOUT CONSENT:  ILLEGAL ALIENS IN THE AMERICAN POLITY (1985))  ("Dictum so widely
repeated and, apparently, so easily accepted by nearly all Americans may deserve more
respect.... .").  Thus, it is more accurate to call the rule a form of customary constitu-
tional law.
6  See SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 94-95 ("When... combined with the powerful lure
of the expanded entitlements conferred upon citizen children and their families by the
modern welfare state, the total incentive effect of birthright citizenship may well become
significant."); Charles Wood, Losing Control of America's Future-The Census, Birthright Citi-
zenship, and Illegal Aliens, 22 HARV.J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 465, 497 (1999)  (contending that the
rule "creates a significant additional incentive for illegal immigration").
7  Ofoji, 354 F.3d at 621  (Posner,J., concurring).  The constitutional custom is codified in 8
U.S.C. § 1401 (2005), and hence Congress would need to take action to alter the status of
future children born here to illegal immigrants.
8  See SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 5 (stating that a change in the birthright citizenship
for children of illegal aliens "has to our knowledge never been seriously considered"); see
also GERALD L. NEUMAN, STRANGERS TO THE CONSTITUTION:  IMMIGRANTS, BORDERS, AND
FUNDAMENTAL LAW 166 (1996)  (identifying Schuck and Smith's book as the source of the
revisionist claims); Joseph  H. Carens,  Who Belongs?  Theoretical and Legal Questions About
Birthright Citizenship in the United States, 37 U. TORONTO L.J. 413, 430 (1987)  (noting that
prior to Schuck and Smith's book, "[flew issues of constitutional law ha[d] seemed more
clearly settled than birthright citizenship").
9  U.S. CONST. amend. XIV, § 1 ("All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and
subject  to the jurisdiction  thereof, are citizens of the United States.... ."); SCHUCK &
 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=965268 Mar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
on the fact that the "subject to the jurisdiction" clause excluded the
Native American Tribes from birthright citizenship.0  Drawing on this
point, Schuck  and Smith reasoned  that the text requires more than
"the  individual's  subjection  to the  government's  police  power  and
criminal jurisdiction.""  In their view, there must also be "a reciprocal
relationship between them at the time of birth, in which the govern-
ment consented to the individual's presence  and status and offered
him  complete  protection.02  Though  this  analysis  is  not widely ac-
cepted, the book remains an important touchstone in the illegal im-
migration debate.13
This Article untangles the citizenship issue for the children  of il-
legal aliens  by showing  that Schuck  and  Smith's  analogy to  Native
Americans is flawed for two reasons.  First, the Framers  of the Four-
teenth Amendment viewed  the  "subject to the jurisdiction" (or citi-
zenship)  clause as a way of enhancing tribal autonomy, not as a tool
for limiting citizenship.14 As a result, the text does not have an exclu-
SMITH, supra note 5, at 6 (stating that this "expresses a constitutional commitment to citi-
zenship based on mutual consent-the consent of the national community as well as that
of the putative individual member"); Wood, supra note 6, at 509 ("[T]he rationale  that
underlies the denial of birthright citizenship to the children of parents who are not fully
subject to the formal jurisdiction of the United States applies also to parents who are con-
tinuously disobedient, yet cannot in a practical sense be brought before United States
courts to answer for it.").
10  See Elk v. Wilkins, 112 U.S. 94, 102 (1884)  (confirming this interpretation); S. REP. No.
41-268, at 10 (1870)  ("[T]hose who framed the [F]ourteenth  [A]mendment...  under-
stood that the Indian tribes were not made citizens, but were excluded by the restricting
phrase, 'and subject to the jurisdiction' ....);N EUMAN, supra note 8, at 167 (stating that
Schuck and Smith "focused especially on the denial of citizenship to Native Americans liv-
ing under tribal authority").
11  SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 86.
12  Id.
13  See, e.g., Oforji v. Ashcroft, 354 F.3d 609, 621  (7th Cir. 2003)  (Posner, J., concurring) (cit-
ing Schuck and Smith's book as authority for his conclusion that Congress probably can
repeal by statute birthright citizenship for children born here to illegal aliens); Dan Stein
& John Bauer, Interpreting the 14th Amendment:  Automatic Citizenship for Children of Illegal
Immigrants?, 7 STAN. L. & POL'Y REv. 127, 127-28 (1996)  (relying on Schuck and Smith to
reach the same conclusion).  For some of the criticisms, see Christopher L. Eisgruber,
Birthright Citizenship and the Constitution, 72 N.Y.U. L. REv. 54, 65-85 (1997)  (attacking the
normative claims of Schuck and Smith); Neil Gotanda, Race, Citizenship, and the Searchf or
Political Community Among "We the People,"76 OR. L. REV. 233, 248-55 (1997)  (pointing out
that Schuck and Smith fail to consider the racial implications of their proposal); David S.
Schwartz,  The Amorality of Consent, 74 CAL.  L. REV.  2143,  2152-57  (1986)  (reviewing
SCHUCK & SMITH,  supra note 5)  (rejecting the moral claim of their mutual consent the-
ory).
14  See GERARD N. MAGLIOCCA, ANDREW JACKSON AND THE CONSTITUTION:  THE RISE AND FALL
OF GENERATIONAL REGIMES 88-93, 118-23 (2007) (exploring how the abuses inflicted on
the Tribes influenced the Fourteenth Amendment).
 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=965268 JOURNAL OF CONST ITUTIONAL LA W [Vol. 10:3
sionary gloss that should be extended by construction.  The revision-
ists' failure to consider this point reflects a broader problem with our
reading of the Fourteenth Amendment.  While its drafters viewed Na-
tive Americans  and African Americans  as part of the  same battle for
freedom, judges  and scholars  tend  to ignore the tribal side  of this
story.  That ongoing omission is harmful because it diminishes the re-
sources available to interpret the landmark  provisions of that funda-
mental constitutional text, including the Citizenship Clause.
More  important, comparing illegal  immigrants  with  original  na-
tive-born  inhabitants  is conceptually  incoherent  and leads  to an in-
terpretive dead-end.  The more appropriate analogy is between illegal
aliens and enemy aliens.15  At common law,  the children born to en-
emy soldiers in hostile occupation within the dominions of the Crown
were  not considered subjects.'6  This exception was widely accepted
here when  the Fourteenth  Amendment was  ratified and provides  a
clear theory for denying  citizenship  to the  offspring  of "invaders."'7
Accordingly, the question that we should be asking is whether illegal
immigration is tantamount to a hostile invasion.  This analysis is not
only more  consistent with  the text of the  Citizenship  Clause,  but it
also directly engages the views of those who believe that illegal aliens
pose a threat to our national security.
Part I reviews  the law on birthright citizenship and  then lays out
the competing view of Schuck and Smith.  Part II examines the rela-
tionship  between  the  Tribes  and  the  Fourteenth  Amendment  and
shows that the  evidence  cuts against the claim that the treatment of
the Tribes stamps an exclusionary meaning on the "subject to the ju-
risdiction" clause.  Part III argues that a better approach would be to
take a fresh look at the common law exception for children born to
enemy soldiers in hostile occupation and concludes under that analy-
15  Only one article explores this angle  (albeit briefly).  See Wood, supra note 6, at 506-08
(drawing on the distinction in Coke's jurisprudence between enemy aliens and aliens in
amity).
16  See, e.g., A. V. DICEY, A DIGEST OF THE LAW OF ENGLAND WITH REFERENCE TO THE CONFLICT
OF LAWs 167 (2d ed. 1908) ("Any person who (his father being an alien enemy) is born in
a part of the British dominions which at the time of such person's birth is in hostile occu-
pation, is an alien.").
17  See, e.g., Inglis v. Trs. of Sailor's Snug Harbour, 28 U.S. (3 Pet.) 99, 156 (1830)  (Story, J.,
dissenting)  ("[T]he children of enemies, born in a place within the dominions of an-
other sovereign, then occupied by them by conquest, are still aliens .... .");JAMES KENT, 2
COMMENTARIES ON AMERICAN LAW 90 (spec. ed.,  1986)  (1827)  (stating that children of
aliens born here in hostile occupation were not citizens); see also Calvin's Case, (1608)  77
Eng. Rep. 377, 398-99 (KB.)  (establishing this rule).Mar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
sis  that illegal immigration  is not the functional equivalent of a for-
eign invasion for citizenship purposes.
I. THE CHALLENGE TO AN AGE-OLD RULE
This  Part  traces  the doctrine  on birthright citizenship  from  the
common law through the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Under the  conventional view of these authorities, a child born here
to aliens is a citizen so long as the United States has legal and actual
authority  over  the  parents-including  illegal  aliens.8   Schuck  and
Smith read these same sources as holding that reciprocal consent to
citizenship is required  by the Fourteenth Amendment, which would
exclude illegal aliens.'9  This split between the  territorial and mutual
allegiance interpretations  of the "subject to the jurisdiction"  clause
defines the current impasse.
A.  Birthright Citizenship and the Common Law
One  fundamental  premise  of Anglo-American jurisprudence  is
that any child born within the dominion and under the authority of
18  See, e.g., Societal and Legal Issues Surrounding Children Born in the United States to Illegal Alien
Parents: Joint Hearing on H.R. 705, H.R. 1363, H.J. Res. 56, H.J. Res. 64, H.J. Res. 87, H.j
Res. 88, and H.J. Res. 93 Before the Subcomm. on Immigration & Land Claims and the Subcomm.
on the Constitution of the H. Comm. on theJ udiciaiy, 104th Cong. 103-04 (1995)  (statement
of Gerald L. Neuman, Professor, Columbia University Law School)  ("[S]ubject to the ju-
risdiction," in the Citizenship Clause "means actual subjection to the lawmaking power of
the United States.... The common law exceptions included children of foreign diplo-
mats, who were legally immune from domestic law, and children born to women accom-
panying invading armies, who were practically immune from domestic law."); Wood, su-
pra note 6, at 518 (stating that the Citizenship Clause's "subject to" phrase "requires not
only formal jurisdiction, but also more than some minimum degree of actual power on
the part of the United States to bring the parents to justice for disobeying federal law");
see also In re Look Tin Sing, 21 F. 905, 906 (C.C.D. Cal. 1884) (stating thatjurisdiction un-
der the Citizenship Clause must be "actual and exclusive").
19  See SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5,  at 116  ("[The Citizenship Clause] should be read to
embody the public law's conception of consensual  membership, and therefore to refer
only to... citizens and legal resident aliens."); see also Michael Gunlicks, Note, Citizenship
as a Weapon in Controlling the Flow of Undocumented Aliens: Evaluation of ProposedD  enials of
Citizenship to Children of Undocumented Aliens Born in the United States, 63 GEO. WASH. L. REV.
551, 567 (1995)  ("[Schuck and Smith] argue that a consensual allegiance to the United
States and  consensual  protection  by the  United States,  not territorial  happenstance,
should be the bases of citizenship for everyone.").  Critics respond that the Fourteenth
Amendment itself gave consent to birth citizenship and the contemporary consent of
Congress is not required.  See NEUMAN, supra note 8, at 169 ("[A] consensual approach to
citizenship need not imply anything about the powers of Congress.").  Thus, a more accu-
rate description of the revisionist view is that Congress retains the discretion to exclude il-
legal aliens from citizenship.JOURNAL OF CONSTTfUTONAL LA W [Vol. 10:3
the sovereign  is a citizen.0   In the seventeenth  century,  Lord Coke
held, "Every man is either alienigena, an alien born, or subditus, a sub-
ject born.  Every alien is either a friend  that is in league,  &c.  or an
enemy that is in open war ....",   With respect to enemy aliens, Coke
said that if they "surprise any castle or fort, and  possess the same by
hostility, and have  issue there, that issue is  no subject  to  the King,
though he  be born within  his dominions, for that he was not born
under  the  King's  ligeance  or  obedience., 22   By  contrast, allied  or
friendly aliens "owed to the King local obedience,  that is, so long as
he was within the King's protection; which local obedience, being but
momentary  and uncertain,  is  yet strong  enough to make  a  natural
subject;  for if he  hath  issue here,  that issue  is  a natural  born sub-
ject .... The only exception to this rule was an ambassador, who
,,2' 
was an official representative  of a foreign prince and thus owed him
allegiance even when abroad.24
Although  Coke's reasoning relied on a feudal premise about the
indissoluble  tie  between  lord  and  subject,  his  formulation  was
adopted  by the  United  States.25  The Supreme  Court observed  that
20  See United States v. Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. 649, 655 (1898)  ("The fundamental princi-
ple of the  common  law with  regard  to English nationality  was birth  within the alle-
giance .... ."); see also Inglis, 28 U.S. (3 Pet.) at 164 (Story, J., dissenting)  ("Nothing is bet-
ter settled at the common law than the doctrine that the children even of aliens born in a
country, while the parents are resident there under the protection of the government,
and owing a temporary allegiance thereto, are subjects by birth.").
21  Calvin's Case, 77 Eng. Rep. at 397; see PollyJ. Price, NaturalL aw and Birthright Citizenship
in Calvin's Case  (1608), 9 YALEJ.L. & HUMAN.  73,  74 (1997)  ("Calvin's Case became the
basis of the American common-law rule of birthright citizenship, a rule that was later em-
bodied in the Fourteenth Amendment.  ..." (footnote omitted)).
22  Calvin's Case, 77 Eng. Rep. at 399.
23  Id. at 384; cf Schooner Exch. v. McFaddon, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch) 116, 144 (1812)  ("When
private individuals of one nation spread themselves through another as business or ca-
price may direct,..,  it would be obviously inconvenient and dangerous..  .if such indi-
viduals or merchants did not owe temporary and local allegiance, and were not amenable
to the jurisdiction of the country.").
24  See Calvin's Case, 77 Eng. Rep. at 399 ("[11f any of the King's ambassadors in foreign na-
tions, have children there of their wives, being English women, by the common laws of
England they are natural-born subjects, and yet they are born out of the King's domin-
ions."); see also Inglis, 28 U.S. (3 Pet.) at 155 ("[T]he children of an ambassador are held
to be subjects of the prince whom he represents, although born under the actual protec-
tion and in the dominions of a foreign prince.").
25  See Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. at 707 (Fuller, CJ., dissenting) ("The rule was the outcome of
the connection in feudalism between the individual and the soil on which he lived, and
the allegiance due was that of liegemen to their liege lord."); Bernadette Meyler, The Ges-
tation of Birthright Citizenship, 1868-1898 States' Rights, The Law of Nations, and Mutual Con-
sent, 15 GEO. IMMIGR. L.J. 519, 528 (2001)  ("Courts in the early United States continued
to follow the jus soli principles that Coke had articulated in Calvin's Case."). A related ex-
ception was created for anyone born on a foreign public ship in our waters.  See SchoonerMar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
the birth  citizenship  rule  for aliens  "does not appear to have  been
contested or doubted until more than fifty years after the adoption of
the  Constitution.''16   And when  a  challenge  was  made  in  Lynch  v.
Clarke,27 a New York court reaffirmed the common law approach and
rejected  a reciprocal consent theory  of citizenship.28  Indeed, Lynch
held that "every person born within the dominions and allegiance of
the  United  States,  whatever were  the situation  of his  parents,  is  a
29
natural born citizen.,
This unequivocal statement of liberty, like so many others in our
tradition, was not applied to slaves  and most Native Americans.  In
the slave  states,  positive law simply ousted the common law and  de-
nied African Americans  citizenship.0  The  Tribes presented a more
complex problem that had no common law counterpart.  While they
lived within the United States, most Native Americans retained their
tribal  identity  and  considered  themselves  as  coequal  sovereigns.31
This status was confirmed by the  regular practice  of signing treaties
Exch., 11 U.S. (7 Cranch) at 144-45 (holding that the United States lacks jurisdiction over
these vessels); In re Look Tin Sing, 21 F. 905, 906 (C.C.D. Cal. 1884)  ("Persons born on a
public vessel of a foreign country, while within the waters of the United States... are also
excepted.  They are considered as born in the country to which the vessel belongs.").
26  Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. at 664; see SCHUCK & SMITH,  supra note 5, at 57-58 ("[A]lthough
children born in America of alien parents were generally assumed to be citizens who pos-
sessed all the rights and obligations of that status, no court seems to have decided a case
directly on the question until Lynch v. Clarke, a New York case decided in 1844.").
27  1 Sand. Ch. 583 (N.Y. Ch. 1844).
28  Id. at 673-79; see also Carens, supra note 8, at 431  ("Lynch v. Clarke ...  explicitly rejected
Vattel's public law conception of consensual membership.").  Nevertheless, Schuck and
Smith find comfort in this decision because it proves that "the issue was still unsettled
even in 1844."  See SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 61.  This assertion is false.  Although
there were some treatise writers who argued against birthright citizenship, no court ever
accepted this view.
29  1 Sand. Ch. at 663; see In re Look Tin Sing, 21 F. at 909 (stating that the issue "was elabo-
rately considered" in Lynch and that the conclusion "was the general understanding of
the legal profession,  and the universal  impression  of the public mind").  This dictum
could be cited as support for birth citizenship of illegal aliens, but the holding of Lynch
addressed the status of a child born to a foreign visitor.  See Lynch, 1 Sand. Ch. at 638.
30  By this time, English law held that slavery was contrary to the common law presumption
of freedom and could only be supported by positive law.  See, e.g., Dred Scott v. Sandford,
60 U.S.  (19  How.)  393,  412-13  (1857)  (stating that in slave states, African-Americans
"have never been regarded as a part of the people or citizens of the State, nor supposed
to possess any political  rights which the dominant race might not withhold or grant at
their pleasure");  Somerset v. Stewart,  (1772)  98 Eng. Rep. 499, 510 (K.B.)  (Mansfield,
LJ.)  (stating that slavery is "so odious, that nothing can be suffered to support it, but
positive law").
31  For an illuminating discussion of these issues, see Chancellor Kent's opinion in Goodell v.
Jackson, 20 Johns. 693 (N.Y.  1823),  which held that tribal members owe allegiance to a
tribe and not to the United States.JOURNAL OF CONSTFFUTIONAL LAVW1  [Vol. 10:3
with the Tribes, just as the President did with foreign nations.  Thus,
the consensus view was that the United States lacked jurisdiction over
these "domestic dependent nations" and that the Tribes were on the
same legal plane as foreign ambassadors with respect to citizenship. 3
Among its many faults, Dred Scott v. Sandford broke with the com-
mon law tradition by holding that birthright citizenship did not apply
to free African Americans. 4  While the lead dissent observed that "it is
a principle  of public law,  recognised  by the Constitution itself, that
birth on the soil of a country both creates the duties and confers the
rights of citizenship,3 5 Chief Justice  Taney responded "that neither
the class of persons who had been imported as  slaves, nor their de-
scendants, whether they had  become  free or not, were ...  intended
to  be  included"  among  our  citizenry.36   As  Schuck  and  Smith ob
served,  "By making Dred  Scott's citizenship  turn  upon the  putative
will  and  intention  of  the  Framers  to  exclude  all  blacks  from  the
American  political  community, Taney  seemed  to embrace  the con-
sensual conception  of citizenship .... 3 7   Of course,  this result  was
overruled by the Fourteenth Amendment.38
32  See Worcester v. Georgia, 31 U.S.  (6 Pet.)  515, 559-61 (1832);  see also 6 REG. DEB. 349
(1830)  (statement of Sen. Sprague)  (stressing this point in opposing President Jackson's
plan to aid the removal of the Cherokees from Georgia).
33  See Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 30 U.S. (5 Pet.)  1, 17 (1831)  (establishing this definition
of the Tribes); see also Elk v. Wilkins, 112 U.S. 94, 100 (1884)  (explaining that the Tribes
were not subject to birthright citizenship prior to the Civil War).  The constitutional gen-
eration led by AndrewJackson reversed this view of tribal sovereignty, arguing that Con-
gress or the several states possessed full authority to govern the Tribes.  See United States
v. Rogers, 45 U.S. (4 How.) 567, 572 (1846) ("[Tlribes residing within the territorial lim-
its of the United States are subject to their authority, and where the country occupied by
them is not within the limits of one of the States, Congress may by law punish any offence
committed there.... ."); MAGLIOCCA, supra note 14, at 95 ("[A]sJackson had always main-
tained, Congress  and the states could govern Native  Americans without restriction.").
Even during this period, though, the Tribes retained their sovereignty in the sense that
the United States continued to make treaties with them, and thus birthright citizenship
did not apply.
34  See Dred Scott, 60 U.S. (19 How.) at 407 (stating that neither the Declaration of Independ-
ence nor historical legislation allows for such citizenship).
35  Id. at 578 (Curtis, J., dissenting); seeU.S. CONST. art. II, § 1, cl. 5 (stating that "[n]o Person
except a natural born Citizen" is eligible for the Presidency).
36  Dred Scott, 60 U.S. (19 How.) at 407.
37  SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 72.
38  In this sense, the revisionist argument that the Fourteenth Amendment repudiated  the
holding of Dred Scott but embraced its reasoning is implausible.  See Carens, supra note 8,
at 437 ("Schuck and Smith clearly want to repudiate, on moral grounds, the treatment of
blacks... endorsed by Dred Scott...  but at the same time they want to draw on the argu-
ments used to justify those decisions ....  This is a difficult and a dangerous line and one
that is ultimately impossible to sustain.").Mar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
B.  The Fourteenth Amendment and Wong Kim Ark
When  the Thirty-Ninth  Congress  got down to work, the  conven-
tional view is that they sought to affirm the common law approach to
birthright citizenship and extend the rule to the newly freed slaves.9
The Civil Rights Act of 1866, which was the direct antecedent of the
Fourteenth  Amendment,  held that "all persons  born in the United
States and not subject to any foreign power,  excluding Indians not
taxed, are hereby declared to be citizens of the United States.Oo  Dur-
ing  the debate  on  the Act, common  law precedents  such  as  Lynch
were cited to illustrate the meaning of birthright citizenship.4'  While
the language on "Indians not taxed" was taken from the Constitution
•  42
to  indicate  that the  exclusion  of the  Tribes  would  continue,  the
phrase "subject to any foreign power" referred to the traditional ex-
ceptions for children of ambassadors and enemy aliens in hostile oc-
cupation.
When Republicans decided to secure and broaden the Civil Rights
Act  through  the  Fourteenth  Amendment,  the  relevant  text  was
changed to say that all Americans "subject to the jurisdiction" of the
United States were birthright citizens.  Once again, the common law
39  See United States v. Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. 649, 675 (1898)  ("In the fore front, both of
the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution, and of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, the
fundamental principle of citizenship by birth within the dominion was reaffirmed in the
most explicit and comprehensive terms."); id. at 676 (stating that the Citizenship Clause
"is declaratory in form, and enabling and extending in effect").
40  Act of Apr. 9, 1866, ch. 31,  14 Stat. 27.
41  See CONG. GLOBE,  39th Cong.,  1st Sess. 1832  (1866)  (statement of Rep. Lawrence)  ("In
the great case of Lynch vs. Clarke, it was conclusively shown...  that all 'children  born
here are citizens without any regard to the political condition or allegiance of their par-
ents.'"); cf In re Look Tin Sing, 21 F. 905, 909 (C.C.D. Cal. 1884) (using Lynch to interpret
the text).
42  See U.S. CONST. art. I., § 2, cl.3  ("excluding Indians not taxed" for the apportionment of
representatives and direct taxes).  Congress granted  birthright citizenship to all Native
Americans by statute in 1924.  See Act of June 2, 1924, ch. 233, 43 Stat. 253 (current ver-
sion at 8 U.S.C. § 1401 (b) (2000)).
43  One scholar says that this language meant that "[a]ny child born on U.S. soil to parents
who were temporary visitors to this country and who, as a result of the foreign citizenship
of the child's parents, remained a citizen or subject of the parents' home country, was not
entitled to claim ...b irthright citizenship."  John C. Eastman, Politics and the Court: Did
the Supreme Court Really Move Left Because of Embarrassment over Bush v. Gore ? 94 GEO. L.J.
1475, 1486 (2006).  This expansive reading is not supported by any evidence, and is con-
tradicted by the citation to Lynch, which held that a child born to a foreign visitor is a citi-
zen. See Lynch v. Clarke, 1 Sand. Ch. 583, 683 (N.Y. Ch. 1844); CONG. GLOBE, 39th Cong.,
1st Sess. 498 (1866)  (statement of Sen. Trumbull) ("I understand that under the naturali-
zation laws the children who are born here of parents who have not been naturalized are
citizens. That is the law, as I understand it, at the present time.").JOURNAL OF CONSTITUTIONAL LA W [Vol. 10:3
was  invoked  to  define  this  language,  but  the  debate  centered  on
whether this substitute applied to the Tribes."  Some contended that
federal statutes already regulated  aspects  of tribal life and subjected
Native Americans to national jurisdiction."  Nonetheless, the phrase
was retained because the floor managers could not agree on a better
alternative.  Furthermore,  they countered that the Tribes were not
"subject to  the jurisdiction" of the  United  States because  they had
their own recognized governments.
In United States v. Wong Kim Ark,46 the Supreme Court held that the
Fourteenth Amendment adopted  the common law view of birthright
citizenship.46  Ruling  that children  born in the United States to Chi-
44  See, e.g., CONG. GLOBE,  39th Cong.,  1st Sess.  2890  (1866)  (statement of Sen. Howard)
("This amendment which I have offered is simply declaratory of what I regard as the law
of the land already ..  "); id. at 2769  (statement of Sen. Wade)  (invoking the foreign
ambassador exception).  Nothing in the debates sheds any light on the issue of illegal
aliens.  The only related reference came from a foe of the Amendment who complained
that it would grant birth citizenship to gypsies.  Id. at 2891 (statement of Sen. Cowan).
He argued that the State had a right to reject gypsies because they "invade her borders;
who owe to her no allegiance; who pretend to owe none; who recognize no authority in
her government; who  have a distinct, independent government of their own-an  im-
perium in imperio."  Id.  Some of these faults can be attributed to illegal immigrants, but
they do not have their own government.
45  Id. at 2892 (statement of Sen. Doolittle); id. at 2893-94 (statement of Sen.Johnson); id. at
2894-95 (statement of Sen. Hendricks).
46  See id. at 2894-97.  In particular, the formulation of "Indians not taxed" was rejected be-
cause it implied that states could control the definition of citizenship by changing tax pol-
icy and might introduce  wealth  discrimination into the Constitution.  See id. at 2894
(statement of Sen. Trumbull)  ("[1It would be very objectionable to insert those words
here, because it would make of a wealthy Indian a citizen and would not make a citizen of
one not possessed of wealth under the same circumstances."); id. at 2895 (providing a col-
loquy on whether changes in state taxes would affect Native American citizenship).
47  See  id. at 2895  (statement of Sen. Howard)  (explaining that "the jurisdiction  of the
[tribal] nation intervenes and ousts what would otherwise be perhaps a right ofjurisdic-
tion of the United States"); id. at 2893 (statement of Sen. Trumbull)  ("We make treaties
with them, and therefore they are not subject to our jurisdiction."); see also In re Look Tin
Sing, 21  F.  905, 909 n.2  (C.C.D. Cal.  1884)  ("These  tribes are independent political
communities, retaining, in many respects, the right of self-government...  ; and a mem-
ber thereof, though born in the country, is not, by his birth, a citizen of the United States,
under the [F]ourteenth [A]mendment.  He is not born under their actual and exclusive
jurisdiction, which the [A] mendment contemplates.").
48  169 U.S. 649, 681 (1898).
49  See id. at 563 ("The question ...  is whether a child born in the United States, of parents of
Chinese  descent,  who  at  the  time  of  his  birth  are  subjects  of  the  Emperor  of
China ....  and are not employed  in any diplomatic or official capacity ....  becomes at
the time of his birth a citizen of the United States.  ...").  In its first reading of the Four-
teenth Amendment, the Court stated, "The phrase 'subject to its jurisdiction'  was  in-
tended to exclude from its operation children of ministers, consuls, and citizens or sub-
jects of foreign States, born within the United States."  Slaughter-House  Cases, 83 U.S.
(16  Wall.)  36, 73 (1873).  This dicta from Slaughter-House was rejected as erroneous inMar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
nese  immigrants were  citizens,  the Justices  "detailed at some length
the  history of the  Citizenship  Clause,  and  the  predominantly  geo-
graphic sense in which  the term 'jurisdiction' was used."50  They con-
cluded that the purpose of the "subject to the jurisdiction" language:
[WIould appear to have been to exclude, by the fewest and fittest words,
(besides children of members of the Indian tribes, standing in a peculiar
relation to the National Government, unknown to the common law,)  the
two classes of cases-children  born of alien enemies  in hostile occupa-
tion, and children of diplomatic representatives of a foreign State-both
of which, as has already been shown....  had been recognized exceptions
to the fundamental rule of citizenship by birth within the country.
The emphasis on territoriality was an integral part of the common law
approach  dating back  to Coke,  which  held  that citizenship was  di-
rectly tied to the government's legal and practical authority.5
C.  A Mutual Consent Approach to Citizenship
The  Court has not revisited  Wong Kim Ark, but Schuck and Smith
offer a reading of the Citizenship Clause that connects the exclusions
to birthright citizenship with a principle of reciprocal  consent or al-
legiance.  After conceding that the common law held that citizenship
applied to aliens  "under circumstances in  which  the sovereign  pos-
sessed the power to provide protection to the subject and was actually
exercising it to at least some minimal degree," they argue that deter-
WongKim Ark.  See Wong Kim Ark 169 U.S. at 678 ("It was unsupported by any argument,
or by any reference to authorities; and.., was not formulated with the same care and ex-
actness,  as  if  the case  before  the  court  had  called  for  an  exact  definition  of the
phrase .... "). I was sympathetic to recent rehabilitation efforts on behalf of Slaughter-
House, see Kevin Christopher Newsom, Setting Incorporation Straight: A Reinterpretation of the
Slaughter-House Cases, 109 YALE L.J. 643, 648-49 (2000), but this error on the Citizen-
ship Clause leads me back to the conclusion that Justice  Miller's opinion for the Court
really was a sloppy effort.
50  Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 211 n.10 (1982).  At the time, this question was controversial
because naturalization laws barred parents of Asian descent from becoming citizens; thus,
some commentators argued that their children were excluded from birthright citizen-
ship.  See also Meyler, supra note 25, at 532-37 (describing the lively discussion of this is-
sue in the law reviews).
51  Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. at 682.
52  See supran otes 21-24 and accompanying test.  CompareC ONG. GLOBE, 39th Cong., 1st Sess.
2897 (1866)  (statement of Sen. Williams)  ("All persons living within ajudicial district may
be said, in one sense, to be subject to the jurisdiction of the court in that district, but they
are not in every sense subject to the jurisdiction  of the court until they are brought, by
proper process, within the reach of the power of the court."),  with Eastman, supra note
43, at 1488 (concluding that Wong Kim Ark did not "appreciate[]  the distinction between
partial, territorial jurisdiction, which subjects all who are present within the territory of a
sovereign  to the jurisdiction of its laws, and complete, political jurisdiction,  which re-
quires allegiance to the sovereign as well.").JOURNAL OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW [Vol. 10:3
mining status by birth was in tension with the  democratic ideal  that
citizenship was a matter of personal choice.5 For instance, the com-
' 
mon law held that citizenship  could not be renounced, as the bond
between  subject and King  was  perpetual.54   The  Founders  rejected
this  principle  in  the  Declaration  of Independence,  and  the same
Congress  that ratified  the Fourteenth  Amendment  also  passed the
Expatriation  Act,  which  stated that it was  "a  natural and  inherent
right  of all  people"  to renounce  their citizenship.5   Thus,  mutual
consent and birthright citizenship  were  each living traditions  when
the "subject to the jurisdiction" provision was written.
Schuck and Smith further contend that this clause modified birth-
right citizenship with a consent requirement, and their leading evi-
dence  comes  from  the  debate  about  the  Tribes.56  When  Senator
Trumbull  was asked why jurisdiction was lacking over the Tribes, he
said that the term meant "[n]ot owing allegiance  to anybody else."7
In  a  similar vein,  Senator  Howard  stated  that the Tribes  were  ex-
cluded because "full and complete" jurisdiction was required, which
53  SCHUCK & SMITH,  supra note 5, at 14; see id. at 23-36 (summarizing the arguments made
by Locke and other writers on behalf of a consent theory).  In most respects, Schuck and
Smith track the views expressed by the dissenters in Wong Kim Ark.  See Carens, supra note
8, at 434 ("The similarities between [the dissenters'] line of argument and the one ad-
vanced by Schuck and Smith could hardly be more striking.").  This is awkward because
they agree with the holding of the case,just as they disagree with the holding of Dred Scott
while backing its consent-based approach to citizenship.  See supra note 38.  One scholar
explains that "[t]he  unintended but inevitable consequence of Schuck and Smith's rea-
soning would be the symbolic rehabilitation of Dred Scott. ..and the symbolic repudiation
of Wong Kim Ark."  Carens, supra note 8, at 437.
54  See Calvin's Case, (1608)  77 Eng. Rep. 377, 407 (K.B.)  (stating that allegiance was irrevo-
cable).  Accordingly, the Royal Navy held that it had the right to impress Americans into
its service long after the Revolution because they were British subjects for life.  See also
SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 54.
55  SCHUCK & SMITH,  supra note 5, at 86-87; see also Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. at 711  (Fuller,
C.J., dissenting) ("[F]rom the Declaration of Independence to this day, the United States
have rejected the doctrine of indissoluble allegiance and maintained the general right of
expatriation, to be exercised in subordination to the public interests and subject to regu-
lation.").
56  See SCHUCK & SMITH,  supra note 5, at 85-86  (stating that the jurisdiction  rule "added to
the ineradicably ascriptive birthright citizenship rule a transforming consensual concep-
tion of the necessary connection between an individual and his government-a concep-
tion that was... more profoundly political than one emphasizing the individual's mere
presence on the soil at birth"); id. at 84-85 ("[T]he jurisdiction requirement was elabo-
rated most fully and carefully in connection with the congressional debates (and later ad-
judication) over the question of Indian birthright citizenship .... ").
57  CONG. GLOBE, 39th Cong.,  1st Sess. 2893 (1866)  (statement of Sen. Trumbull).  If this
quote were taken seriously, then dual citizenship would be prohibited. See Wong Kim Ark,
169 U.S. at 720 (Fuller, C.J., dissenting) ("[D]ouble allegiance in the sense of double na-
tionality has no place in our law.... .").Mar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
would be the same "in extent and quality as applies to every citizen of
the United States now.,58  Both statements support what Schuck and
Smith  describe  as  a "more demanding  formulation"  of jurisdiction
that required  national  authority and consent  to citizenship.59  They
also cite the Court's opinion in Elk v. Wilkins,60 which held the Tribes
were not entitled to birthright citizenship  because the clause  meant
"not merely subject in some respect or degree to the jurisdiction of
the  United States,  but completely  subject  to their political jurisdic-
tion,  and  owing  them  direct  and  immediate  allegiance.",61   In  the
Court's words, this expressed a "principle that no one can become  a
citizen of a nation without its consent."62
The revisionist argument does provide a reasonable  basis for the
continuation  of the  common law  exceptions  into  the  modern  era.
Instead of viewing  the ambassador and tribal categories as situations
where  the United States lacks the legal authority to grant birthright
citizenship, Schuck and Smith observe that in each case there was no
consent  to citizenship by both sovereigns. 63 Enemy aliens in hostile
occupation did not fall under the actual authority of the government
at common law, but one could also say that birthright citizenship was
inappropriate  because a sovereign did not consent to the presence of
foreign  troops on its soil.  Reciprocal  allegiance  therefore  makes as
much sense of these precedents as a territorial view ofjurisdiction.
Theories of territory and mutual allegiance part company on the
issue  of illegal aliens.  Stated simply, these  immigrants would be ex-
cluded from birth citizenship under a consent approach because the
58  CONG. GLOBE, 39th Cong., 1st Sess. 2895 (1866)  (statement of Sen. Howard).
59  SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 82-83.
60  112 U.S. 94 (1884).
61  Id. at 102  (1884).  In Wong Kim Ark, the Court limited this case to its facts.  See Wong Kim
Ark, 169 U.S. at 682 ("The decision in Elk v.  Wilkins concerned only members of the In-
dian tribes within the United States, and had no tendency to deny citizenship to children
born in the United States of foreign parents of Caucasian, African or Mongolian descent,
not in the diplomatic service of a foreign country.").
62  Elk, 112 U.S. at 103.  The issue in Elk was whether a Native American automatically be-
came a citizen when  he left his tribe and subjected himself to the jurisdiction  of the
United States.  Though there was significant evidence that the Framers of the Fourteenth
Amendment would have said yes, the Court held that these individuals would have to ap-
ply for naturalization just like any other alien.  See also Gerard N. Magliocca, The Cherokee
Removal and the Fourteenth Amendment, 53 DUKE LJ. 875, 945, 950 (2003)  (looking at the
decision and the legislative history).
63  See SCHUCK & SMITH,  supra note 5, at 85 (stating that "this privileged status of diplomats
was one to which both governments consented"); id. at 83 (stating that the Tribes "had
never chosen or been chosen to be United States citizens").JOURNAL OF CONSTITTFIONAL LA W [Vol. 10:3
United States does not consent to their presence.'  But under a for-
mulation  based  on  the authority of the federal government,  illegal
aliens are  included so long as  they are not beyond the reach of the
authorities,  as  is  the  case  when  territory  is  occupied  by  a foreign
power.  To resolve this dispute, we must choose between  these com-
peting readings of the "subject to the jurisdiction" clause.
D. Standard Criticisms of Schuck and Smith
There are many points that could be made in response to the revi-
sionist interpretation, but the two  that are  the most germane  to this
historical analysis relate to the textual meaning of jurisdiction and to
the presence  (or lack thereof)  of illegal aliens when  the Fourteenth
Amendment was written. 5  The first objection puts a lot of pressure
on Schuck and Smith's invocation of the Tribes' status as support for
their approach, while  the latter calls their entire  project  into ques-
tion.
All of the confident assertions that the word 'jurisdiction" in the
Citizenship Clause means "allegiance or consent" run up against the
problem  that this  is  not how the  term is  usually  defined.66  Justice
Holmes gave the standard explanation that "U]urisdiction  is power,"
by which he meant that the willingness of a party to be hailed before
a court is irrelevant.  For example, it would be strange if a criminal
defendant could assert a defense based on his lack of consent to the
State's prosecutorial authority.  Likewise,  illegal aliens in deportation
proceedings  would not get far by asserting  that the  tribunal  lacked
64  Given the lax enforcement of the immigration laws, one could say that the United States
is granting tacit consent to the presence of illegal aliens. The best understanding of the
Schuck and Smith position, however, is that formal consent is required by both parties for
birthright citizenship.
65  One of these criticisms would be on stare decisis grounds, which Schuck and Smith dismiss
as a "reflexive acceptance and legitimation  of the status quo."  SCHUCK & SMITH,  supra
note 5, at 131.  Another would address the pragmatic implications of any interpretive
change, such as the loss of "administrative clarity and simplicity of the current birthright
citizenship rule." Id. at 133.
66  See NEUMAN, supra note 8, at 171  ("The word jurisdiction has various meanings in Ameri-
can law, but it has never been defined in terms remotely resembling the elaborate con-
struct on which the revisionist argument depends.").
67  Cordova v. Grant, 248 U.S. 413, 419 (1919); seeJames C. Ho, Defining "American": Birth-
right Citizenship and the Original Understandingo f the Fourteenth Amendment, 9 GREEN BAG 2D
367, 368 (2006)  ("When we speak of an individual who is subject to the jurisdiction of a
court, he must follow the judgments and orders of that court, whether he likes  it or
not.").Mar. 2008] INDIANS AN)  INVADERS
jurisdiction because they did not consent6.8  This does not mean that
an alternative  reading is incorrect.69  It does indicate,  however, that
Schuck and Smith must rely on legislative history, rather than on the
ordinary meaning of the text, to make their case.  And as stated ear-
lier, their principal source is the debate on the Tribes.7°
The other obstacle to the revisionist argument is that illegal aliens
were  here when  the Fourteenth  Amendment was ratified,  and  they
received  birth citizenship just like everyone  else under the authority
of the United States.  A common refrain among critics of the current
constitutional custom  is that there were no illegal  immigrants when
the Citizenship  Clause was written;  hence,  the drafters did not con-
sider the  problem. 71 While  it  is  true  that no general  immigration
statute  was  enacted  until  after Reconstruction,  Gerald  L.  Neuman
points out that the immigration  (or importation) of slaves was barred
long before  the Civil War.72  Nonetheless, illegal smuggling of slaves
was  widespread  and  tens of thousands  entered  the  country  in this
fashion.73  Presumably, under a mutual consent theory of birthright
citizenship, the children of these illegal slaves could not be citizens.74
68  Indeed, one could say that illegal aliens are illegal precisely because they are subject to
the jurisdiction of the authorities under federal immigration law.
69  On the other hand, the Supreme Court held that illegal immigrants are "within the juris-
diction" of the states pursuant to the Equal Protection Clause.  Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S.
202, 211-13 (1982).  Thus, a persuasive explanation is required to show why "subject to
the jurisdiction" should be read differently.  See SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 157-58
n.40 (arguing that the words "subject to" and "within" bear different constructions);
Wood, supra note 6, at 520 (arguing that equal protection is not a zero-sum game the way
citizenship is).
70  See suprat ext accompanying notes 56-62.
71  See SCHUCK & SMITH, supra note 5, at 95; Wood, supra note 6, at 515.
72  See Plyler, 457 U.S. at 205 ("Since the late 19th century, the United States has restricted
immigration into this country."); NEUMAN, supra note 8, at 178 (describing the ban on the
foreign slave trade); see also U.S. CONST. art. I, § 9, cl. 1 (prohibiting Congress from re-
stricting the "Migration or Importation" of slaves until 1808); Act of Mar. 2, 1807, ch. 22,
2 Stat. 426 (prohibiting the importation of slaves into the United States as of January 1,
1808).  Neuman also says that illegal immigrants were familiar to the Framers of the Four-
teenth Amendment because states regulated immigration during the antebellum years.
See NEUMAN, supra note 8, at 176-78.
73  See NEUMAN, supra note 8, at 179  ("Conservative estimates of the numbers of illegally im-
ported  slaves put them  in the  tens of thousands.");  C. VANN WOODWARD,  AMERICAN
COUNTERPOINT  82 (1971)  (stating that an estimate of 54,000 for the number of illegal
slaves imported into the United States from 1808 to 1861 is "persuasive").  These captives
were subject to deportation back to Africa.  See Act of Mar. 3, 1819, ch. 101, 3 Stat. 532,
533  (authorizing the President to regulate the deportation of "all such negroes, mulat-
toes, or persons of colour" who are brought to the United States in connection with the
slave trade).
74  See NEUMAN, supra note 8, at 179 ("There is no consistent principle by which the citizen-
ship clause can be interpreted as simultaneously including all native-born former slavesJOURNAL OF CONS777IFTIONAL  LAW [Vol. 10:3
Since an interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment that does not
make all African Americans citizens is patently absurd, the reciprocal
allegiance theory appears inadequate. 
Neuman's  challenge  postdates  Schuck  and  Smith's  book,  but
there are at least two  responses  to his point on slavery.  The first is
that the transformative  thrust of the Fourteenth  Amendment on the
issue of racial justice could be read broadly to grant birth citizenship
to African Americans  in spite  of their illegal status.76  If that sounds
too radical, a more conventional answer is that the illegally imported
slaves were relatively few in number and constituted a de minimus ex-
ception to the mutual consent principle that cannot be applied to the
much greater number of illegal immigrants arriving now."7  For those
who  hold that there  should be no exceptions  based on sheer num-
bers,  it is worth  noting that the common  law's exclusion for enemy
aliens in hostile occupation  could easily be described as a de maximus
exception  to a territorial rule of birthright citizenship.  This suggests
that the enemy alien category deserves  more scrutiny than it gets in
the current debate on how illegal  aliens should be treated, both on
the slavery point and as a more general source of guidance.
In sum, the revisionist argument against birthright citizenship for
children of illegal immigrants turns on how the Framers of the Four-
teenth Amendment conceptualized the Tribes'  status under the Citi-
zenship Clause.  Although Schuck and Smith do an admirable job of
parsing the legislative history, the next Part explores the abolitionist
background that they ignore.
and excluding all children of parents to whose entry into the country the nation has not
consented.").
75  There is no indication in the legislative history, however, that the Framers of the Four-
teenth Amendment ever considered the issue of illegal slaves.
76  An analogous problem arose when the first African-American senator presented his cre-
dentials to the Senate Chamber in 1870, and Democrats asserted that he was ineligible to
serve as a senator because  the Constitution requires senators  to have been citizens for
nine years.  See Richard A. Primus, The Riddle of Hiram Revels, 119  HARv. L. REV.  1681,
1682-85 (2006) (exploring the constitutional and substantive justice aspects of the Senate
debate).  Since the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified in 1868, no African American in
1870 could claim nine years of citizenship without:  (1)  a rather creative reading of the
requirement,  or  (2)  an  acknowledgement  that  Reconstruction  worked  a  significant
change on behalf of racial equality that altered the textual meaning.
77  Another, less plausible answer to the illegal alien point holds that "it is at least misleading
to claim that there were  illegal aliens  at the  time of the framing of the Fourteenth
Amendment" because these aliens did not face "a significant risk of deportation."  Wood,
supra note 6, at 490.  Even if this were true, it is not clear why the means used to enforce
immigration laws is relevant to the question of their status with respect to birthright citi-
zenship.Mar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
II.  BIRTHRIGHT CITIZENSHIP AND THE TRIBES
This Part explores the reasons behind the decision to declare the
Tribes  beyond the  nation's jurisdiction, and links that choice  to the
broader  relationship  between  the  Fourteenth Amendment  and Na-
tive  Americans.  Though  the  abolitionist  movement  was  primarily
concerned with securing basic rights and equal treatment for African
Americans, discrimination  against Native Americans  also influenced
their thinking about these issues.  Schuck and Smith, like almost all
other interpreters  of Reconstruction,  miss  this point and fail to see
that the "subject to the jurisdiction" clause was actually part of an ef-
fort to enhance tribal rights rather than restrict them.  Thus, this lan-
guage  does not have  an  exclusionary cast  that can  be  extended by
construction  to give  Congress  the discretion  to deny birthright citi-
zenship for illegal alien children.
A.  The Trail of Tears and the March of Freedom
The catalyst for the popular  mobilization  that gave  us. the Four-
teenth Amendment  was  the  removal  of the Cherokees  from  Geor-
gia.7   Prior to that time,  most anti-slavery activists supported the de-
portation  of slaves,  not  abolition,  as  the  best  solution.79  When
President Andrew Jackson  sought to impose  a similar policy on  the
Cherokee  Tribe by shipping them into exile west of the Mississippi,
however, these  leaders were  appalled by  its brutal reality.s  Indeed,
78  The argument presented in this portion of the text is developed at much greater length
in my recent book onJacksonian Democracy and the Constitution.  See MAGLIOCCA, supra
note 14, at 88-93, 118-23.
79  See Mary Hershberger, Mobilizing Women, AnticipatingA bolition: The Struggle Against Indian
Removal in the 1830s, 86J. AM. HIST. 15, 35 (1999)  (noting that even William Lloyd Garri-
son, the vocal  abolitionist and editor of the Liberator, supported colonization  as late as
1829); see also RONALD G. WALTERS, THE ANTISLAVERY APPEAL:  AMERICAN ABOLITIONISM
AFTER 1830, at xi (1976)  (noting that the sudden conversion of the leaders of the anti-
slavery movement to an abolitionist view during the 1830s "haunts everything written on
the subject").
80  See Andrew Jackson, First Annual Message  (Dec. 8, 1829), in 2 A COMPILATION  OF THE
MESSAGES AND PAPERS OF THE PRESIDENTS, 1789-1897, at 442, 458 (James D. Richardson
ed., 1897)  (stating that he informed "the Indians inhabiting parts of Georgia and Ala-
bama that their attempt to establish an independent government would not be counte-
nanced by the Executive of the United States, and advised them to emigrate beyond the
Mississippi or submit to the laws of those States"); Linda K. Kerber, The Abolitionist Percep-
tion of the Indian, 62J. AM. HIST. 271,  272-73 (1975)  (describing the activities of the anti-
slavery activists against the Removal Act and noting their shift shortly thereafter to an
abolitionist position); LIBERATOR, July 21,  1832, at 114 (attacking "Andrew Jackson, and
all his subordinate land-stealing, negro-thieving, missionary-persecuting, and Cherokee-
murdering gang"); see also RONALD N. SATZ, AMERICAN INDIAN POLICY IN THE JACKSONIANJOURNAL OF CONSTFITTIONAL LAVW  [Vol. 10:3
many of them said that this  experience  transformed  their views on
slavery.  For example, James  Birney abandoned  colonization  in the
1830s  because  of the  "very great  resemblance  it  bears,  in its  most
prominent features,  to that of the  Indians, who  have  been  moved
upon, in nearly the same manner to 'consent'  to leave their lands."8'
Likewise,  William  Lloyd  Garrison said  slaves  were  "as  unanimously
opposed to a removal  to Africa, as the Cherokees  from the council-
fires  and  graves  of their fathers"  and  connected these  issues  in his
new abolitionist paper, the Liberator."'
As the abolitionists gathered strength over the next three decades,
they often invoked the Cherokee Removal as part of a broader argu-
ment that Native American and African American freedom were in-
extricably linked.  Indeed, "[flew comments are  more common  in
their speeches than that their goal was that both blacks  and Indians
be secured in their rights as  men."84  They were particularly fond of
ERA 101  (1975)  ("One Georgia volunteer engaged in removing the Cherokees remarked
years later, 'I fought through the civil war and have seen men shot to pieces and slaugh-
tered by thousands, but the Cherokee removal was the cruelest work I ever knew.'").
81  Letter from James Gillespie Birney, Late Vice President, Ky. Colonization Soc'y, to Rever-
end Thorton J. Mills, Corresponding Sec'y, Ky. Colonization Soc'y (July 15, 1834), in NEW
YORK OFFICE OF THE ANTI-SLAVERY REPORTER (1834); see BERIAH GREEN, SKETCHES OF THE
LIFE AND WRITINGS OF JAMES GILLESPIE BIRNEY 10 (Utica, NY, Jackson & Chaplin 1844)
("[F]rom the Indian to the Negro, the transition was easy and natural ....[ Birney] could
hardly fail to see, when the wrong of the Indians had thoroughly aroused him, that the
sufferings of the Negro flowed from the same bitter fountain."); Letter from James Birney
to Joshua  Leavitt and Others(Jan.  10,  1842),  in 2 LETTERS OF JAMES GILLESPIE BIRNEY
1831-1857, at 645, 652 (Dwight L. Dumond ed., 1938)  (statement upon being offered the
presidential nomination of the Liberty Party) ("We have so long practiced injustice, add-
ing to it by hypocrisy, in the treatment of the colored race, both negroes and Indians,
that we begin to regard injustice as an element-a chief element-the chief element in
our government.").
82  HENRY MAYER, ALL ON FIRE:  WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON AND THE ABOLITION  OF SLAVERY
138 (1998)  (internal quotation marks omitted); see LIBERATOR, Jan. 26. 1833, at 15  ("So
said the government of Georgia, in regard to the removal of the Indians-we don't com-
pel them to go.  No, Sir, they did not compel the Indians to go; but then, they rendered
them so uncomfortable, by their oppression and injustice, that the poor Indians can't stay.
And just so it is, Sir, with the Blacks."); see also MAGLIOCCA, supra note 14, at 91 (reproduc-
ing the masthead of the Liberator that depicted a slave auction being conducted on top of
trampled "Indian treaties").
83  See, e.g., 8 CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS, DIARY OF CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS 50 (Aida Donald &
David Donald eds., 1964)  ("It is Slavery that is at the bottom of this.  I am more satisfied
of the fact every day I live."); see also Kerber, supra note 80, at 277-78 (explaining that the
Massachusetts  Anti-Slavery Society's Annual  Report in  1838 focused  on the Cherokee
Removal).
84  Kerber, supra note 80, at 290; see ROBERT WINSTON MARDOCK, THE REFORMERS AND THE
AMERICAN INDIAN 12 (1971)  (quoting the abolitionist view that slavery was "an extension
of the unneighborly,  unChristian,  and destructive practice  which  for generations  has
been  operating  against  the Aborigines"  (internal  quotation  marks  omitted)); JohnMar. 2008] INDIANS AMD INVADERS
Chief Justice  Marshall's  opinion  in  Worcester v.  Georgia8, where  he
5 
tried (unsuccessfully)  to protect the Cherokees and the missionaries
in  their  midst  by  articulating  a  broad  view  of tribal  sovereignty.16
Consequently, anti-slavery leaders invoked  Worcester as a milestone in
the struggle for universal freedom.87
The bond between African-American  and Native-American  liberty
remained vital when  the abolitionist generation  reached the summit
of power  during Reconstruction."8  As the National Anti-Slavery Stan-
dard stated, one of the "good results of the abolition of chattel slavery,
and of the...  iniquitous  system,  [is]  that a more just policy is  now
sought  and  recommended  in relation  to the  Indians." 9  While  the
famed Joint  Committee on Reconstruction  was proposing the Four-
teenth Amendment and investigating the conditions of the freedman,
a similar Joint Committee on the Tribes was looking into their situa-
tion and advancing  a series  of broad reforms.9°  And in a direct re-
buke to Jackson's  treatment of the  Cherokees,  the Senate Judiciary
Committee declared  that  Worcester was "the unquestioned  law of the
Greenleaf Whittier, Letter from the Editor, PA. FREEMAN, May 10, 1838, at 2 ("The same
despotic, cruel, and diabolical  spirit that oppresses the African race, acts in all its un-
earthly force and virulence against the poor Indians.").
85  31 U.S. (6 Pet.) 515 (1832).
86  See MAGLIOCCA, supra note 14, at 42-51, 92-93 (exploring the political context surround-
ing the case and the reasons why abolitionists seized upon it); Diary Entry of Salmon P.
Chase  (July 2, 1843),  in 1 THE SALMON P. CHASE PAPERS, JOURNALS,  1829-1872, at 169,
169 (John Niven et al. eds., 1993)  (quoting a pastor who "asked for the deliverance of the
land from Slavery among other sins & evils & in Sermon spoke of the imprisonment of
Butler & Worcester in Geo [rgia] Penitentiary").
87  See, e.g., CONG. GLOBE, 34th Cong., 3d Sess. app. at 135,  139 (1857)  (statement of Rep.
Bingham)  ("The extra-territorial legislative power of every State is limited to its own citi-
zens and subjects.  That is the decision  of the Supreme  Court, in the great case of
Worcester vs. the State of Georgia ....T he Constitution is based upon the EQUALITY of
the human race."); Ableman v. Booth, 11 Wis. 498, 529 (1859)  (quoting an abolitionist
pamphlet stating that "Georgia's resistance to the appellate jurisdiction of the [S]upreme
[C] ourt first sprung from jealousy of interference with the 'peculiar institution'").
88  See, e.g., CONG. GLOBE, 40TH CONG., 2D SESS.  1956 (1868)  (statement of Rep. Broomall)
(refuting the doctrine "that black men and red men have no rights whatever except by
the grace and favor of the white men"); CONG. GLOBE, 38th Cong., 2d Sess. 260 (1865)
(statement of Rep. Rollins) (rejecting the doctrine that the Declaration of Independence
.was applicable alone to white men, and not to the black man, the red man, or any other
than the white man").
89  NAT'L ANTI-SLAVERY STANDARD, Apr. 10, 1869; see MARDOCK, supra note 84, at 48 (quoting
Wendell Phillips's view that the "great poison of the age is race hatred ....  We must see
the man, not the negro, the man and not the Indian, the man and not the Chinaman").
90  See S. REP. NO.  39-156, at 1-4  (1867)  (summarizing the findings of the Joint Committee
on the Tribes).JOURNAL OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW [Vol. 10:3
court to-day"  that "no man  acknowledging  the  authority  of reason
can gainsay."9'
The  critical  point is  that Reconstruction  Republicans  also  used
Worcester and the  Cherokee  Removal  as  interpretive  guides  for  the
Fourteenth Amendment.  For instance, the drafter of Section 1, John
Bingham, told his constituents and colleagues that "[u] nder the Con-
stitution  as  it  is,  not  as  it was,  and  by force  of the  [F]ourteenth
[A] mendment, no State hereafter can..,  ever repeat the example of
Georgia  and  send  men  to  the  penitentiary,  as  did  that State,  for
teaching  the  Indian  to  read  the  lessons  of the  New  Testament.02
Other Members  of Congress  echoed this cite  to Worcester since  they
could  "certainly  recollect  twenty-five  or  thirty years  ago  when  the
whole country rang with moral indignation against the treatment of
those Indians  by citizens  of Georgia."93  As  one  congressman  from
Massachusetts  said, "The principal  danger that menaces  us to-day is
from the effort within  the States to deprive  considerable  numbers of
persons of the civil and equal rights which the General Government
is endeavoring  to secure  to them.94   Given that context, "[t]he  his-
tory of the Indian tribes within  our jurisdiction is an instructive  les-
son ....In  the famous case of the Georgia  Indians, the judiciary  of
the nation went to the extreme of its power in protecting the rights of
the weak and defenseless."'95
91  S. REP. No. 41-268, at 6-7 (1870)  (examining the relationship between the Tribes and the
Fourteenth Amendment).
92  CONG. GLOBE,  42d Cong.,  1st Sess.  app. at 84 (1871)  (statement of Rep. Bingham); see
Adamson v. California, 332 U.S. 46, 74 (1947)  (Black,J.,  dissenting) (describing Bingham
as the "Madison of the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment"); CINCINNATI  DAILY
COMMERCIAL,  Aug. 10, 1866, at 1 ("If you rally at the fall.., depend upon it that every
State South will rally to the lead of Tennessee, and ratify the Amendment.  Is not that
worth striving for?  Then hereafter, in Georgia, men shall not be imprisoned, as in the
past, for teaching the lowly to read in the New Testament of another and a better life."
(quoting Bingham's statement in a campaign speech)).  Indeed, this was the one exam-
ple that Bingham always used to explain why we needed the Fourteenth Amendment.
93  CONG. GLOBE, 41st Cong., 2d Sess.  1671 (1870)  (statement of Rep. Maynard); see CONG.
GLOBE, 40th Cong., 3d Sess. app. at 142 (1869)  (statement of Rep. Burleigh)  ("Every stu-
dent of American history must remember the excitement which this  [Removal]  treaty
produced throughout the country and the influence it exerted upon our national poli-
tics."); CONG.  GLOBE, 39th Cong.,  1st Sess. 1684 (1866)  (statement of Rep. Stevens)  ("I
remember, sir, when a law was passed by the State of Georgia extending the jurisdiction
of that State over the Indian lands within the State ....I  trust that we shall never disgrace
the national legislation by any act which will give the sanction of law to such an outrage as
I have cited.").
94  CONG. GLOBE, 42d Cong., 1st Sess. 335 (1871)  (statement of Rep. Hoar).
95  Id.Mar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
There  are powerful implications  from this deliberate  decision to
incorporate Native Americans into Fourteenth  Amendment analysis.
First, this experience adds a new facet to many of the guarantees in
the Bill of Rights  that were  applied  to the States by  Section 1.96  A
prior article of mine explained  how Bingham's reliance  on Worcester
to define religious  freedom undermines  the Supreme  Court's hold-
ing in Employment Division v.  Smith.97  Likewise, judges  and  scholars
could obtain new insights into the Second Amendment by examining
how gun regulations applied to Native Americans  Second, the con-
cept of equality is changed in subtle ways once the interpretive base-
line  is  expanded  beyond  African  Americans.99  Native  Americans
could be defined in racial  terms, but they could  also be defined  by
their cultural practices involving religion, marriage, and lifestyle."°" If
these choices  are integrated  into an  equal protection  analysis,  then
this opens up new ways  to assess the State's power to enforce moral
standards.l l
B. Worcester and the Citizenship Clause
Most of the time, the history laid out in the previous Section is ig-
nored when  the Fourteenth Amendment is applied, largely because
the African American paradigm totally eclipsed its tribal counterpart
in the twentieth century.  The Citizenship Clause is the exception to
96  This view holds whether one thinks that the Framers of the Fourteenth Amendment in-
tended to incorporate the Bill of Rights, see CONG. GLOBE, 42d Cong., 1st Sess. app. at 84
(1871)  (statement of Rep. Bingham), or rests on the conclusion  that the Due Process
Clause of Section 1 selectively incorporates those rights, see Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U.S.
319, 325-36 (1937).
97  494 U.S. 872, 878-79 (1990)  (holding that the Free Exercise Clause is not violated when a
neutral law imposes a substantial burden on religious practice); see Magliocca, supra note
62, at 953-60 (criticizing this decision).
98  When one Senator asked whether the Fourteenth Amendment would invalidate state laws
that barred whites from selling guns and alcohol to Native Americans, see CONG. GLOBE,
39th Cong., 1st Sess. 573 (1866)  (statement of Sen. Williams), the reply only defended
the state's power to regulate alcohol sales, see id. (statement of Sen. Henderson).  The
Takings Clause is another provision that bears reexamination, as the confiscation of tribal
land without compensation is a powerful legacy of our country's history.
99  See Magliocca, supra note 62, at 960-65. One discrimination case that cried out for a com-
parison to the Cherokee Removal was the wartime internment ofJapanese-Americans.  See
Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 214, 219 (1944).
100  See United States v. Joseph, 94 U.S. 614, 617  (1877)  (holding that the Pueblos did not
qualify as a Tribe because they did not share the cultural practices of other Native Ameri-
cans); id. at 616 (describing the Pueblo as "Indians only in feature [and) complexion").
101  For a thoughtful discussion of the tension between individual autonomy and cultural as-
similation, see generally KENJI YOSHINO, COVERING:  THE HIDDEN ASSAULT ON OUR CIVIL
RIGHTS (2006).JOURNAL  OF CONSTITUFIONAL LA W [Vol. 10:3
this trend, and thus Schuck and  Smith deserve  credit for seeing the
importance of the Tribes in this context.  And because  information
on the link  between  Worcester and the  Fourteenth  Amendment was
not available when  they wrote their book twenty years ago, their fail-
ure  to consider the issue  is understandable.  Nevertheless,  that evi-
dence  refutes  Schuck and Smith's  analysis,  demonstrating  that the
exclusion of the Tribes from citizenship was done out of respect for
Worcester and not to import a reciprocal consent principle.""
The Framers of the Fourteenth Amendment worried that a grant
of birthright citizenship would undermine  the autonomy that Worces-
ter held was a fundamental right of the Tribes.  As the Senate Judici-
ary Committee said, "an act of Congress which should assume to treat
the members of a tribe as subject to the municipal jurisdiction of the
United States would be unconstitutional and void" unless it is "consis-
tent  with  their  character  as  separate  political  communities  or
states.  Furthermore,  Senator  Trumbull  said  that it would be  "a
breach of good faith  on our part to extend  the laws  of the  United
States over the Indian tribes ...  in which treaties we have agreed that
we would not make them subject to the laws of the United States.104
Critics of this reading  (and there were many)  replied that all Native
Americans were entitled to citizenship, because otherwise they would
not be treated equally.105  In this respect, there was a tension between
Worcestes vision  of tribal sovereignty  and the ideal of equal  citizen-
ship, which was resolved by holding that members of Tribes were not
102  This was not, of course, the only motivation for excluding the Tribes. For instance, Sena-
tor Trumbull explained that Indians at war with the United States could not be given citi-
zenship. See CONG. GLOBE, 39th Cong., 1st Sess. 527 (1866)  (statement of Sen. Trumbull)
("Of course we cannot declare the wild Indians who do not recognize the Government of
the United States at all...  to be the subjects of the United States in the sense of being
citizens. They must be excepted.").
103  S. REP. NO. 41-268, at 9-10 (1870).  See generally id. at 9-11 (analyzing the relationship be-
tween the Fourteenth Amendment and the Tribes).
104  CONG. GLOBE, 39th Cong., 1st Sess. 2894 (1866)  (statement of Sen. Trumbull); see also S.
REP. NO.  41-268, at 11 (stating that the United States could not abrogate these treaties
unilaterally through passage of the Fourteenth Amendment).  If this were the only objec-
tion to tribal citizenship, then Schuck and Smith's mutual consent theory would stand on
solid ground. The problem is that consistency with Worcester was the primary concern.
105  Compare CONG. GLOBE, 39th Cong.,  1st Sess. 574  (1866)  (statement of Sen. Henderson)
("We are deciding to-day that [the Constitution]  was  made for the white man and the
black man, but that the red man shall have no interest in it."), with id. (statement of Sen.
Trumbull) ("We are not deciding any such thing.").  For a sample of the views in favor of
full Native American  citizenship, see CONG.  GLOBE,  41st Cong.,  2d Sess. 1670  (1870)
(statement of Rep. Paine), CONG. GLOBE, 41st Cong., 2d Sess. 125-26 (1869)  (statement
of Rep. Niblack), and CONG. GLOBE, 41st Cong.,  1st Sess. 559-60  (1869)  (statement of
Rep. Butler).Mar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
citizens but that individual Native Americans who were not members
of Tribes would be considered citizens.16
The  debate  and  contemporaneous  reading  of the  Citizenship
Clause,  as informed by the abolitionist movement, does  not support
the claim that the  "subject to the jurisdiction" requirement changed
the traditional understanding of birthright citizenship.  It is clear that
the Framers of the Fourteenth Amendment did not write the jurisdic-
tion provision to transform the law in this area.  Instead, they wanted
to rescue the common law rule from the clutches of Dred Scott and re-
store the authority of Worcester, which for all practical purposes was a
nullity during the Jacksonian era.107  This conclusion is confirmed by
the fact that there  is nothing specific in the legislative history about
limiting  birthright citizenship  through  a mutual  allegiance  theory,
whereas there are specific references  to the common law and  Worces-
ter'°  Since Schuck and Smith must rely on original understanding to
overcome the ordinary textual meaning given to jurisdiction, this lack
of support in the historical record is fatal to their claims.
Another way to look at the significance  of Worcester for the revi-
sionist claim relates  to the rule  of construction  that should apply to
the  Citizenship  Clause.  Schuck and Smith  could be saying that the
"subject to the jurisdiction" language  is ambiguous with respect to il-
legal aliens  and  should receive  an exclusionary reading.  From  the
sources considered here, however, there can be little doubt that the
drafters excluded  the Tribes  because they felt that this was the best
way to  maximize  Native  Americans'  rights.'09  Turning around  and
construing that text to eliminate unambiguously the rights of a class
of children is not consistent with the underlying purpose of the pro-
vision with respect to the Tribes."0  The Framers of the Fourteenth
106  See Elk v. Wilkins, 112 U.S. 94, 112  (1884)  (Harlan, J., dissenting)  (stating that the Civil
Rights Act of 1866 was "the first general enactment making persons of the Indian race
citizens of the United States"); id. at 120 (citing Cooley's treatise for the proposition that
a Native American not affiliated with a tribe had the same rights "as that of any other na-
tive born inhabitant").
107  See MAGLIOCCA,  supra note  14, at 69-73, 94-96 (describing  Worcestes moribund status
during the preceding thirty years).
108  Accordingly,  the stray  comments about "allegiance"  and "consent" that are  cited  by
Schuck and Smith simply cannot bear the weight that they put on them.  See supra notes
57-62 and accompanying text.
109  It goes without saying that this strategy did not work well.  See Magliocca, supra note 62, at
949-52 (exploring what happened following Reconstruction).
110  See Martin, supra note  5, at 295  (stating that reciprocal consent is a harmful principle
"when society excludes those who realistically have no home elsewhere and therefore de-
serve the status of member in the only national society to which they are connected.  This
was the essential vice of Elk v. Wilkins and Dred Scott").JOURNAL OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW [Vol. 10:3
Amendment  viewed  exclusion  as  a  necessary  evil  that was  imposed
over the objections of those who wanted full Native American citizen-
ship.  Extending this decision by construction is therefore not appro-
priate,  particularly  given  all of the  other  interpretive  objections  to
such a move.
In  sum,  the  bond  between  abolitionists  and  Native  Americans
works against the revisionist interpretation of the Citizenship  Clause
by showing that the exclusion of the Tribes was based on respect for
the principles enunciated  in  Worcester.  The discussion  now turns to
the question of whether some other theory can justify the  repeal of
birth citizenship for illegal immigrants.
III.  INVASION AND EVASION
This Part contends  that any sound analysis of illegal alien citizen-
ship must rest on a comparison to the common law exception for en-
emy aliens in hostile occupation  of a sovereign's land.  Schuck and
Smith's tribal analogy only confuses matters because there is no con-
ceptual similarity between the original native-born inhabitants of our
country and its most recent immigrants.  Yet there is a potential par-
allel between foreign invaders and illegal aliens, who both enter the
country unlawfully  and  are  subject  to  expulsion.  Accordingly,  the
operative question is whether illegal aliens, like enemy occupiers, are
beyond the actual authority of the United States.  The answer to this
constitutional question is no.
A.  The Relevance of Foreign Soldiers
No exception to the rule of birthright citizenship comes closer to
the dilemma raised by illegal immigrants  than the one  reserved for
enemies in hostile  occupation."'  In each  case, the host country has
legal jurisdiction  over the intruders and does not want them  on its
soil.12  The problem  is that the government cannot enforce its will,
111  The United States has never invoked this exception to birthright citizenship, though the
issue has arisen in other contexts when U.S. territory was occupied.  See United States v.
Rice,  17 U.S.  (4 Wheat.)  246 (1819)  (holding that the British occupation  of towns in
Maine (then part of Massachusetts)  during the War of 1812 suspended the operation of
customs laws there).
112  There could be some narrow exceptions under international  law, whereby a sovereign
would not have a lawful right to eject foreign invaders, but that need not concern us here.
The fact that lawful combatants are exempt from ordinary judicial process under the Ge-
neva Conventions is irrelevant because the home country has the right to detain thoseMar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
which is relevant because the common law held that a sovereign must
be  in actual  possession  of power to  confer  birthright citizenship.13
With respect to a hostile army hunkered down in Massachusetts, this
lack of authority is  comprehensive  until  the force  is  destroyed  or
driven out.  When it comes to illegal aliens, the problem lies with the
administrative  task of finding the wrongdoers when  they can hide in
14
plain sight.
Putting aside the legal similarities between illegal immigrants and
enemy aliens in hostile occupation, the comparison also makes sense
given that many Americans see both as threats.  Illegal aliens are not
enemies  in  the  sense  of the  common  law because  they almost  all
come from friendly or neutral nations in Latin America.  One might
conclude, though, that these illegal workers  are an economic threat
because they drive down wages for some citizens or lawfully admitted
aliens.  Similarly, one could say that these migrants pose some kind of
cultural danger because  they do not speak English or do not adhere
to our values.  Of course,  these claims  can  be  and often  are  chal-
lenged.  The point is that opponents  of illegal  immigration  are  far
more likely to make a connection with enemy invaders than with Na-
tive American Tribes, whose relationship to the issue is not at all ob-
vious.
B.  An Issue ofE  nforcement
If the  proper analogy is with enemy aliens in hostile occupation,
then the next issue worth considering is the degree of authority re-
quired  to meet the jurisdictional element of the  Citizenship  Clause.
Foreign armies are beyond the sovereign's control in a way that is not
comparable  to illegal aliens.  Nevertheless,  that does not mean that
troops and hold them as prisoners of war.  See Geneva Convention Relative to the Treat-
ment of Prisoners of War, Aug. 12, 1949, 6 U.S.T. 3316, 75 U.N.T.S. 135.
113  See Inglis v. Trs. of Sailor's Snug Harbour, 28 U.S. (3 Pet.) 99, 155 (1830)  (Story, J., dis-
senting) ("[T]he party must be born within a place where the sovereign is at the time in
full possession and exercise of his power.... .").  Though the principal issue for asserting
jurisdiction over the Tribes was a formal recognition of their sovereignty, it must be con-
ceded that some of them were strong enough to block the United States from asserting its
authority in a concrete way.
114  One could say that the comparison is inappropriate because the common law exceptions
involved the  official  representatives  of the  sovereign  (soldiers  or ambassadors).  Cf
Schooner Exch. v. McFaddon, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch)  116, 144 (1812)  (holding that foreign
visitors are not exempt from the home country's jurisdiction unless they are employed by
the sovereign or "engaged in national pursuits").  Nevertheless, there is nothing about of-
ficial status that bears on the issue of whether the United States has actual, as opposed to
formal, jurisdiction over the individuals in question.JOURNAL OF CONSITTJ'IIONAL LAW [Vol. 10:3
the United States'  authority over the latter group is sufficient to say
that they still qualify for birthright citizenship.
The best argument for the  proposition that the  enemy alien ex-
ception  encompasses  illegal  aliens  comes  from  Charles  Wood,  the
former counsel  to the  Senate Judiciary  Committee's  Subcommittee
on Immigration. 5  Wood says that "it would be reasonable  for Con-
gress to  conclude that illegal aliens  are  not 'subject to'  the jurisdic-
tion of the government..,  and that the federal government's actual
power to bring illegal aliens to justice is insufficient to satisfy the con-
stitutional standard for birthright citizenship."''1 6  Indeed, "[i]t seems
indisputable that such power is substantially less than the power with
respect to other violators of the law."'"17  That is true because "it is es-
sentially only their status, and not their actions, which distinguishes
them from the law-abiding persons  around them" and so "they face
relatively little risk of being brought to justice."1l
Conceding that there are difficulties involved in apprehending il-
legal aliens,  the  problem with Wood's argument is  that the United
States could be doing a lot more to enforce  its borders.  Opponents
of illegal immigration never tire of pointing out that we could build
fences  along the Rio Grande, crack down  on corporations  that hire
illegal aliens  (by reviewing  their Social  Security information),  or re-
fuse to give these immigrants a driver's license."9  These are just a few
of the measures that could be taken if the political community really
wanted to address the issue.  The failure to enforce  the immigration
laws is not about a practical inability to do so; rather, it is about the
practical  conclusion  that  robust  enforcement  is  not  worthwhile.
Whether  that choice  is  right  or wrong, a blas6  attitude is  a far cry
from the impossibility of enforcing the sovereign's will.
Wood anticipates the force of this objection, and his answer is that
"even if the probability of their apprehension  and prosecution were
greatly increased it is unlikely ever to be equivalent to that of other
lawbreakers." 20  Even if this claim is correct, the question is why con-
115  See Wood, supra note 6, at 510-11  (arguing that the government's  inability to actually
bring illegal  aliens to justice exempts them from birthright citizenship);  id. at 465-66
(giving Wood's credentials and outlining his argument generally).
116  Id. at510.
117  Id.
118  Id.
119  For a thoughtful discussion on the driver's license question, see Maria Pab6n L6pez, More
Than a License to Drive: State Restrictions on the Use of Driver'sL icenses by Noncitizens, 29 S. ILL.
U. L.J. 91  (2004).
120  Wood, supra note 6, at 511.Mar. 2008] INDIANS AND INVADERS
stitutional jurisdiction requires an enforcement level that is equal to
other wrongdoers.  Just as it is inadmissible for a criminal defendant
to assert that jurisdiction is  lacking because she  did not consent to
the  tribunal,  a claim  that  there  is  no jurisdiction  because  the  en-
forcement  of this crime  was not equivalent  to that of other crimes
would be laughed out of court.  As with Schuck and Smith's mutual
consent  approach,  the  ordinary  meaning  of jurisdiction  does  not
support Wood's interpretation on this score.
Not surprisingly, Wood defends  his unorthodox reading of juris-
diction  by  citing the same  legislative  history about  the Tribes  that
Schuck and Smith used to support their theory.  For instance, he im-
plies that Senator Howard's  declaration  that "full and complete" ju-
risdiction is required by the Citizenship  Clause  that is "the same juris-
diction in extent and quality as  applies to  every citizen  of the  United
States now" supports a rule of enforcement parity.22  No such conclu-
sion is warranted.  First, these comments were made about the lack of
formal, not actual, authority with respect to the Tribes, and thus say
nothing relevant about the issue Wood wants to talk about.  Second,
for the reasons stated in Part II,  construing  the Fourteenth Amend-
ment's treatment of the Tribes in an exclusionary manner is inconsis-
tent with its Framers'  intent.  Third,  complete sovereignty  does not
mean that there will always  be effective  law enforcement.  The  fact
that it is harder to catch certain types of criminals simply does not af-
fect jurisdiction unless the enforcement  gap is acute and impossible
to cure.123
In sum, the only analytic framework that makes sense for the issue
of birthright citizenship for illegal alien children  is a comparison  to
the exception  for enemy aliens in hostile occupation.  Although the
jurisdiction  element  of  the  Citizenship  Clause  does  require  the
United States to exercise real authority over its territory,  there is no
reason to think that the government could not do so with respect to
illegal immigrants if it actually tried.  Perhaps this issue could be re-
121  See supra notes 66-70 and accompanying text (explaining how the ordinary use of juris-
diction contradicts the mutual allegiance interpretation).
122  Wood, see supra note  6, at 508-10  (quoting CONG.  GLOBE,  39th Cong.,  1st Sess.  2895
(1866)  (statement of Sen. Howard) (emphasis in Wood)); supra notes 58-59 and accom-
panying text (showing how Schuck and Smith rely on these quotes).  I use the word "im-
plies" because Wood never really develops this point, but it is the most logical reading of
the relevant passage in his article.
123  Furthermore, it is far from clear that immigration violations are inherently more difficult
to enforce than arguably victimless crimes like prostitution or gambling.  As a result, the
premise that even a full-court press would not yield constitutionally adequate enforce-
ment to qualify as jurisdiction is probably wrong.JOURNAL OF CONSTTFUFFIONAL LAW [Vol. 10:3
visited  if the  federal  government  took strong  action  that  came  to
naught;  but under present  circumstances,  the  only reasonable  con-
clusion  is  that jurisdiction  does  exist and  birth citizenship  does  ap-
ply. 124
CONCLUSION
There is undoubtedly some tension between  the right of a nation
to control its borders and a rule of birthright citizenship that applies
to illegal aliens.  From the common law, we have inherited a welcom-
ing tradition  that considers birthright citizenship too precious to be
left in the hands  of Congress.  Though  the federal  government re-
tains broad discretion  to deport  illegal immigrants,  any child  born
under the legal and actual authority of the United States is a citizen.
The revisionist arguments by Schuck and Smith cannot overcome the
formidable authority standing in their way.
Nevertheless, Schuck and Smith's analysis provides a valuable ser-
vice  by focusing  attention  on  the  relationship  between  the Native
American Tribes and the Fourteenth Amendment.  Sadly, the neglect
that breeds hopelessness on reservations even today is matched by the
indifference  of lawyers  toward  the role  that tribal life played in the
evolution  of our great guarantees  of freedom.  By probing  the citi-
zenship claims of outsiders, Schuck and Smith end up exposing a new
paradigm for thinking about the rights of all Americans.
124  Put another way, Congress should not be able to alter longstanding constitutional doc-
trine on birthright citizenship by just asserting that they lack the necessary authority over
illegal immigrants.  Instead, Congress should be put to the test and demonstrate that it
cannot deport or drive out this population, even by using the full might of the federal
government.