HOW (NOT) TO TALK ABOUT ABORTION 
Meredith Johnson Harbach * 
''Respect, Mr.  Speaker,  due to those on both sides of 
lS 
every issue." 
-Delegate Kathy J. Byron (R-Bedford, VA/ 
In the spring of 2012, abortion politics dominated much of our 
public discourse, with rhetoric heating, tempers flaring, and tele 
vision satirists salivating.2 
The Virginia General Assembly was right in the middle of the 
fray. The most controversial legislation included a bill requiring 
women to submit to an ultrasound before receiving an abortion,3 a 
"personhood" bill that defined the beginning oflife as conception,4 
*  Assistant Professor of Law, University of Richmond School of Law. I owe a special 
debt of gratitude to my students in the inaugural semester of UR's "Regulating Reproduc 
tion" seminar for their intellectual friendship and for their willingness to create a rigor 
ous, engaged, and respectful community: Maggie Bowman, Meghan Casey, David Crum 
plar, Katherine Cumpton, Catherine Gill, Megan Hazlett, Dori Martin, Michelle Miller, 
Angela Neiman, Sara Nunley, Rachel Reynolds, Jhontera Rivers, Amy Travin, Amy Weiss, 
and Rachel Yates. I also thank Tara Casey, David Harbach, Corinna Lain, Carl Tobias, 
Kevin Walsh, and Amy Weiss for their helpful reactions and comments on the piece. And 
finally, I thank Amy Weiss for her terrific research assistance. 
1.  The Family Foundation, Pro-Life Floor Speech-Delegate Kathy Byron, YOuTUBE 
(Mar.  7,  2012),  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=McT5BgB8BnO  [hereinafter  Pro-Life 
Floor Speech]. Delegate Byron made this statement in the context of a speech in which she 
described the "vile, crude, disrespectful, and frequently obscene messages" she and other 
supporters of the mandatory ultrasound bill received from opponents of the bill. Id. 
2.  At the national level, the Obama administration's requirement that health insur 
ance cover contraception took center stage. See, e.g., ObamaAniWunces Change in Contra 
ceptive Coverage Rule After Outcry, FoxNEWS (Feb. 10, 2012), http://www.foxnews.com/pol 
itics/2012/02/10/white-house-to-announce-accommodation-on-contraceptive-policy/. At the 
state level, forty-five of the forty-six legislatures that convened in Spring 2012 introduced 
more than 900 measures related to reproductive rights and reproductive health. See State 
Policy Trends: Abortion & Contraception in the Crosshairs, GVTTMACHER INST. (Apr. 13, 
2012),  http://www.guttmacher.org/medialinthenews/2012/04/13/index.html  [hereinafter 
State Policy Trends]. 
3.  H.B. 462, Va. Gen. Assembly (Reg. Sess. 2012). 
4.  H.B. 1, Va. Gen. Assembly (Reg. Sess. 2012). 
425 426  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 47:425 
and a  measure that would have withdrawn state public assis 
tance funds for poor women seeking abortions because of "gross 
and totally incapacitating'' deformities or deficiencies. 5 Mter pro 
tracted wrangling over whether the  mandatory ultrasound re 
quirement would include transvaginal ultrasounds, 6 the bill that 
ultimately was signed into law requires transabdominal ultra 
sounds, but allows women to refuse consent to transvaginal ones.7 
The personhood bill was carried over to the 2013 session, 8 and the 
abortion funding  measure was passed over indefinitely in the 
senate.9 
5.  H. B. 62, Va. Gen. Assembly (Reg. Sess. 2012) (proposing repeal of VA. CODE ANN. 
§ 32.1-92.2 (Rep!. Vol. 2011)). These measures prompted more than 1000 protestors to 
travel to the state Capitol and voice their disagreement. See, e.g., Chelyen Davis, Women 
Hold Capitol Protest, FREE LANCE-STAR (Feb. 21, 2012), http://fredericksburg.cornlNews/ 
FLS/2012/022012/02212012/684387. Eventually, opponents of these measures delivered 
petitions with 33,000 signatures to Governor Bob McDonnell's office. Harry Minium, Pro 
Choice Groups Deliver Petitions to Gov.  McDonnell, VIRGINIAN-PILOT (Feb.  22,  2012), 
http://www.hamptonroads.com/2012/02/prochoice-groups-deliver-petitions-gov-mcdonne!L 
Later in  the spring, police in riot gear arrested thirty protestors in front of the Capitol. 
See Video: Abortion Rights Protesters Clash with Police at Virginia Capitol, CBS DC (Mar. 
5, 2012), http://washington.cbslocal.com/2012/03/05/video-abortion-rights-protesters-clash 
with-police-at-virginia-capitoU. 
6.  See Wesley P. Hester & Jim Nolan, A Restless Session of Rancor; Contentious So 
cial Legislation Fueled Protests, Partisanship, RICH. TiMES-DISPATCH, Apr. 9, 2012, at Al. 
A compromise was reached at the urging of Governor McDonnell who, after public outcry, 
issued a statement on February 22, 2012, stating that "(m]andating an invasive procedure 
in order to give informed consent is not a proper role for the state. No person should be 
directed to undergo an invasive procedure by the state, without their consent, as a precon 
dition to another medical procedure." Press Release, Office of the Governor, Statement of 
Governor Bob McDonnell on SB 484 (Feb. 22, 2012), available at http://www.governor.vir 
ginia.gov/News/viewRelease.cfm?id=l148. 
7.  The final version of the bill includes an exemption for victims of rape and incest, if 
the incident was reported to law enforcement authorities. H.B. 462, Va. Gen. Assembly 
(Reg. Sess. 2012) (enacted as Act of Mar. 7, 2012, ch. 131, 2012 Va. Acts ___). Further, 
women who live one hundred miles or more from an abortion facility may have a mandato 
ry ultrasound only two hours before the procedure rather than twenty-four. !d. Also, phy 
sicians need not obtain the patient's informed written consent if the abortion is performed 
pursuant to a medical emergency or spontaneous miscarriage. ld. 
Interestingly, Governor McDonnell appeared to be persuaded, in part, by the conserva 
tive Rutherford Institute, one of the principal architects of Delegate Marshall's "person 
hood" bill. See Letter from John W. Whitehead, Founder and President, The Rutherford 
Inst., to Robert F. McDonnell, Governor, Va., (Feb. 20, 2012), available at https://www. 
rutherford.org/files_images/general/2-20-12_Letter_HB_ 462. pdf. 
8.  See Jim Nolan, Senate Scraps "Personhood" Bill, RICH. TIMES-DISPATCH, Feb. 24, 
2012, atAL 
9.  See Mark L. Cole, H.B.  62, Abortion Funding; Repealed, VA. LEGISLATIVE INFO. 
Svs., http://lis.virginia.gov/cgi-binllegp604.exe?ses=121&typ=bil&val=hb62. Less remark 
ed upon was an amendment to Virginia's wrongful death statute that allows women to 
bring wrongful death actions on behalf of fetuses. Act of Apr. 9, 2012, ch. 725, 2012 Va. 
Acts_ (codified as amended at VA. CODE ANN. § 8.01-50 (Cum. Supp. 2012)). Several 2012]  ABORTION  427 
Along the way, Virginia found itself in the national spotlight, 
lambasted on The Daily Show with John Stewart and Saturday 
Night Live.10  But rhetoric used at the Capitol was anything but 
funny. Legislative attempts at humor fell decidedly flat, both with 
other lawmakers and with the Virginia public. Many were embar 
rassed by the negative attention Virginia received.11  Others were 
troubled and offended by the tenor of the debate over these issues 
at the General Assembly.12 And the glib comments of some in the 
General Assembly belied the serious nature of the debated legis 
lation and its consequences.13 
Through the thick of this debate, I was part of a  much richer 
conversation in a small classroom here at the University of Rich 
mond School of Law, where I was teaching a seminar: Regulating 
Reproduction. Throughout the semester, our class engaged in a 
thoughtful, rigorous, and respectful conversation about the very 
same issues the General Assembly considered. 
other abortion-related measures failed to become law, including several measures that 
would have prohibited health insurance coverage for abortions, the ''Virginia Pain-Capable 
Unborn Child Protection Act," and a House measure to repeal Virginia's mandatory HPV 
vaccine requirement for girls entering the sixth grade. See H.B. 464, Va. Gen. Assembly 
(Reg. Sess. 2012) (prohibiting abortion coverage); S.B. 496, Va. Gen. Assembly (Reg. Sess. 
2012) (same); H.B. 1285, Va. Gen. Assembly (Reg. Sess. 2012) (Virginia Pain-Capable Un 
born Child Protection Act); S.B. 637, Va. Gen. Assembly (Reg. Sess. 2012) (same); H.B. 
1112, Va. Gen. Assembly (Reg. Sess. 2012) (repealing HPV vaccination requirement). 
10.  See Hester & Nolan, supra note 6. Former Governor Tim Kaine complained that 
legislators had created "fodder for late night comedy shows and [had] turned Virginia into 
a laughing stock." Minium, supra note 5 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
What follows is a sampling of the television humor. John Stewart on The Daily Show: 
"Oh man, Transvaginal Ultrasound? The flfteen.member jazz.fusion chorus band? Those 
guys are awesome! I saw them at the Beacon in '94; they were amazing! Transvaginal Ul· 
trasound, Transvaginal Ultrasound. Wait a minute. Oh, not the band. The other one with 
the wand and the hoo-hoo?" Punanny State-Virginia's Transvaginal Ultrasound Bill, THE 
DAlLY SHOW WITH JON STEWART (Feb. 21, 2012), http://www.thedailyshow.com/watchltue 
february-21-2012/punanny-state---virginia-s-transvaginal-ultrasound-bill.  On  Saturday 
Night Live, Amy Poehler quipped, "I love Transvaginal. It's my favorite airline. I got so 
many miles on Transvaginal that I always get upgraded to Lady Business." Really? with 
Seth and Amy: Birth Control, NBC.COM (Feb. 19, 2012), http:llwww.nbc.com/saturday 
night-live/video/really-with-seth·and-amy-birth-control/1386256. 
11.  Ginny Brock, Editorial, An Indecent Proposal, ROANOKE TIMES, Feb. 27, 2012, at 
All ("As a Virginian, I am embarrassed and sau that my state with its history of sound 
thinking is being dragged through the late-night comedy shows, a subject of ridicule. I am 
dismayed at the low caliber of politician this state has seen fit to elect in recent years."). 
12.  See, e.g., Tara Casey, What I Have Learned Today, RVA MAG. (Mar. 1, 2012), 
http:/lrvamag.com/articles/fulll14008/what-i-have-learned-today ("[ learned that the flip 
phrases 'jelly on the belly' and 'abortion is a matter of lifestyle convenience,' which I per 
sonally heard in the halls of my state legislature, translate to actual votes and platform 
positions of disengaged legislators."). 
13.  See, e.g., id. 428  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 47:425 
In this essay, I aim to have a conversation about how we con 
verse-how we talk-about abortion and related issues. In the 
process, I want to consider how we might come together to discov 
er issues of shared commitment and values and transform the ex 
isting abortion debate. I begin with a review of some of the more 
notable abortion-related rhetoric during the 2012 Virginia Gen 
eral Assembly, and contrast that rhetoric with the discourse in 
my classroom. I then consider whether and how we might move 
forward together toward a more meaningful and productive dia 
logue on these issues. 
Talking about abortion is hard. Striking the right tone on an 
issue  about  which convictions  are so  deeply held is  especially 
challenging. My point here isn't to change minds or to pretend at 
agreement where it doesn't exist. What I do hope to do, however, 
is to  consider whether changing our approach to  abortion dis 
course-whether in the legislature or in the classroom-might 
lead us away from polarization and gridlock, and toward civility 
and common ground. 
I. ABORTION TALK IN THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
"Can we dial down the rhetoric . . . ?" 
-Delegate Jennifer McClellan (D-Richmond/4 
The  mandatory  ultrasound  bill  proved  to  be  the  rhetorical 
lightning rod for Virginia's 2012 session.15 The measure's propo 
nents argued that the bill was central to informed consent for 
women seeking to have abortions.16 Critics maintained that it un 
necessarily interfered with the patient-physician relationship and 
was an attempt to shame women and dissuade them from having 
abortions.17 
14.  See Laura Vozzella & Anita Kumar, Richmond Wades Through 'Crossover Day', 
WASH.  POST (Feb.  14,  2012), http://www.washingtonpost.comllocalldc-politics/richmond 
wades-through-crossover-day/2012102114/giQAphyhER_story .html  (quoting  Del.  McClel 
lan's plea on Twitter) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
15.  See Jim Nolan, At Sponsor's Urging,  Senate Scraps Abortion Ultrasound Bill, 
RICH. TIMES-DISPATCH, Feb. 24, 2012, http://www2.timesdispatch.com/news/2012/feb/2418/ 
senate-adjourns·tor-day-without-taking·up-abortion-ar-1713430/;  Bob  Lewis,  Va.  House 
Scraps Invasive Pre-Abortion Requirement, AsSOCIATED PRESS ST. & Loc. WIRE, Feb. 23, 
2012. 
16.  See Nolan, supra note 15. 
17.  See id. 2012]  ABORTION  429 
How did our legislators talk about abortion? Abortion talk in 
the  General Assembly was troubling on multiple levels.  Some 
comments and rhetoric were disrespectful and dismissive of wom 
en's life experiences. Others were inappropriate attempts at hu 
mor that trivialized the issues and had concerning undertones of 
bias. Finally, in addition to the substance of these comments, at 
times the actual words legislators used to advance their agendas 
were unprofessional, inappropriate, and offensive. 
A number of comments disregarded the realities of women's 
situations and experiences. Some commentary was disrespectful 
of the many women-about half of American women by age forty 
five-who have an unintended pregnancy.18  For example, during 
early  floor  debate  on  the  mandatory  ultrasound  requirement, 
Delegate  C.  Todd  Gilbert  (R-Shenandoah)  characterized  most 
abortions  as "matters of lifestyle convenience."19  In fact,  three 
fourths of women who have abortions are concerned about their 
responsibilities to other individuals; "three-fourths say they can 
not afford a child; three-fourths say that having a baby would in 
terfere with work, school, or the ability to care for dependents; 
and half say they do not want to be a single parent or are having 
problems with their husband or partner."20 These are hardly mat 
ters of mere "convenience," and later in the day, Delegate Gilbert 
apologized for his comments. 21 
Other comments dismissed the importance of women's consent 
and their bodily integrity. For example, while debating mandato 
ry transvaginal ultrasounds, one Republican legislator reportedly 
18.  Abortion in the  United States: Quick Stats, GUTTMACHER INST.,  http://guttma 
cher.org/media/presskits/abortion· US/statsandfacts.html (last visited Oct. 15, 2012). 
19.  HuffPostPolitics, Virginia Lawmaker C.  Todd Gilbert Calls Abortion a "Lifestyle 
Convenience," YouTuBE (Feb. 14, 2012), http:l/www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uci-a6wAHzY; 
see also Anita Kumar, Del. Gilbert Says He 'Regrets' Comments on Abortion, WASH. POST 
(Feb. 14, 2012, 07:56 PM ET), http:l/www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/virginia·politics/postl 
del-gilbertlsays/he/regrets/comments-on-abortion/2012/02114/giQAEG 1VER_blog.html. 
20.  See Facts on Induced Abortion in the United States, GUTTMACHER INST., (Aug. 
2011), http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/fb_induced_abortion.pdf [hereinafter Facts on In· 
duced Abortion]. 
21.  Kumar, supra note 19. In a statement, Delegate Gilbert said, 
Abortion is a sad and deeply serious occurrence .... Individuals on both sides 
of this issue agree that it is tragic for all involved. I recognize that few women 
undergo the procedure lightly. It leaves scars, both mental and physical, that 
can last forever. I regret that my comments earlier today on the House floor 
were insensitive to that reality. 
ld. (internal quotation marks omitted). 430  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 47:425 
commented  that women already had  made  the  decision  to  be 
"vaginally penetrated when they got pregnant."22 Similarly, Dele 
gate Kathy J. Byron (R-Bedford) compared a transvaginal ultra 
sound to a standard gynecological exam with a speculum; she ar 
gued that an abortion was, in fact,  much more invasive than a 
mandatory  ultrasound.23  These  comments  overlooked  a  crucial 
distinction between mandatory ultrasounds and voluntary inter 
course or medical procedures: the woman's consent.24 
Democrats  seized  on  the  consent  issue  but  also  overplayed 
their rhetorical hand,  glossing over women's lived experiences. 
Delegate Lionel Spruill (D-Chesapeake) and other Democrats lik 
ened the mandated test to rape, an argument that reverberated 
among activists, the media, and the blogosphere.25  This rhetoric 
disregarded the difference between a  medical test performed in 
the safety of a physician's office without fear of violence on the 
one hand, and a violent sexual assault on the other. 26 
Other lawmakers made unprofessional and failed attempts at 
humor during the debate. In the midst of the contentious manda-
22.  Jessica Valenti, Editorial, A War on Women; Latest Paternalistic Efforts to Control 
Female Sexuality Are Part of a Long Pattern, BALT. SUN, Feb. 29, 2012, at 17A (internal 
quotation marks omitted). This comment was relayed by Delegate David Englin CO 
Alexandria). Id. 
23.  StopTheWarOnWomen,  Debate on Amendments to  Ultrasound Bill, YoUTUBE 
(Feb. 26, 2012), http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z-YuZUZyki8. 
24.  In attempt to highlight the actual consequences of a mandatory ultrasound bill for 
women, one legislator sought to impose similar requirements for men: Senator Janet 
Howell (D-Fairfax) attached an amendment to the ultrasound bill that would have re 
quired men to have a rectal exam and a cardiac street test before obtaining a prescription 
for erectile dysfunction medication. Laura Vozzella & Anita Kumar, Va. GOP Crams in 
Social Agenda, WASH. POST, Feb. 4, 2012, atAOL 
25.  Harry Minium, General Assembly Pre-Abortion Ultrasound Might Be Made Op 
tional, VIRGINIAN-PILOT, Feb. 22, 2012, at B1; see Julian Walker & Harry Minium, Senate 
Passes, McDonnell to Sign Abortion Bill, VIRGINIAN-PILOT, Feb. 29, 2012, at Al; Laura 
Vozzella & Anita Kumar, In Va. Nitty-Gritty Knocks Abortion Bill off Fast Track, WASH. 
POST, Feb. 24, 2012, at AOl; see, e.g., Dahlia Lithwick, Virginia's Proposed Ultrasound 
Law Is an Abomination, SLATE (Feb. 16, 2012), http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/ 
doublex/2012/02/virginia_ultrasound_law_ women_w  ho_ want_an_abortion_w  ill_be_forcibly 
_penetrated_for_no_medical_reason.html. 
26.  Delegate Bob Marshall (R-Prince William) responded to this "haranguing" and 
warned about "what happens to  us in the  next life"  when he noted that Planned 
Parenthood and other "so-called clinics that perform abortions" don't call ultrasounds 
"rapes" when they describe typical abortion procedures. Bob Marshall, Delegate Marshall 
Discusses What Planned Parenthood Says About Ultrasounds, YOUTUBE (Feb. 23, 2012), 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wH9-bCG7xlM; Harry Minium & Michael Sluss, Abor 
tion Bill Falters As Gov. Backs Away General Assembly, VIRGINIAN-PILOT, Feb. 23, 2012, 
at Al. Yet Delegate Marshall, too, disregarded the distinction between voluntary ultra 
sounds and state-mandated ones. 2012]  ABORTION  431 
tory ultrasound debate, Delegate David Albo  (R-Fairfax) told a 
"surprisingly ribald" story about his thwarted attempt at seduc 
ing his wife, complete with "the music of a classic boom-chicka 
wah-wah riff."27 According to Delegate Alba, while trying to set up 
a seduction scene with his wife the night before, he inadvertently 
landed  on  the  Rachel Maddow  Show  while  searching for  the 
Washington Redskins.28  After watching Delegate David Englin's 
(D-Alexandria) criticism of the mandatory ultrasound bill on the 
Maddow  Show, Delegate Alba's wife said, "I gotta go  to bed."29 
Delegate Albo delivered the speech amidst laughter in the cham 
ber, some genuine and some seemingly uncomfortable.30 Broader 
reaction was not quite as sanguine.31 Many thought the awkward 
joke trivialized the significance and terms of the debate.'~2 
In another feeble attempt at humor, Delegate Bob Marshall (R 
Prince William) tried to respond to Saturday Night Live's ribbing 
of the Virginia General Assembly in kind. In a television inter 
view, Delegate Marshall decried the "rampant sexist nature" of 
"that chauvinist Seth [Meyers's]"  effrontery in commenting on 
pregnancy, "when in fact,  it should have been Baby Momma."33 
Despite  Delegate  Marshall's  apparent  "awkward  attempt  to 
sound hip,"34 his use of controversial, sometimes-offensive slang in 
reference to pregnant women and mothers was unfortunate. The 
term ''baby momma" is widely understood to refer to an unmar 
ried pregnant woman or mother, who may or may not have a rela-
27.  The Reliable Source, Del. Dave Alba: All that Ultrcu;ound Talk Ruined a Romantic 
Night (Video), WASH. POST (Feb. 24, 2012), http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/reliable 
source/post/del-albo-all-that-ultrasound-talk-ruined -a-romantic-night-video/20 12/02/24/g 
IQAiL9WYR_blog.htmL 
28.  Not Larry Sabato, Dave Alba's Wife Rejects Sex with Him, YouTUBE (Feb. 24, 
2012), http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vbLsy9eKBll. 
29.  ld. 
30.  See id. 
31.  See, e.g., Tamara Dietrich, Opinion, Virginia Women Striking Back, DAILY PRESS, 
Mar. 9, 2012, at Al. 
32.  Yet despite the delegate's strong support of mandatory ultrasound-including the 
transvaginal ultrasound requirement-he couldn't bring himself to actually use the word 
"transvaginal," instead referring to "'trans-v this' and 'trans-v that."' See Dietrich, supra 
note 31. 
33.  Perry  Stein,  Morning  Read:  VA  Delegate's  Comedic  Response  to  SNL Skit, 
NBCWASHINGTON.COM  (Feb.  21,  2012),  http://www.nbcwashington.com/blogs/fust-read 
dmv/Morning-Read-VA-Delegates-Comedic-Response-To-SNL-Skit-139809283.html. 
34.  State v. Harris, 2009 Wise. App. LEXIS 39, at *22 (unpublished opinion), rev'd, 
786 N.W.2d 409 (Wis. 2010). Several years ago, a state trial judge in Wisconsin similarly 
found his usage of the term under scrutiny with the sentencing of an Mrican American 
defendant. See id. 432  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 47:425 
tionship with the fetus's or child's father.35 The term often evokes 
racial stereotypes.36  Marshall's comment suggested a lack of re 
spect for struggling pregnant women and mothers.37 
Finally, as the debate continued to intensify, it took on an an 
grier tone, with the words themselves becoming increasingly un 
seemly.38  For  example,  Senator  Louise  Lucas  (D-Portsmouth) 
joined the fracas,  quoting John Stewart's lewd slang for female 
sex organs.39  The rhetoric outside legislative chambers also be 
came  heated.  Delegate  Byron  described  to  her colleagues  the 
"vile, crude, disrespectful, and frequently obscene messages" she 
and supporters of the transvaginal ultrasound bill received from 
the bill's opponents. 40  Especially troubling, some members of the 
public "readily and quite casually suggested methods by which 
[the delegates] should die and openly expressed their desire that 
[their] deaths be hastened."41 
And so it was with the General Assembly's "raucous legislative 
squabble over abortion restrictions."42 One political scientist said 
35.  Harris, 786 N.W.2d at 421. 
36.  Id. 
37.  In fact, according to the Guttmacher Institute, "Women who have never married 
and are not cohabitating" account for less than half of all abortions. See Facts on Induced 
Abortion, supra note 20. 
38.  Bob Lewis, Ire Flashes over Va. Protest, Police Response, AsSOCIATED PRESS ST. & 
LOC. WIRE, Mar. 6, 2012 (describing "locker-room language"). 
39.  ''Virginia used to be synonymous with results: business, growth, solid manage 
ment. Now, we're the transvaginal ultrasound state, otherwise called 'Punanny State,' 
where peaceful protesters wind up in jail." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted); Bob 
Lewis, Session Dismissed Gov's Overreach, Obstruct Advice, AsSOCIATED PRESS ST. & Loc. 
WIRE, Mar. 11, 2012. 
40.  Pro-Life Floor Speech, supra note 1. No doubt some of the messages were among 
those characterized as "sarcasm bomb[s]."  C{.  Amy  Bingham,  Rick Perry's FB Page 
'Bombed' with Questions About 'Lady Parts', ABC NEWS (Mar. 21, 2012, 1:55 PM), http:// 
abcnews.go.comlblogs/politics/2012/03/protesters-inundate-rick-perrys-facebook-page-with 
coy-questions-about-their-lady-parts/. As described by the Washington Post, in the wake of 
the ultrasound bill's passage, opponents of the bill flooded GOP Face book pages "with the 
kind of information normally reserved for the ob/gyn." Laura Vozzella, 'Lady Business' Ac 
tivism Floods Va. Republicans' Facebook Pages, WASH. PosT (Mar. 15, 2012, 10:00 AM), 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/virginia-politics/postllady-business-activism-floods· 
va-republicans-facebook·pages/2012/03/15/giQAm8A8DS_blog.html. 
41.  Pro-Life Floor Speech, supra note 1. 
42.  Lewis, supra note 38. One observer summed up Virginia's 2012 General Assembly 
this way: 
More than 1,000 women locked arm-in-arm in silent protest. Police in riot 
gear confronting women's. rights demonstrators on the Capitol steps. Virginia 
being skewered over vaginal ultrasounds on 'The Daily Show With Jon Stew 
art." These are the abiding images from the 60-day regular session of the 
2012 General Assembly .... Legislators passed more than 1,500 bills, but 2012]  ABORTION  433 
he hadn't seen so much tumult in Richmond since the civil rights 
and Vietnam War protests.43  But the tone-if not the terms-of 
the debate might have been different. I turn now to contrast the 
General Assembly's legislative clashes with law students' discus 
sion of the same issues in the classroom. 
II. ABORTION TALK IN THE CLASSROOM 
"[I]t  is so important to  remain sensitive when speaking about 
the topic. It in no  way changes my views,  but it is important to 
speak in a loving and gracious tone rather than an air of condem 
nation." 
-University of Richmond Law Student, Regulating Reproduction 
Seminar, Spring 201244 
In contrast to  the angry discourse frequently present in the 
General Assembly, this student's comment reflects the students' 
ethos in our Spring 2012 Regulating Reproduction seminar. The 
goal of the course was to develop students' understanding of the 
interrelationship  of  legal  rules,  politics,  ideology,  and  socio 
economic realities that shape reproductive rights and justice. As 
part of our exploration of "reproductive rights" and "reproductive 
justice," we considered a broad spectrum of related topics, includ 
ing types of abortion restrictions upheld since Roe v.  Wade45 and 
Planned Parenthood v. Casey,46 access to contraception and repro 
ductive health services, new reproductive technologies, and the 
federal government's role in reproductive rights, among others. 
none attracted as much attention as those mandating invasive pre-abortion 
ultrasound exams, something its most strident critics called "state-sponsored 
rape." The measure prompted protests on Capitol Square, including one that 
resulted in 30 arrests. It drew scorn from national columnists and television 
comedians and generated some of the sharpest rhetoric in a long time on the 
Senate and House of Delegates floors. 
Larry  O'Dell  &  Bob  Lewis,  Abortion  Bill  Stole  Show  at  2012  General  Assembly, 
AsSOCIATED PRESS ST. & LOC. WIRE, Mar. 11, 2012. 
43.  Wesley P. Hester & Jim Nolan, A Restless Session of Rancor; Contentious Social 
Legislation Fueled Protects, Partisanship, RICH. TIMES-DISPATCH, Apr. 9, 2012, at A1 (re 
ferring to a statement from University of Virginia political scientist Larry Sabato). 
44.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 6, at 4-5 
(Feb. 13, 2012, 9:01 PM) (on file with author). 
u.s. 
45.  410  113 (1973). 
u.s. 
46.  505  833 (1992). 434  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 4 7:425 
As we began the semester, I emphasized that the topics we'd be 
exploring would be dynamic, controversial, and often deeply per 
sonal. I asked that the students maintain an atmosphere of pro 
fessionalism at all times, according respect and sensitivity to the 
diverse experiences,  backgrounds,  and opinions  of their peers. 
Students on all sides of these difficult issues exceeded all expecta 
tions. 
How did the students talk about abortion? Rather than dis 
missing women's lives and experiences,  they were eager to ex 
plore the real-world circumstances of men and women. They were 
respectful of the situations that lead women and their families to 
consider abortion. Rather than understanding abortion as a "life 
style convenience," one student observed: "I'd like to think that 
when women go to get an abortion it's something they've agonized 
over ...., 47 
Rather than comparing mandatory ultrasounds to  voluntary 
sex, well-woman exams, or rape, the students were interested in 
the actual motivations and effects of mandatory ultrasound laws. 
An example: 
The Post-Abortion Syndrome article we read dealt with the psycho 
logical effects of having an abortion and the guilty feelings after· 
ward, but what about the psychological effects of guilting someone 
into having a baby through descriptions of the child's characteristics, 
colored pictures, and sonograrns? Is it not just as likely that having 
an unwanted child would have  severe psychological effects  on a 
woman and her mental health?48 
And others: "If ultrasound images and heartbeats are 'infor 
mation' to a person without medical training,  [is it]  solely that 
they offer an emotional guide to a woman who may have mini 
mized the humanity and personhood of [her]  fetus[?]"49  "Do the 
motivations behind [exceptions to mandatory ultrasound laws for 
minors or victims of rape] deal with emotional trauma this proce 
dure might cause?"50 And finally, "If 'encouraging' more women to 
47.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 8, at 5 
(Feb. 27, 2012, 8:59PM) (on file with author). 
48.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 8, at 2 
(Feb. 28, 2012, 8:45AM) (on file with author). 
49.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 8, at 1-2 
(Feb. 28, 2012, 8:58AM) (on file with author). 
50.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 8, at 2 
(Feb. 28, 2012, 8:48AM) (on file with author). 2012]  ABORTION  435 
be  mothers is  an  objective  of mandatory sonogram  statute[s], 
should men be required to view sonograms, for the purpose of 'en 
couraging' men to be fathers?"51 
Unlike some Virginia legislators, the students understood that 
topics we were exploring had real consequences for real people. 
Although the dynamic in the classroom was at times lighthearted, 
the students never made light of the serious topics with which we 
grappled and were always respectful of other points of view, even 
when they disagreed. Here's one illustrative comment by a pro 
life student, who was assiduously respectful of her classmates: "I 
was not quite aware of the measures women took with their own 
bodies to terminate their pregnancies when legal abortions are 
not accessible. This was one of the more compelling arguments 
I've read that made me consider the negative implications of pro 
hibiting abortion."52 
Finally, the students understood the importance of rhetoric and 
tone in our conversations about abortion. One student's recogni 
tion of the importance of speaking in a "loving and gracious tone 
rather than an air of condemnation" is a commendable example of 
this."3  Another  student  turned her critical  eye  to  an  author's 
choice of rhetoric and tone in a scholarly article we studied: "Is 
[the author's] article really effective, or do her style, inflammato 
ry tone and jumps in logic take away from her message?"54 
In sum, the students' approach to our study and debate of these 
topics was a commendable antidote to the Virginia legislature's 
toxicity.  Rather  than  dismissing  real  experiences  and  conse 
quences, they sought to dig deep. Rather than trivializing issues 
with sarcasm and jokes, they approached our studies earnestly 
and conscientiously. And rather than using words that alienated 
and offended, they chose their words carefully. Using these expe 
riences as an alternative model for talking about these vexed is 
sues, I now consider the larger lessons we can draw, and how we 
might move forward. 
51.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 8, at 1 
(Feb. 28, 2012, 9:12AM) (on file with author). 
52.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 5, at 4 
(Feb. 6, 2012, 9:10PM) (on file with author). 
53.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 6, at 4-5 
(Feb. 13, 2012, 9:01 PM) (on file with author). 
54.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 4, at 3 
(Jan. 31, 2012, 7:47AM) (on file with author). 436  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 47:425 
III. MOVING FORWARD WITH MEANINGFUL DIALOGUE AND 
COMMON GROUND 
"The issue of abortion raises passionate feelings among many 
Virginians, based on one's own views on life and liberty. While de 
bates  in  the  legislature  over the  decades  may seem  to  indicate 
there is no common ground to be found on this issue, I believe that 
areas of agreement can and do exist. " 
-Governor Bob McDonnell55 
If we are to take "areas of agreement" and the pursuit of com 
mon ground on abortion seriously as a  project, we must find a 
better way to talk with each other about it. The comparison be 
tween  the  2012  General Assembly  and  our experience  in  the 
classroom has something to teach us about transcending gridlock 
and working together. I don't mean to suggest that legislative de 
bate is the same thing as academic discourse.  The two forums 
have different focus,  motivations,  and consequences.  But that's 
not to say that they do not-or ought not-share common aspira 
tions of civility, greater understanding, and trust, which make 
constructive conversation and common ground possible. 
In fact,  there is a  successful "common ground" model for ap 
proaching the abortion conflict that may change the dynamic of 
the debate and lead to progress. The Search for Common Ground 
("SFCG")  is  an  international  non-governmental  organization 
whose mission is to "transform the way the world deals with con 
flict: away from adversarial approaches, toward cooperative solu 
tions."56  From 1993 to 2000, the SFCG sponsored The Common 
Ground Network for Life and Choice. 7 The project's goal was 
5
to change the dynamic of the abortion conflict in the United States 
by changing the stance of the opposing parties, from  one defined 
solely by disagreement and characterized by extreme polarization, to 
one where strong disagreement is acknowledged but where the par 
ties (1) seek to fully understand the others' positions and beliefs, and 
55.  Press Release, Office of the Governor, Statement of Governor Bob McDonnell on 
Signing HB462 (M:ar.  7, 2012), available at http://www.governor.virginia.gov/news/view 
Release.cfm?id=ll65. 
56.  See Our Mission & Vision, SEARCH FOR COMMON GROUND, http://www.sfcg.org/ 
sfcg/sfcg_mission.html. 
57.  See  The  Common Ground Network for  Life &  Choice,  SEARCH  FOR  COMMON 
GROUND,  http://www.sfcg.org/programmes/us/us_life.html (hereinafter Common Ground 
Network). 2012)  ABORTION  437 
the issue; (2)  seek and name the existence of overlapping values, 
goals, beliefs and important interests (the common ground); and (3) 
consider ways to act jointly to move toward shared goals. 58 
As part of the project, the SFCG identified essential techniques 
for bringing both sides of the abortion issue into "constructive 
conversation."59 This approach seeks to alter the relationship be 
tween opposing camps in order to elevate the level of discourse 
and facilitate the recognition of commonly held values and com 
mitments. These techniques include dialogue, connective think 
ing, the sharing of personal experience, and genuine questions.60 
Dialogue is  not the same as debate.  Rather than seeking to 
persuade others of a position, dialogue instead focuses on under 
standing and being understood. As characterized by the SFCG, it 
is  "a  process  in  which  people  are  asked  to  respect  and 
acknowledge the humanity of the people present regardless of 
their points of view."61  Connective thinking resists undercutting 
another's position, and instead focuses on instances of resonance, 
despite disagreement.62  Personal experiences are constructive be 
cause they invite understanding and empathy. Finally, genuine 
questions lead to honest inquiry. They are "asked in a spirit of re 
al curiosity and a sincere interest in learning the answers."63 Im 
portantly, common ground isn't the same as compromise. Rather 
than find a middle position, the common ground approach instead 
seeks to find instances of genuinely shared values and concerns.64 
While not explicitly focused on the SFCG's common ground ap 
proach, the students in our class used tools of dialogue, connec 
tive  thinking,  personal experiences,  and  genuine  questions  in 
class. Their willingness to take this approach was critical to our 
ability  create  an  honest,  rigorous,  and  respectful  intellectual 
space for our discussions and to our ability to explore issues of 
common ground. 
Rather than holding rigidly to categorical beliefs or trying to 
change minds, the students were willing to acknowledge weak-
58.  I d. 
59.  I d. 
60.  I d. 
61.  I d. 
62.  I d. 
63.  I d. 
64.  I d. 438  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 47:425 
nesses and consider the potential contradictions in their own po 
sitions. Pro-choice students critiqued mistakes made by the pro 
choice movement,  such as its unfortunate alienation of Norma 
McCorvey-Jane Roe in Roe v. Wade.65 Others questioned why the 
choice movement has been reluctant to advocate for substantive 
pre- and post-abortion counseling. 66  Another student wondered: 
"Does  'acknowledging'  possible  benefits  to  regulating  abortion 
providers hurt the pro-choice movement?"67 
The students also explored weaknesses in their own positions 
and asked genuine questions. One student wondered whether the 
possibility  of fetuses  experiencing pain ought not compel  pro 
choice advocates to reevaluate their ideas of ''life" and when it be 
gins.68 Another considered whether leaving the abortion decision 
solely with women has "the unintended consequence of 'cement 
ing the notion that men are minor players in the life of a fami 
ly?"'69 One student identified a potential conflict between her pro 
choice stance and her discomfort with the use of assisted repro 
ductive  technologies  to  make  "designer" babies:  "If a  woman's 
body is her body and I believe that she should be able to termi 
nate a  pregnancy for any reason, why shouldn't she be able to 
construct a pregnancy for any reason?"70 
This willingness to engage in constructive dialogue led to con 
nective thinking and to nuance instead of dogma: "Why isn't [the 
fact that a person can be 'pro-life' but also 'pro-choice'] discussed 
more in the media?"71  "My beliefs aren't in either of those places. 
Do you think people are so black and white on this issue?"72 This 
65.  See Sam Howe Verhovek, New Twist for a Landmark Case: Roe v. Wade Becomes 
Roe v. Roe, N.Y. TIMES, Aug. 12, 1995, at L 
66.  "Why does the choice movement seem to shy away from substantive pre-and post 
abortion counseling?" Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, 
Class 6, at 5 (Feb. 13, 2012, 4:56PM) (on file with author). 
67.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 9, at 4 
(Mar. 12, 2012, 8:36PM) (on file with author). 
68.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 8, at 5 
(Feb. 27, 2012, 8:59 PM) (on file with author). 
69.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 6, at 3 
(Feb. 14, 2012, 3:59AM) (on file with author). 
70.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 11, at 2 
(Mar. 27, 2012, 8:09AM) (on file with author). 
71.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 9, at 2-3 
(Mar. 12, 2012, 9:19PM) (on file with author). 
72.  Student Comment, Regulating Reproduction Discussion Questions, Class 10, at 4 
(Mar. 19, 2012, 9:43PM) (on file with author). 2012]  ABORTION  439 
nuance led, ultimately, to a richer exploration of common ground 
on a number of hotly contested issues, including coerced contra 
ception,  abortion,  fathers'  rights,  fetal  pain,  informed consent, 
Plan B for minors, sex education, and counseling before and after 
abortion. 73 
The common ground approach is an alternative paradigm of 
what abortion discourse can look like. It involves a willingness to 
challenge assumptions, to acknowledge weaknesses, to listen, and 
to understand. When we  approach each other respectfully and 
step away from categorical positions, the conversation begins in 
earnest,  and we  have a  real chance at charting a  constructive 
path forward. 74 
CONCLUSION 
It will not be long before the Virginia legislature revisits abor 
tion legislation. The issue remains politically salient, and recent 
trends suggest a  continued focus  on abortion regulation. 75  How 
should the General Assembly talk about abortion the next time 
around? 
Our legislators might learn something from the two very dif 
ferent conversations that went on in Richmond last spring. There 
may be  considerable political benefit to  inflammatory rhetoric 
and offhand jokes, to dogmatic and inflexible positions, but they 
nevertheless come at a cost. By the end of the 2012 General As 
sembly, very little abortion legislation was signed into law. But 
73.  Common ground identified by the Common Ground Network for Life & Choice in 
cluded: preventing teen pregnancy, making adoption more accessible, avoiding violence 
and rebuilding community after violence, increasing women's options, reducing circum 
stances that frequently lead to abortion, and working together in the legislative arena to 
advance jointly supported measures. See Common Ground Network, supra note 57. 
74.  In fact, a number of others also have recently advocated for common ground ap· 
proaches to the abortion debate. See, e.g., Victoria Pynchon, Should We Bother Seeking 
Common Ground on Abortion?, FORBESWOMAN BLDG (Jan. 16, 2012, 5:43 PM), http:// 
www .forbes.com/sites/shenegotiates/20 12/0 1/16/should- we-bother-seeking-common-ground 
-on-abortion/; William Saleton, Abortion Common Ground: A Pro-Choice Agenda, SLo\TE. 
COM (Nov. 17, 2010, 7:51 AM), http://www.slate.com/articleslhealth_and_science/human_ 
nature/2010/11/abortion_common_ground_a_prochoicc_agenda.html  (describing  lessons 
drawn from abortion conference at Princeton University's Center for Human Values); Wil 
liam Saleton, Abortion Common Ground: A Pro-Choice Agenda, SLATE.COM (Nov. 16, 2010, 
7:59 AM),  http://www.slate.com/articleslhealth_and_science/human_nature/2010/11/abort 
ion_common_ground_a_prolife_agenda.html (same). 
75.  See State Policy Trends, supra note 2. 440  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 47:425 
the damage to Virginia's image, and to our regard for one anoth 
er, was manifest. 
In contrast, moving toward a  common ground approach just 
might move the debate forward-toward legislation that trans 
cends polarized positions, and instead advances shared goals and 
values. And that ought to be something all Virginians can get be 
hind. 