COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING
CONFIDENCE: THE NORTH CAROLINA  INNOCENCE
INQUIRY COMMISSION AND  THE MISSING
DELIBERATIVE CITIZEN
Mary Kelly Tate
I  INTRODUCTION
II.  ATTEMPTS AT RESTORING CONFIDENCE: A BRIEF LOOK AT  INNOCENCE
COMMISSIONS  STATE BY STATE
A.  California
B  Connecticut
C.  Florida
D.  Illinois
E.  Louisiana
F.  New York
G.  Oklahoma
H.  Pennsylvania
I.  Texas
J  Virginia
K.  Wisconsin
III.  A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NORTH CAROLINA INNOCENCE INQUIRY
COMMISSION
IV.  INCLUDING JURORS IN JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ACTUAL INNOCENCE
A.  Strengthening Democratic Values
1  The Jury System is in our Civic DNA
2.  Educating Citizens in the Problems Surrounding Wrongful
Conviction
3.  Returning "Local Democracy" to the CriminalJ ustice System
B.  Dampening MajoritarianP ressures and Leading to More Balanced
Decision-Making
C.  Returning the Controversy to the Local Jurisdiction Who Was the
OriginalS overeign Victim of the Crime in Question
V.  CONCLUSION532 MAINELAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND  RESTORING
CONFIDENCE:  THE NORTH CAROLINA INNOCENCE
INQUIRY COMMISSION AND  THE MISSING
DELIBERATIVE CITIZEN
Mary Kelly Tate*
"[T]he institution of the jury places the people themselves, or at least one class of
citizens, on the judge's bench. The institution of the jury, therefore, really puts the
direction of society into the hands of the people or of this class."1
I.  INTRODUCTION
Since  1989,  the  United  States  has witnessed 289  DNA  exonerations,  with
exonerees serving an average of thirteen years in prison.2  Although DNA  and its
unmatched  power  for  conclusive  results  is  what  brought  popular  attention  to
wrongful convictions, the scope of the problem is vastly larger than the number of
known DNA exonerations.3  The actual number of convicted individuals who are
factually innocent is unknown.  The state of North Carolina has recently responded
to this national crisis via a newly created state agency.  This essay applauds North
Carolina's  response,  but  urges  that  ordinary  citizens,  qua  jurors,  be  active
participants in its important work.
Long before the arrival of DNA  technology, wrongful convictions have been
the  object  of scholarly,  judicial, philosophical  and  literary  focus.  Indeed  the
breadth  of the  attention  shows  that  conviction  of the  innocent  unsettles  the
collective  psyche.  Yale  Law School Professor  Edwin Borchard wrote a classic
critique  of sixty-five  wrongful  conviction  cases  in  the  1930s.4  Judge  Friendly
authored an  important work  in the  1970s pressing the legal  culture to  face the
fallibility of criminal  trials.5  And  few are  unacquainted  with  the  Blackstonian
* Director, Institute for Actual Innocence,  University of Richmond  School of Law; J.D. 1991,
University of Virginia School of Law.  Special thanks to my colleagues Professor Ronald J. Bacigal,
Professor Henry L. Chambers, Jr., Professor Corinna Barrett Lain, and students Lindsey Vann, and
Aminah Qureshi.
1. ALEX DE TOCQUEVILLE, DEMOCRACY INA MERICA 260 (Francis Bowen trans., 3d ed. 1863).
2. Facts  on  Post-Conviction  DNA  Exonerations,  INNOCENCE  PROJECT,
http://www.innocenceproject.org/Content/Facts  onPostConvictionDNAExonerations.php  (last
visited Apr. 9, 2012).
3. See Samuel R. Gross et at., Exonerations in the UnitedS tates 1989 Through 2003, 95 J. CRIM.
L. & CRIMINOLOGY  523,  527 (2005);  D. Michael  Risinger, Innocents Convicted: An  Empirically
Justified Factual Wrongful Conviction Rate, 97  J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY  761,  780-82  (2007)
(focusing on capital rape-murder trials during the 1980s and asserting a three to five percent innocence
rate).
4. EDWIN M. BORCHARD, Preface to CONVICTING THE INNOCENT: ERRORS OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE
(Archon  Books 1961)  (1932)  ("'Innocent  men are  never convicted.  Don't worry about it, it never
happens in the world. It is a physical impossibility.' The present collection of sixty-five cases, which
have been selected from a much larger number, is a refutation of this supposition.")
5. Henry J. Friendly, Is Innocence Irrelevant? CollateralA ttack on CriminalJ udgments 38 U. CHI.
L. REv.  142,  153  (1970)  (discussing  the American  Bar Association  Standards  Relating  to Post-2012]  COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  533
bromide that it is better to let ten guilty men go free than to imprison one innocent
man.  Within modem American literature,  Harper Lee's To Kill a Mockinbird is
the archetypal example of the innocent man who is convicted in a trial beset with
racial and class animus.  And, of course, wrongful convictions rightly capture the
imagination  of  those  engaged  in  philosophical  and  moral  discourse.8
Notwithstanding  the calls of judicial and academic  luminaries or great works  of
literature, it required the revolution in DNA testing to ultimately pry loose the long-
standing cultural pretension that the United States had a singularly high performing
criminal justice  system and  that  its adversarial  system  was well  built  for truth
seeking.9
As  a  practical  matter,  state  and  federal  courts  are  the  province  for post-
conviction review, even though, theoretically, executive clemency is a pathway for
relief. Yet, in general, the appellate review found in state and federal courts for all
post-conviction cases, but also for innocence cases, is a form of review hobbled by
extraordinary procedural  and  substantive  limitations.0  Appellate  courts'  limited
factual  review  and preference  for finality  are  strong barriers  to post-conviction
Conviction Remedies concluding that new constitutional developments "produce a growing pressure for
post-conviction remedies.").
6. 4 WILLIAM BLACKSTONE, COMMENTARIES ON THE LAWS OF ENGLAND 358-59 (1996).
7.  HARPER LEE, To KILL A MOCKINGBIRD (Grand Cent. Publ'g 1982) (1960).
8.  See, e.g., RONALD DWORKIN, A MATTER OF PRINCIPLE 72 (1985)  (providing a philosophical
meditation on how society, the lawyer and the individual are to conceptualize  the problem  of the
conviction of the innocent.).  See also id. ("Nothing is of more immediate practical importance to a
lawyer than the rules that govern his own strategies and maneuvers; and nothing is more productive of
deep and philosophical puzzles than the question of what those rules should be.  One such puzzle is
quickly stated.  People have a profound right not to be convicted of crimes of which they are innocent. If
a prosecutor were to pursue a person he knew to be innocent, it would be no justification or defense that
convicting that person would spare the community some expense or in some other way improve the
general welfare.  But in some cases it is uncertain whether someone is guilty or innocent of some crime.
Does it follow, from the fact that each citizen has a right not be convicted if innocent, that he has a right
to the most accurate procedures possible to test his guilt or innocence, no matter how expensive these
procedures might be to the community as a whole?").
9. See BRANDON L. GARRETT, CONVICTING THE INNOCENT: WHERE CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS Go
WRONG 6 (2011)  ("DNA exonerations have changed the face of criminal justice in the United States by
revealing  that wrongful  convictions do  occur and,  in the  process, altering  how  judges,  lawyers,
legislators,  the public, and  scholars perceive the  system's accuracy.").  See also REVIEW OF  THE
CRIMINAL  AND  CIVIL  JUSTICE  SYSTEM  IN  WESTERN  AUSTRALIA  51  (1999),
http://www.lrc.justice.wa.gov.au/2publications/reports/P92-CJS/finalreport/ch7adverscrim.pdf  ("In...
the adversarial.  ..criminal justice system[], the State monopoli[z]es the determination of whether or not
an act is a criminal offen[s]e and the sentencing of offenders. The primary purpose is to prevent private
justice by retribution. . . . [The goal of the adversarial system is] to ensure the procedural faimess by
balancing the rights of the individual against the rights and interests of society as a whole.").
10. See GARRETT, supra note 9, at 211-12 (discussing the barriers in postconviction proceedings
confronting those seeking exoneration from  their sentences); Carol S.  Steiker & Jordan M.  Steiker,
Sober Second Thoughts:  Reflections on  Two  Decades of Constitutional Regulation of Capital
Punishment, 109 HARV. L. REV. 355, 399-400 (1995)  ("the [Supreme] Court has imposed substantial
barriers to all habeas petitioners."). But see Keith A. Findley, Innocence Protection in the Appellate
Process, 93 MARQ. L. REv. 591, 604, 621 (2009) (discussing unexpected strengths that appellate courts
may have in reviewing innocence cases based on social science research.  Studies show people can
detect deception better through engagement with transcripts rather than testimony).534 MAINE LAW RE VIEW [V  ol. 64: 2
relief."  Fewer than  10% of criminal  convictions  are  reversed;  some  estimates
assert  a percentage  as  low  as  1.5%.12  Furthermore,  political  realities  dampen
courts, legislatures and governors'  willingness to afford relief to petitioners  even
when faced with compelling evidence in favor of innocence.
In addition to the incalculable injury to the individuals wrongfully convicted
and incarcerated,  exonerations  have  made  their mark  on the chief actors  in the
criminal justice  system.  Judges,  jurors,  prosecutors,  defense  counsel  and law
enforcement now perform their duties with knowledge that wrongful outcomes are
not  an  abstract  concern,  but  a  concrete  reality.  The  steady  stream  of DNA
exonerations have also strongly impacted the public and its elected representatives.
The public's confidence in the integrity of the courts does not compare favorably to
the public's assessment of other public institutions.  Moreover, DNA exonerations
have also led to eroding  support for the death penalty, and exposed the strained
relationship  between  law  enforcement  and  citizens  living  in  heavily-policed
neighborhoods.
Seventeen years after the United States heralded its first DNA exoneration, in
2006  North  Carolina  established  the  North  Carolina  Inquiry  Innocence
Commission ("Inquiry Commission").  The Inquiry  Commission is the first-ever
state agency in the United States with the power to review, investigate and refer
claims  of  actual  innocence  for  judicial  review  and  relief.'3   The  Inquiry
Commission's pioneering  contribution to the problem of wrongful  convictions is
the much needed post-conviction flexibility afforded by its sophisticated screening,
investigating,  reviewing  and  remedial  functions.14   Consequently,  the  Inquiry
Commission is a public policy turning point in the modem  wrongful  conviction
epoch.
Although the  Inquiry  Commission  is  most prominently  recognized  for  its
creative approach to the problem of post-conviction review of credible claims of
innocence,"  its value does not solely rest with the innovative case-specific review
process.  It  also  lies  in  the  Inquiry  Commission's  confrontation,  although
incomplete,  with the institutional harm to the judicial branch,  and by extension to
our democratic  society, caused by recurring  wrongful  convictions  all across the
11.  GARRETT,  supra note  9, at 227 (discussing judges'  denial  of postconviction  DNA  testing
requests  by petitioners later exonerated,  "[s]tates  emphasized  the 'finality'  of convictions,  for the
understandable reason that except in unusual situations, as time passed after a trial, evidence would get
stale, memories would fade, and it would be difficult to revisit the question of guilt or innocence.").
12. Id at 197.
13.  N.C. GEN. STAT.  § 15A-1461  (2007). In light of criminal defendants' perennial outsider-status
vis-a-vis accessing favor from the legislative branch, the creation of the Inquiry Commission marked
enormous progress for this "discrete and insular" group.  See generally JOHN HART ELY, DEMOCRACY
AND DISTRUST: A THEORY OF JUDICIAL REVIEW (1980) (explaining democratic processes and analyzing
groups chronically excluded from such processes).
14. See Jerome M.  Maiatico, All Eyes On Us: A Comparative Critique of the North Carolina
Innocence Inquiry Commission, 56 DUKE  L.J. 1345,  1361  (2007)  ("[tlhe Criminal  Cases Review
Commission  (CCRC)  is the independent review commission in  the United  Kingdom that reviews
suspected miscarriages of criminal justice ....  [M]any of the fundamental characteristics of the [Inquiry
Commission] were based upon those of the CCRC.").
15.  See, e.g., David Wolitz, Innocence Commissions and the Future of Post-Conviction Review, 52
ARIz. L. REv. 1027, 1027 (2010).2012]  COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  535
United States.'6  Incorporating jurors into the Inquiry Commission's mission would
bolster its ability to protect the judiciary's institutional capital.
Lest we forget the obvious,  trial courts are the locus of errant outcomes in
criminal matters.  Therefore, any attempt at amelioration of this kind of confidence-
reducing  problem  should  be  broadly  conceived  and  directed  there.  Public
confidence  in  adequately  functioning  trial  courts17  is  damaged  by the  ongoing
problem of wrongful convictions."  By employing the prestige and competencies
of the  judiciary  in  the  form  of special  tribunals  tasked  to  review  criminal
convictions in which signs and symptoms of outcome-based error are present, this
ground-breaking agency recognizes that wrongful convictions damage the integrity
of the courts and the societal sense of justice they are thought to reflect.' 9
Against  this  historical  and  legal  background,  North Carolina's  decision  to
empower a state agency with remedial muscle of this non-traditional sort, and no
less  in the politically  rife arena  of criminal justice  matters, marked  a bold and
innovative step.  Such a step in a system of federalism will certainly be assessed by
other states in their unavoidable and on-going response to wrongful convictions.20
This essay argues that, in order for the Inquiry Commission to most adequately
remedy  the  harms  of wrongful  convictions,  its  final  review  must  include  the
deliberative  voice  of jurors  selected  from the community  where  the  conviction
occurred.  The discussion proceeds as follows.  Part II briefly addresses the origin
and structure  of innocence  commissions  in other states.  Part III addresses  the
unique  structure  of North  Carolina's  Inquiry  Commission.  Part  IV  offers  a
proposal for enhancing the Inquiry Commission's effectiveness through inclusion
of post-conviction jurors in the final stage of review now performed exclusively by
a three-judge panel.  Including jurors in the Inquiry Commission's final review of
16. See Susan A. Bandes, Protecting the Innocent as the Primary Value of the CriminalJ ustice
System, 7 OHIO ST. J. CRIM. L. 413, 413 (2009) ("[b]ut the deeper, more systematic causes of wrongful
conviction-causes imbedded in institutional structure and culture-are harder to isolate, and certainly
harder to tackle.").  See also GARRETT,  supra note 9, at 6 (discussing the proliferation of exonerations
and the establishment of the "innocence network" while noting that "[p]ublic distrust of the criminal
justice system has increased, and popular television shows, books, movies, and plays have dramatized
the stories of the wrongfully convicted. We now know that the 'ghost of the innocent man' spoken of by
Judge Learned Hand is no 'unreal dream,' but a nightmarish reality.").
17.  See generally Sara C. Benesh,  Understanding Public Confidence in American Courts, 68 J.
POL.  697, 697-707  (2006)  (discussing a lower-courts  driven  analysis  of public confidence  in the
judiciary  and  how  it affects  democratic  values);  THE  FEDERALIST  NO.  78 (Alexander  Hamilton)
(explaining the relative weakness  of the courts in relation to the executive and legislative branches.
Absent the "purse" or "sword" belonging to the other branches, the judicial branch's reliance on public
trust and confidence is even more necessary).
18. GEORGE C.  THOMAS  III, THE SUPREME  COURT ON TRIAL: HOW THE  AMERICAN  JUSTICE
SYSTEM SACRIFICES INNOCENT DEFENDANTS  1-2 (2008) (maintaining that protection of the innocent is
the essential, foremost goal of the criminal justice system and that the system has failed in reaching it).
19. See  Rules  and  Procedures,  Preamble,  N.C.  INQUIRY  COMM'N  6  (2010),
http://www.innocencecommission-nc.gov/rules.html)  ("Although the reasons for the original conviction
of North Carolina's exonerated vary, each exoneration can be characterized as delayed, lengthy, costly,
and damaging to the public's confidence in its justice system.").
20.  See New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262, 311 (1932) (Brandeis J., dissenting) ("[i]t is
one of the happy incidents of the federal system that a single courageous State may, if its citizens
choose, serve as a laboratory; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of
the country.").536 MAINE LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
innocence cases deemed worthy of judicially-impaneled  review will achieve three
important "confidence-enhancing"  goals: it would reinforce the jury's central role
in our criminal justice system, protect the review process from political pressures
on  elected  officials,  and  honor  the  local  jurisdiction's  natural  and  substantial
interest in the ultimate resolution of the controversy.  As it stands now, the Inquiry
Commission is a good thing. But it could be even better.
II. ATTEMPTS AT RESTORING CONFIDENCE: A BRIEF LOOK AT  INNOCENCE
COMMISSIONS  STATE BY STATE
At least eleven innocence commissions have been established since the DNA-
driven modem awareness of wrongful convictions.21 Each state commission varies
in structure, mission and origin.22  Some are the product of legislative action, while
others were created by non-profit organizations, bar associations, the judiciary and
law firms.23  This multiplicity not only speaks to the mounting impact exonerations
are having on stakeholders in the legal arena, but also signals a lack of consensus
concerning how to properly respond to the problem of wrongful convictions.
Despite  this  mosaic  in  form  and  purpose,  all  the  commissions  share  the
absence of active and power-based citizen involvement and all, except the Inquiry
Commission, lack any remedial authority over claims of innocence.24  Accordingly,
these commissions perform framing and studying functions belonging in the public
policy domain, rather than functioning as a check on the criminal justice system's
fact-finding and assignment of culpability.25
Below  is a brief overview  of commissions  throughout  the United  States.26
This review is intended to highlight, through contrast, the innovative nature of the
21.  Criminal  Justice  Reform  Commissions:  Case  Studies,  THE  INNOCENCE  PROJECT,
http://www.innocenceproject.org/Content/CriminalJusticeReform_CommissionsCaseStudies.php
(last visited April 10, 2012)
22. Id.  In 2011, Senator Jim Webb (D-Va.) sponsored the National Criminal Justice Commission
Act of 2011, S. 306, 112th Cong. (2011). This was the third year Senator Webb sponsored a bill such as
this, which would create a bi-partisan national commission to review the nation's criminal justice
system over eighteen months.  Wesley P. Hester, Senate GOP Defeats Webb's Criminal-JusticeR eform
Bill,  RICHMOND  TIMES-DISPATCH,  Oct.  21,  2011,  http://www2.timesdispatch.com/news/virginia-
politics/201 1/oct/21/tdmainO4-senate-gop-defeats-webbs-criminal-justice-ar-1  398378/.  Over  100
organizations, including The National Sheriffs Association, the International Association of Chiefs of
Police, the U.S. Conference of Mayors, and the Innocence Project, supported the Bill. Wesley P. Hester,
Mayors Back Webb's Criminal Justice Reform Legislation, RICHMOND  TIMEs-DISPATCH, June 23,
2011, http://www2.timesdispatch.com/ news/virginia-politics/201 1/jun/23/tdmet03-mayors-back-webbs-
criminal-justice-reform--ar-i  127407/.  Regrettably, the Bill fell three votes shy of the votes it needed to
advance even though it was supported  by four Republicans.  Hester, Senate GOP Defeats Webb's
Criminal-Justice Reform Bill, supra.  Senator  Webb has  committed  to continue  fighting  for  a
commission with the help of the organizations supporting the Bill. Innocence Blog, Sen. Webb to Keep
Fighting  for  a  Commission,  INNOCENCE  PROJECT  (Oct.  24,  2011,  05:26PM),
http://www.innocenceproject.org/Content/Sen  Webb to Keep_ Fighting_ for_a_Commission.php.
23.  CriminalJ ustice Reform Commissions: Case Studies, supra note 21.
24. Id.
25. See generally THOMAS, supra note 18, at I (analyzing the difference in pursuit of "truth" in the
American adversarial model and the European inquisitorial model).
26. The discussion of the innocence commissions foundin Part II is not exhaustive and additional
information can be found on each commission's respective website.2012]  COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  537
Inquiry Commission's investigative and remedial reach and to demonstrate that the
innocence commission movement in the United States has not created a vital place
for citizen participation.
A.  California
The  California  Legislature,  through  Senate  Resolution  44  established  the
California  Commission on the  Fair Administration  of Justice (the "CCFAJ") in
2004.27  The CCFAJ had a tripartite mission:  (1) to study the extent of criminal
justice  system  failures  in  California's  past,  specifically  instances  of wrongful
convictions  or  wrongful  executions;  (2)  to  examine  possible  methods  for  the
improvement in the functioning of California's criminal justice system; and (3) to
recommend  and propose  legislative  action  which  could  enhance  the  fair  and
accurate administration ofjustice in California.28
Governor  Schwarzenegger  and  the  California  Legislature  received  the
CCFAJ's  final  report  on  June  30,  2008.29  The  report  made  several
recommendations  across  a  myriad  of areas  including,  improving  interrogation
practices,  diminishing  reliance  on jailhouse  snitch  testimony,  and  reforming
exoneree compensation.30  However, as a result of gubernatorial vetoes,31 the only
successfully enacted reform concerned compensation  for the exonerated.32  This
reform extended  the time period  in which an exoneree can  present a  claim  for
compensation from six months to two years33 and removed language from the code
which prohibited compensation when the accused negligently contributed to his or
her arrest or conviction.34
27. S. Res. 44, 2003-04 Leg. (Cal. 2004). See also Membership, Gerald Uelman, CAL. COMM'N ON
THE FAIR ADMIN. OF JUSTICE, http://www.ccfaj.org (follow "Membership"  hyperlink) (last visited April
10,2012).
28. S. Res. 44, 2003-04 Leg. (Cal. 2004).
29. S. Res. 10, 2007-08 Leg. (Cal. 2007) (extending the commission's deadline to report its finding
and recommendations from December 31, 2007 to June 2008).
30.  CAL.  COMM'N  ON  THE  FAIR  ADMIN.  OF  JUSTICE,  FINAL  REPORT  (2008),  available at
http://www.ccfaj.org/documents/CCFAJFinalReport.pdf.
31.  Robert J. Norris et al.,  "Than That One Should Suffer": Evaluating State Safeguards Against
Wrongful Convictions, 74 ALB. L. REv. 1301,  1356 (2010/2011)  (noting that in "California  ...the
legislature passed a number of bills based on the recommendations of the California Commission on the
Fair Administration of Justice, only to have the governor veto them."); Gov. Vetoes 3 Bills on Crime
Case Procedures,L .A. TIMES, Oct. 7, 2007, http://articles.latimes.com/2007/oct/16/local/me-vetol6.
32.  See CALIFORNIA COMM'N ON THE FAIR ADMIN. OF JUSTICE, FINAL REPORT, supra note 30, at
109.  Under existing  federal law, a wrongfully  imprisoned individual  can receive a maximum of
$100,000 per year in compensation after exoneration.  28 U.S.C. § 2513 (2006). California's penal code
section 4904 provides a maximum compensation of $100 per day of incarceration. CAL. PEN. CODE §
4904 (West 2012).
33.  2009 Cal. Legis. Serv. ch. 432 (West) (amending CAL. PENAL CODE § 4901).
34.  Id. (amending CAL. PENAL CODE §§ 4903-4904).  See also CAL. COMM'N ON THE FAIR ADMIN.
OF JUSTICE, supra note 30.  The compensation statutes now prohibit compensation  only where the
accused intentionally contributed to bringing about his or her arrest or conviction and provide that the
compensatory  factfinder  will  not consider  an  involuntary  false confession  or involuntary plea  as
intentionally contributing to the arrest or conviction. 2009 Cal. Legis. Serv. ch. 432 (West) (amending
CAL. PENAL CODE §§ 4903-4904).538 MAINE LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
B. Connecticut
The Connecticut legislature established the Connecticut Advisory Commission
on Wrongful Convictions in 2003 as a body intended to review particular cases of
wrongful conviction.35  The  Connecticut Commission is vested with the authority
to investigate exonerations,  determine the causes of the wrongful convictions, and
devise recommendations meant to lessen the risk of convicting an innocent person
in Connecticut  courts.36  Fourteen  members  comprise the Advisory Commission,
drawn  broadly  from  the  criminal  justice  system.37  In  February  2009,  the
Commission  issued a report describing  its  efforts,  including  implementing  new
protocols  for  eyewitness  identifications  with  the  Office  of the  Chief  State's
Attorney,  evaluating  a  pilot  program  for  recording  interrogations  of arrested
persons,  and  monitoring  the  procedures  for the  compensation  of wrongfully
convicted persons.38 Regrettably,  as a result of funding  shortfalls and  perceived
overlap with the Connecticut Innocence Project, the Commission became dormant
after issuing its report in 2009.
C. Florida
The  Florida  Supreme  Court ordered  the  creation  of the Florida  Innocence
Commission on July 2, 2010.40  Its mandate is to identify the causes of wrongful
convictions,  along  with  advancing  proposals  for  reducing  the  risk  of  such
convictions.41 The Commission submitted an interim report in 2011 to the Florida
Supreme Court highlighting the five main causes of wrongful convictions found in
the  Florida  court  system.42 The  Commission  remains  dedicated  to  working  to
eliminate the possibility of wrongful convictions and is working to produce a final
report in June 2012.43
D.  Illinois
Former Governor Ryan of Illinois established the Governor's Commission on
Capital Punishment  in January  of 2000, which is the most noted  and publicized
35.  H.R. 6700,2003 Gen. Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Conn.).
36. Id
37. STATE OF CONN.  JUDICIAL BRANCH, ADVISORY COMMISSION  ON WRONGFUL  CONVICTIONS,
http://www.jud.ct.gov/committees/wrongfulconviction/#Member (last visited Mar. 30, 2012).
38. CONN.  ADVISORY  COMM'N  ON  WRONGFUL  CONVICTIONS,  REPORT  OF  THE  ADVISORY
COMMISSION  ON  WRONGFUL  CONVICTIONS  1  (2009),  available  at
http://www.jud.ct.gov/committees/wrongfulconviction/WrongfulConvictionComm  Report.pdf
39. Dave Collins, Wrongful Convictions Panel Idle for 2 Years, BOSTON GLOBE (Nov. 26, 2010),
http://www.boston.com/news/local/connecticut/articles/2010/11/26/connwrongful  convictionspaneli
die for 2years/.
40. In re Florida  Innocence  Commission,  No.  AOSCIO-39  (Fla.  Jul. 2,  2010),  available at
http://www.floridasupremecourt.org/clerk/adminorders/2010/AOSC1O-39.pdf.
41.  Id.
42. FLA. INNOCENCE COMM'N, INTERIM REPORT 10 (Jun. 6, 2011) (providing the five main causes
for  wrongful  convictions  found  in  Florida:  eyewitness  misidentification,  false  confessions,
informant/jailhouse snitches, invalidated or improper scientific evidence and professional responsibility
and accountability).
43.  Id at 2.2012]  COMMISSIONING  INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  539
commission of the last decade.  The Commission's fifteen members, drawn from a
predictable  cross-section  of criminal justice  system  stakeholders,  completed  a
report in 2003 from which twenty of eighty-five recommendations formed the basis
of  legislatively  enacted  reform."  The  recommendations  were  aimed  at
safeguarding  the  criminal  justice  system  against  the  threat  of  wrongful
convictions.45  In response  to the  Commission's  findings and recommendations,
Governor Ryan commuted the sentences of all Illinois death row inmates to life
imprisonment46 and the state ultimately abolished the death penalty in 2011,  citing
concerns over executing the innocent.47
E. Louisiana
The Louisiana Legislature ordered the pre-existing official state agency, the
Louisiana  State Law Institute, to broadly  study problems  in the criminal justice
system and recommend revisions to the law of criminal procedure before January
1, 2013.48  The Institute will work with other organizations  across the criminal
justice  system  in  Louisiana,  including  the  Louisiana  District  Attorney's
Association,  the  Louisiana  Public  Defender  Board,  the  Louisiana  Sheriffs'
Association, and  others.49 To date, the  Institute has  no tangible findings,  but is
expected to produce recommendations in 2013.
F. New York
New York has established two separate innocence commissions: one launched
by  the  New  York  State  Bar Association  called  the  Task  Force  on  Wrongful
Convictions50  and  the  other-the  New  York  State  Justice  Task  Force-was
produced through action taken by Jonathan Lippman, the Chief Judge of the State
of New  York.5 Both commissions  were charged with  identifying the causes  of
1 
44. COMM'N ON CAPITAL PUNISHMENT, REPORT OF THE GOVERNOR'S COMMISSION ON CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT  36-38  (2002),  available  at  http://www.idoc.state.il.us/ccp/ccp/reports/
commission report/summaryrecommendations.pdf.  See also Joseph  L. Hoffmann,  Protecting the
Innocent: The Massachusetts Governor's Council Report, 95 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY  561,  564
(2005).
45. See COMM'N ON CAPITAL PUNISHMENT, supra note 44.
46. Michael  L. Radelet  & Hugo Adam Bedau,  The Execution of the Innocent, in AMERICA'S
EXPERIMENT WITH CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 325, 337 (James R. Acker et al. eds., 2d ed. 2003).
47. John Schwartz & Emma G. Fitzsimmons, Illinois Governor Signs Capital Punishment Ban,
N.Y. TIMES (Mar. 9, 2011), http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/10/us/10illinois.html,  (quoting Governor
Quinn as justifying his signature on the ban stating "it is impossible to create a perfect system").
48. Criminal  Justice  Reform  Commissions:  Case  Studies,  THE  INNOCENCE  PROJECT,
http://www.innocenceproject.org/Content/Criminal  JusticeReformCommissionsCaseStudies.php
(last visited Apr. 10, 2012) [hereinafter Innocence Project Case Studies]. See also Purpose, LOUISIANA
STATE LAW INSTITUTE, http://www.lsli.org (last visited Apr. 10, 2012).
49. Innocence Project Case Studies, supra note 48.
50.  N.Y. STATE BAR Ass'N, FINAL REPORT OF THE NEW YORK STATE BAR ASSOCIATION'S TASK
FORCE  ON  WRONGFUL  CONVICTIONS  (Apr.  4,  2009),  available  at
http://www.nysba.org/AM/Template.cfn?Section=NewsCenter&CONTENTID=31576&TEMPLATE
=/CM/ContentDisplay.cfn.
51.  N.Y. STATE  JUSTICE TASK FORCE, http://www.nyjusticetaskforce.com/  (last  visited Apr.  9,
2012).540 MAINE LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
wrongful  convictions  and  fashioning  potential  remedies.  The  Task  Force  on
Wrongful Convictions produced a final report in April 2009 and continues working
to  advocate  its  legislative  proposals  and  supports  legal  education  for wrongful
conviction  issues.52  The  New  York  Justice  Task  Force  created  two  reports
recommending  changes  to  prevent  wrongful  convictions-one  on  improving
eyewitness  recommendations  and the  other  on expanding the New  York  DNA
bank."
G.  Oklahoma
The Oklahoma Bar Association established the Oklahoma Justice Commission
in  2010.  It has  an  expansive  research  mission aimed at  gathering wide-spread
information at the state and national level on the causes of wrongful conviction.54
The  Commission's  membership  is  determined by  the  Commission's  Chairman,
former  Oklahoma  Attorney  General  Drew  Edmondson.55   Currently,  the
Commission  is creating remedial  strategies designed to reduce the possibility of
conviction  of the  innocent  by  examining  procedural  and educational  remedies
determined to be the cause of wrongful convictions in Oklahoma.
H. Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania Senator Stewart J. Greenleaf, Chairman of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, sponsored a resolution calling for an advisory committee on wrongful
convictions  in 2006.  The  Pennsylvania  Senate passed the resolution, creating  a
commission to study the causes of wrongful  convictions and to propose remedial
steps to prevent their occurrence.56  The commission published its report, which
provides best practice recommendations, in September 2011. 5
I.  Texas
Judge Barbara Hervey of the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals established an
ad hoc committee, the Texas Criminal Justice Integrity Unit, in June 2008 for the
purpose of studying the strengths and weaknesses of the criminal justice system in
Texas.  The body is intended to achieve reform through education, training and
52.  NEW YORK STATE BAR ASS'N, supra note 50.
53.  N.Y.  STATE  JUSTICE  TASK  FORCE,  RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR  IMPROVING  EYEWITNESS
IDENTIFICATIONS  (2011),  available  at  http://www.nyjusticetaskforce.com/2011_02_01
ReportID Reform.pdf;  N.Y.  STATE  JUSTICE  TASK  FORCE,  RECOMMENDATIONS  REGARDING
FORENSICS  AND  EXPANSION  OF  THE  NEW  YORK  STATE  DNA  DATABANK  (2011),  available at
http://www.nyjusticetaskforce.com/2011_02_OlForensicsAnd  DNADatabank Report.pdf.
54. Oklahoma Bar Association Resolution Establishing the Oklahoma Justice Comm'n, OKLA.
STATE BAR Ass'N (Sept. 24, 2010), http://www.okbar.org/members/justice-commission.
55.  Press Release,  Okla.  Bar Ass'n,  Edmonson  to  Chair Justice Commission  (Jan. 28,  2011),
http://www.okbar.org/news/2011/01-28-edmondson-to-chair-justice-commission.htm.
56. S. Res. 381, 2006 Gen. Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Pa. 2006).
57.  JOINT  STATE  Gov'T  COMM'N,  REPORT  OF  THE  ADVISORY  COMMITTEE  ON  WRONGFUL
CONVICTIONs(20 11),  available at http://jsg.legis.state.pa.us/resources/documents/ftp/documents/9-15-
11%20rpt/20%20Wrongful%20Convictions.pdf.
58. TEx. CRIM. JUSTICE INTEGRITY UNIT, 2009 ANNUAL REPORT OF ACTIVITIES 3 (2009), available
at http://www.cca.courts.state.tx.us/tcjiu/reports/TCJIU-2009-report.pdf.2012]  COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  541
legislative recommendations.59
The  Texas  Legislature  passed  House  Bill  498  establishing  the  second
innocence  commission  for  the  state60  That  commission,  the  Timothy  Cole
Advisory Panel on Wrongful Convictions was established on September 1, 2009.1
It is named after the first Texan to be exonerated posthumously through DNA.  Its
final report was completed in 2011  and offers recommendations for the prevention
of wrongful convictions.62  The panel also addressed the feasibility of replicating a
North Carolina-style case review commission.63
J  Virginia
A  joint  project  between  the  Mid-Atlantic  Innocence  Project,  the
Administration  of  Justice  Program  at  George  Mason  University  and  the
Constitution  Project  at  Georgetown  University  Law  Center  established  the
Innocence  Commission  of Virginia  (the  "ICVA")  in  2004.4  The  ICVA  had
significant assistance from several major law firms in Virginia and the District of
Columbia.  The  ICVA  identified  cases  of  wrongful  convictions  in  Virginia,
proposed specific reforms  linked to problems in Virginia law and practices,  and
surveyed police and prosecutors  on a variety of issues.65 As a nongovernmental
commission  and  one  of the  first bodies  to  pursue  a  broad-based  commission
approach, the ICVA was a trail-blazing body.
K.  Wisconsin
The Wisconsin Republican Chairman of the Assembly Judiciary Committee,
Representative Mark Gundrum, led the effort to establish a commission to study
the causes of wrongful  convictions  in Wisconsin  in 2003.  The task force was
named the Avery Task Force after Wisconsin exoneree Steven Avery.67 The work
of the task force resulted in numerous legislative reforms, including ones aimed at
improving  eyewitness  identification,  related  to  the  preservation  of  biological
evidence and mandatory recordings of interrogations.
After the Task Force's final report in 2005, a group of criminal justice system
leaders  from  Marquette  University  School  of  Law,  the  Wisconsin  Attorney
59. Id.
60. Act of Sept. 1, 2009, Tex. H.B. 498, 81st Leg., Reg. Sess. (2009).
61.  TIMOTHY COLE ADVISORY PANEL ON WRONGFUL CONVICTIONS, REPORT TO THE TEXAS TASK
FORCE  ON  INDIGENT  DEFENSE  1  (2010),  available  at
http://www.txcourts.gov/tidc/pdflFINALTCAPreport.pdf.
62. Id
63. Id. at 32-33.
64.  See Jon  B.  Gould,  After Further Review:  A New  Wave of Innocence Commissions, 88
JUDICATURE 126, 128-29 (2004).
65.  Id.
66.  Wis. Legis. Reference Bureau, CriminalJ ustice Reforms: 2005 Wisconsin Act 60, LEGISLATIVE
BRIEFS, Oct. 2006, availablea t http://legis.wisconsin.gov/lrb/pubs/Lb/06Lbl8.pdf.
67.  The group was originally known as the "Avery Task Force,"  but in 2005 the committee's
recommendations were renamed the Criminal Justice Reforms Package. Id. See also Tom Kertscher
Tkertscher, Man Linked to Rape Had Long Criminal History: Crime Persisted After Avery  Wrongly
Convicted, MILWAUKEE J. SENTINEL, Dec. 10, 2003, at IB.
68.  Wis. Legis. Reference Bureau, supra note 66.542 MAINE LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
General's  Office  and  the  University  of Wisconsin  School  of Law  created  the
Wisconsin  Criminal Justice  Study Commission, which expanded the work of the
Task Force.  It examined DNA backlogs, false confessions and electronic recording
of interrogations.
Although the "think-tank" style innocence commissions discussed above were
significant  successes  in  showcasing  the  reality  of wrongful  convictions,  their
findings on an aggregate  level were marred by duplicative findings.  Even though
the states differ markedly in criminal procedure landscapes, which naturally impact
the particulars of wrongful  conviction study and reform, much work is left to be
done in studying these causes more in-depth.  The vast majority of the commissions
were charged with identifying causes of wrongful convictions despite the fact that
these causes  have been set forth again and again by a multi-disciplinary  array of
scholars and researchers and are known as the "canonical list."70  Countless sources
have  proven  that  eyewitness  misidentification,  poor  lawyering,  questionable
interrogation practices, shoddy forensics and other widely-recognized inputs are the
risk factors and causal links for errant outcomes in criminal trials.71
Absent breaking new ground in terms of our understandingo f these causes or
dedicating  these precious  resources  to  advancing  specific  state-based  reforms,
redundant summaries bulleting causes of wrongful convictions are hard to justify in
an era of public  resource  scarcity.  The  designers of these commissions  appear
willing to overlook the efficiencies that could be leveraged by embracing the well-
developed scholarship and reports that abound in the study of what causes wrongful
convictions.72
On a unitary level,  the various  innocence  commissions  were flawed by the
absence of any capacity to review active claims of innocence and to afford relief
where such relief was warranted.  In this sense, the commissions simply were not
structured to provide relief even though our current system has shown traditional
appellate  and  post-conviction  review  are  not  well-suited  to  correct  wrongful
outcomes.
The foregoing summary of the innocence commissions nationwide illustrates a
recurring  propensity  for  the  creation  of innocence  commissions  constricted  in
composition and constricted in function.  These bodies are populated by criminal
justice insiders  who are tasked,  for the  most part,  with studying and identifying
already  well-known  causes  of inaccurate  outcomes  in  criminal  trials.  Future
69. Wis.  Criminal  Justice  Study  Comm'n,  Charter  Statement  2  (2005),  available  at
http://www.law.wisc.edu/webshare/02i0/commissioncharter  statement.pdf.
70. Samuel R. Gross, Convicting the Innocent, 4 ANN. REv. L. & Soc. Sci. 173, 186 (2008).
71.  Id.
72. See Innocence Protection Act of 2004, Pub. L. No. 108-405, title IV, 118 Stat. 2260 (codified at
18 U.S.C. § 3600).
73. See, e.g., OKLA. BAR Ass'N, Resolution Establishing the Oklahoma Justice Commission (Sept.
24,  2010), http://www.okbar.org/members/justice-commission  (describing the responsibilities  of the
Oklahoma  Justice  Commission  as  limited  to  "research  and  identify[ing]  the common  causes  of
conviction of the innocent"); S. Res. 381, 2006 Gen. Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Pa. 2006) (establishing a
commission for the limited purpose of studying "the underlying causes of wrongful convictions and to
make findings and recommendations").
74. See GARRETr,  supra note 9, at 179-212.  Garrett addresses the many factors that result in post-
conviction review difficulties in isolating and correcting wrongful convictions.  Id.2012]  COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  543
commissions  should  direct  limited  resources  exclusively  to  state-law  specific
reform proposals and review of actual cases, rather than any general study of the
causes  of wrongful  convictions.75   The  perpetuation  of the  current  model  will
achieve  little  in repairing  the  harm done  to  public  confidence  in  courts.  As
discussed below,  the  Inquiry  Commission  takes  positive,  although  incomplete,
measures toward restoring such confidence.
III. A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NORTH CAROLINA INNOCENCE INQUIRY COMMISSION
The North  Carolina  Inquiry Commission  was not  the  first reform-minded,
officially-sanctioned action in North Carolina directed at examining the problem of
wrongful  convictions.  On November  22, 2002,  North Carolina Chief Justice  I.
Beverly  Lake  spearheaded  the gathering  of important representatives  from  the
criminal  justice  system  and the  legal  academic  community  for the  purpose  of
confronting the problem of wrongful convictions in the state.  This preliminary
judicial effort led to the formal  creation of the North Carolina Actual Innocence
Commission (the "Actual Innocence Commission"), which, in its broad mission of
studying  the  problem of wrongful  convictions  and proposing  reforms,  strongly
resembled the other innocence commission.
Moving past the study/reform paradigm of other commissions and the Actual
Innocence  Commission  itself,  North  Carolina  General  Statute  Article  92
established  the Inquiry Commission in 2006.78  In delineating the purpose of the
legislation, the statute stated, "[t]his  Article establishes an extraordinary procedure
to investigate and determine credible claims of factual innocence that shall require
an  individual  to  voluntarily  waive  rights  and  privileges  as  described  in  this
75. Of course, causation studies  linked strictly to the particular  criminal procedure  and post-
conviction landscape of any given state are needed.  See Statement of Stephen B. Bright Regarding the
Innocence  Protection  Act  18  (Sept.  2009),  available  at
http://judiciary.house.gov/hearings/pdf/Bright090922.pdf.
76. 2006 N.C. Sess. Laws  184. See generally Christine C. Mumma, The North Carolina Actual
Innocence Commission: Uncommon Perspectives Joinedb y a Common Cause, 52 DRAKE L. REv. 647,
648-49 (2004) (providing a history of Chief Justice Lake's request for a round-table discussion with
leaders in the criminal justice system which ultimately led to the Actual Innocence Commission).
77.  See Mumma, supra note 76,  at 649-50.  The 2009 Actual Innocence Commission  Report
furnished to the North Carolina legislature culminated in the passage of legislation reforming eyewitness
identification practices.  See THE N.C.  INNOCENCE  INQUIRY COMM'N,  REPORT TO THE 2009-2010
SHORT SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA (2010) [hereinafter SHORT SESSION
REPORT], available at http://www.innocencecommission-nc.gov/gar.html.  After issuing its report, the
North  Carolina  Actual  Innocence  Commission  recommended  the creation  of the North  Carolina
Innocence  Inquiry Commission to "provide an  'independent  and balanced  truth-seeking  forum for
credible claims of innocence."'  CriminalJ ustice Reform Commissions: Case Studies, THE INNOCENCE
PROJECT,
http://www.innocenceproject.org/Content/CriminalJusticeReformCommissionsCaseStudies.php
(last visited Apr. 9, 2011).  In response, the legislature created the Inquiry Commission in 2006. Id.
78. N.C. GEN. STAT. § 15A-1461 (2011); see also Kent Roach, The Role ofInnocence Commissions:
Error Discovery, Systemic Reform or Both?, 85 CHI.-KENT L. REv. 89, 90-92, 124 (2010). The Inquiry
Commission  is  an  independent  commission  that falls  under  the  state's Judicial  Department  for
administrative purposes and funding is received from the Administrative Office of the Courts.  N.C.
GEN. STAT. § 15A-1462 (2011).544 MINE LA WRE VIEW [V  ol. 64: 2
Article." 9
Charged  with  implementing  the  Inquiry  Commission's  "extraordinary
procedure" is an Executive Director, her staff and, voting members  of the Inquiry
Commission.80  The members  are eight in number and are required to include  a
superior court judge, a prosecutor, a victim's advocate, a criminal defense attorney,
a non-attorney who is not an officer or employee of the judicial branch, a sheriff
and two appointees from the public who serve at the discretion and selection of the
Chief Justice of the North Carolina Supreme Court.81
The Inquiry Commission divides its review process into five distinct phases:
(1) initiation  of an innocence  claim, (2)  initial review and  investigation of the
innocence  claim, (3)  formal inquiry of an innocence claim, (4) hearing before the
Inquiry Commission, and (5) judicial review by three-judge panel.82  Stages three
through  five are  discretionary and  are  only  granted  after findings  of sufficient
evidence of innocence to support further, heightened scrutiny.83
According to the Inquiry Commission, only two percent of innocence  claims
proceed  to the third phase-the  formal  inquiry stage.84  To  proceed to judicial
review upon a plea of not guilty at trial, five of the eight members  must vote in
support of such action.85   In the  case of a guilty plea  at trial, the vote must be
unanimous.  The standard of review is "sufficient evidence of factual innocence
to merit judicial review."87  Once a case is transferred for judicial review, the Chief
Justice of the Supreme  Court of North Carolina appoints a panel of three judges
who have not had substantial previous involvement in the case. 88 At the panel,
relief is awarded  when a unanimous court  decides the petitioner has  shown his
factual innocence through "clear and convincing" evidence.89
In terms of procedural and substantive rights, the Inquiry Commission is not a
normative  recapitulation  of an  American  trial.  A  petitioner  has  the  right  to
appointed counsel throughout the commission's inquiry,90 yet is required to forfeit
various rights and procedural safeguards, including the Fifth Amendment privilege
against self-incrimination and the attorney-client privilege with regard to the claim
of innocence.9'  The Inquiry Commission is required to notify the victim of the
claim and the victim's right to present his or her views throughout each phase of
the proceedings.92  At any point during the proceedings, the Inquiry Commission
79. Id § 15A-1461.
80. Id. § 15A-1465 (2011).
81.  Id § 15A-1463(a) (2011).
82. Rules andP rocedures,N .C. INQUIRY COMM'N  7-18  (2010),  available  at
http://www.innocenceconmission-nc.gov/rules.html  . See also N.C. GEN. STAT. § 15A-1461.
83. Rules and Procedures,N .C. INQUIRY COMM'N, supra note 82, at 10.
84. Id at app. B.
85. Id § 15A-1468(c) (2011).
86. Id.
87. Id.
88. Id. § 15A-1469(a) (2011).
89. Id § 15A-1469(h).
90. Id. § 15A-1467(b) (2011).
91.  Id. See also id.§§  15A-1468(al), 15A-1469(d).
92. Id. § 1467(c).2012]  COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  545
can determine that the claim is without merit.93  The power of subpoena, as well as
other, broader powers are also available to the body.94
Since  its  inception,  the  Inquiry  Commission  has  performed  case  reviews,
substantive hearings, and pursued and obtained a federal grant through the National
Institute of Justice."  As of January 2012, the Inquiry Commission had received
and reviewed  1100 innocence claims, closing 953 of them by early 2012.  It has
averaged  roughly  225  claims  yearly.97   This  initial  period  for  the  Inquiry
Commission has resulted in four cases receiving a Commission Hearing and three
exonerations.
The  first  Inquiry  Commission  exoneration  came  sixteen  years  after  the
conviction of Gregory Flynt Taylor based on faulty science and a jailhouse snitch.99
Taylor was convicted of the murder of Jacquetta Thomas, whose body was found
on the pavement of a cul-de-sac about 150 yards from Taylor's vehicle which was
stuck in mud and gravel on a service road.'"  The Inquiry Commission reviewed
Taylor's  murder  conviction  and  presented  evidence  of  his  innocence  at  a
Commission Hearing in 2009.101  Specifically, the Inquiry Commission presented
evidence that the preliminary blood test relied on at trial, indicating the victim's
blood  was  found on  Taylor's  car,  was  not  conclusive  and  that further  testing
revealed that none of the victim's blood was on Taylor's vehicle.102  The Inquiry
Commission  also presented  testimony  of the jailhouse  snitch  who  testified  at
Taylor's initial trial, calling his credibility into serious question.103  After a two-day
hearing,  the  panel  unanimously  found  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  of
innocence to merit judicial review and recommended Taylor's case to proceed to a
93. Id. § 15A-1467(a).
94. Id. § 15A-1467(d).  Included in the Inquiry Commission's broader powers are "[a]ll proceedings
of the Commission shall be recorded and transcribed as part of the record. All Commission member
votes shall be recorded in the record. All records and proceedings of the Commission are confidential
and are exempt from public record and public meeting laws except that the supporting records for the
Commission's conclusion that there is sufficient evidence of factual innocence to merit judicial review,
including all files and materials considered by the Commission and a full transcript of the hearing before
the Commission, shall become public at the time of referral to the superior court. Commission records
for conclusions of insufficient  evidence of factual  innocence  to merit judicial  review shall remain
confidential, except as provided in subsection (d) ofthis section."  Id. § 15A-1468(e).
95.  SHORT SESSION REPORT, supran ote 77, at 2.
96. NC Innocence Inquiry Commission Case Statistics, NORTH CAROLINA  INNOCENCE  INQUIRY
COMMIssioN  (Jan.  2012),  http://www.innocencecommission-nc.gov/stats.html  [hereinafter  NC
Innocence Inquiry Commission Statistics]
97.  SHORT SESSION REPORT, supran ote 77, at 4.
98. NC Innocence Inquiry Commission Statistics, supra note 96.
99.  Brief for North Carolina Innocence Inquiry Commission at 2, State v. Taylor, No. 91CRS71728
(N.C.  Super.  Ct.  Wake  Cty.),  available  at  http://www.innocencecommission-
nc.gov/Forms/pdf/Taylor/Redacted%20Taylor0/o20Brief.pdf.
100.  Id. at 1.
101.  Id.
102.  Id at 321.
103.  Transcript  of Innocence  Inquiry  Commission  Hearing Day  I at 74, State  v. Taylor,  No.
91CRS71728  (N.C.  Super.  Ct.  Wake  Cty.),  available  at  http://www.innocencecommission-
nc.gov/Forms/pdflTaylor/TaylorHearingDayl.pdf.546 MINELAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
three-judge panel.104  In early 2010, the three-judge panel held a hearing in Taylor's
case,  unanimously finding  him innocent  and  making Taylor  the first  person in
United States history to be exonerated by a state-mandated commission.'s  North
Carolina Governor Bev Perdue subsequently pardoned Taylor on May 21, 2010.'os
The  Inquiry  Commission's  most recent  exonerations  were  a product  of its
review  of the murder  convictions  of two  men and a hearing  held in  April  of
201 1.107  The two exonerees  were among a group  of six men charged with the
murder of Walter Bowman in the course of what the police thought was a drug-
related robbery.08  To avoid charges of first-degree  murder and the possibility of
the  death  penalty,  and  after  numerous,  intense  police  interrogations,  Kenneth
Kagonyera  and  Robert  Wilcoxson  pleaded  guilty  to  second-degree  murder  in
2002.109  The Inquiry Commission investigated the cases jointly because they arose
out of the same crime and discovered inadequate police investigation in the case."o
The  police  initially  received  a  tip  saying  a  group  of  three  men  (Group  A)
committed the crime, but chose instead to focus on a second group of men (Group
B), which included Kagonyera and Wilcoxson."'  Through its investigation, the
Inquiry Commission discovered a member of Group A confessed to the crime, that
DNA at the scene matched another member of Group A, and that police relied on a
compromised  surveillance  video  during  the  initial  investigation.112  After
considering the  evidence,  the commissioners  unanimously  concluded  there  was
sufficient  evidence  of factual  innocence  to  forward  the  case  to  a  three-judge
panel.113  The three-judge panel heard the case in September  2011, unanimously
ruling that  Kagonyera  and  Wilcoxson had proven their  innocence  by clear  and
convincing evidence.114
The success stories of the Inquiry Commission indicate the value of a state
mandated  innocence  commission.  Through the  Inquiry  Commission's  subpoena
and  other  investigative  powers,  it  was  able  to  find  evidence  of  wrongful
104. Transcript of Innocence  Inquiry  Commission  Hearing Day 2 at  244, State v. Taylor, No.
91CRS71728  (N.C.  Super.  Ct.  Wake  Cty.),  available  at  http://www.innocencecommission-
nc.gov/Forms/pdf/Taylor/TaylorHearingDay2.pdf.
105.  David Zucchino, Man Freed, '93 Murder Conviction Struck Down, CHICAGO TRiBUNE, Feb. 19,
2010, at 13.
106. Mandy Locke, Greg Taylor Pardoned by Governor, NEWS AND  OBSERVER, May 21, 2010,
http://www.newsobserver.com/2010/05/21/494087/greg-taylor-pardoned-by-govemor.html.
107. Brief of North Carolina  Innocence  Inquiry Commission  at  1, State  v.  Kagonyera,  Nos.
00CRS065086  &  00CRS65088  (N.C.  Super.  Ct.  Buncombe  Cty.),  available  at
http://www.innocencecommission-
nc.gov/Forms/pdf/Kagonyera%20Hearing/Kagonyera%2OBrief/  2OFinal%20PDF.pdf.
108. Id. at 3-7.
109. See id. at 4.
110. Id. at 3-5.
111.  Id. at 4.
112. Id
113. Transcript  of  Inquiry  Commission  Hearing  Day  2  at  265,  State  v.  Kagonyera,  Nos.
00CRS065086  &  00CRS65088  (N.C.  Super.  Ct.  Buncombe  Cty.),  available  at
http://www.innocencecommission-nc.gov/Forms/pdflKagonyera%20Hearing/TranscriptDay2.pdf
114. Fred Clasen-Kelly, Judges Exonerate Two Men in 2000 Killing, CHARLOTTE OBSERVER, Sept.
23,  2011,  http://www.charlotteobserver.com/2011/09/23/2631120/judges-exonerate-two-men-in-
2000.html.2012]  COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  547
convictions and have the sentences overturned, even without DNA evidence in one
case.
The Inquiry Commission, however, cannot reach its full potential as currently
enabled  by  statute.  The  Inquiry  Commission's  review  process  lacks  a  voice
necessary for providing  its full community and justice restoration potential-the
voice of the deliberative citizen.
IV. INCLUDING JURORS INJ UDICIAL REVIEw OF ACTUAL INNOCENCE
As parts I and II of this essay show, ordinary citizens are not a significant part
of modem America's innocence commissions.  Rather, innocence commissions are
often-even  North  Carolina's  pioneering  Inquiry  Commission-the  policy  and
bureaucratic  province  of criminal justice  insiders  and,  occasionally,  prominent
elites drawn from other sectors of the political community.  As discussed below,
including jurors in the Inquiry Commission's final review procedures would serve
important confidence-enhancing  goals, reinforcing  the jury's role in the criminal
justice  system and our democracy,  reducing the effect  of political pressures  on
elected  officials, and remedying,  at least partially, the injury caused to the local
jurisdiction by the wrongful conviction.
A. Strengthening Democratic Values
The  Inquiry  Commission's  remedial  power  strengthens  democracy  by
innovatively responding to the harm to judicial legitimacy  wrought by wrongful
convictions.  Nonetheless,  further  strengthening  is  possible.  Juries  have  many
attributes  and features  that  are uniquely  suited  for supporting broad  democratic
values.  Like other deliberative bodies in a democracy, juries convene to resolve
important disputes and have the authority to reach binding results.  However, the
jury process  is deliberative  and  citizen-based.  It entails  a cross-section  of the
citizenry  and  therefore  reflects  racial  and  economic  diversity.  It  requires  of
ordinary  people  compromise,  analysis,  and  persuasion.  In  essence,  the jury
experience  distills  the  deployment  of many  of the  skills,  habits  and  attitudes
necessary  for a healthy  democracy.  Still  further, it deploys  the very habits of
engagement  that will be  needed  to uproot  and  reform the  problems  within the
criminal  justice  system  giving  rise  to  the  unrelenting  stream  of  wrongful
convictions.
1. The Jury System is in Our Civic DNA
The  notion  of the jury  as  democratic  institution  is  strongly  entrenched  in
American history."'  Our Framers felt it was an antidote against executive mischief
or, worse,  tyranny."'  In this sense, embracing juror participation for the Inquiry
115.  The description of the jury as a democratic institution warrants succinct treatment in this essay
as others fully develop this idea elsewhere. See, e.g., Neder v. United States, 527 U.S.  1, 30 (1999)
(Scalia, J., dissenting in part and concurring in part) (describing the Sixth Amendment right of trial by
jury as the "spinal column of American democracy"); TOCQUEVILLE, supra note 1, at 260-63.
116. See Susan Bandes, "We the People" and Our Enduring Values, 96 MICH. L. REv. 1376,  1386
(1998)  (providing a compelling discussion of how the innocence problem  does not conform to the548 MAINE LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
Commission is not near the leap that the creation of the body itself was.  Rather,
juries are in our civic DNA.  They are foundational to our democratic design in that
they are promised in our Constitution and the Bill of Rights."7
The  Supreme  Court  has championed,  at  least  rhetorically,  the jury  as  an
institution.  The Court has embraced jury trials as "fundamental  to the American
scheme of justice"11  and Justice Kennedy noted that "j]ury service is an exercise
of responsible citizenship by all members  of the community, including those who
otherwise might not have the opportunity to contribute  to our civic life.""'  The
fundamental character of jury trials means that inclusion of this historic artifact in
the Inquiry Commission review process is not disruptive to our norms.  Indeed, it is
a natural return to norms long-honored at the trial level.  Such norms, grounded in
principles  of  democratic  participation  and  civility,  belong  in  the  realm  of
adjudicating and rectifying cases of wrongful conviction,  especially in the Inquiry
Commission's three-judge panel, which is structured more like a trial court than an
appellate court.
2. Educating Citizens in the Problems Surrounding Wrongful Conviction
Apart from the threat of stolen liberty at the hands of the sovereign feared by
our founders, Alex de Tocqueville, the great observer of the American democracy,
lavished the jury system with utmost praise, almost cloaking it in a civic mysticism,
a power to educate and uplift ordinary men, claiming  it played a pivotal role in
holding together the young democracy.  In extolling its virtues and the stamp it left
on the American character, he wrote
[The jury] vests each citizen with a sort of a magistracy; it makes all feel that they
have  duties toward  society  to fulfill and  that they enter  into  its government.
Enforcing men to occupy themselves with something other than their own affairs,
it combats individual selfishness, which  is like the blight of societies.  The jury
serves incredibly to form the judgment and to augment the natural enlightenment
of the  people. There,  in my opinion, is its greatest advantage.  One ought to
consider it as a school, free of charge and always open, where each juror comes to
be instructed in his rights, where he enters into daily communication with the most
instructed and most enlightened members of the elevated classes, where the laws
are taught to him in a practical manner and are put within reach of his intelligence
by the efforts of the attorneys, the advice of the judge and the very passions of the
parties.120
In  addition  to  raising  democratic  sensibilities  in  the  citizenry,121  juror
participation  in the  review of actual claims  of innocence,  side-by  side,  with the
Inquiry  Commission judges, would  educate jurors about  the  complex problems
realities that made colonialists fearful of persecution at the hands of the sovereign).  Arguably, however,
the  policy response  across  all branches  has been  inadequate  to the point of "tyranny."  See THE
FEDERALIST No. 83 (Alexander Hamilton).
117.  U.S. CONST. art. III, § 2, cl. 3; U.S. CONsT. amend. IV.
118.  Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145, 149 (1968).
119. Powers v. Ohio, 499 U.S. 400, 402 (1991).
120. TOCQUEVILLE, supra note 1, at 262.
121.  See JOHN GASTIL ET AL.,  THE JURY AND DEMOCRACY:  How JuRY DELIBERATION PROMOTES
CIvic ENGAGEMENT AND POLITICAL PARTICIPATION 5, 8,28-30 (2010).2012]  COMMISSIONING INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  549
facing  the  criminal  justice  system.  Police  practices,  prosecutorial  discretion,
funding problems, forensic weaknesses and all manner of issues would be made
transparent  during this deliberative undertaking.  The lessons, exposure  and data
would  lead  to  a  virtuous  cycle  of  greater  community  involvement  and
knowledge.122
3.  Returning "Local Democracy" to the CriminalJ ustice System
In overlooking citizen involvement and privileging judges in the final review
of  innocence  claims,  the  Inquiry  Commission  further  entrenches  the
professionalized insularity that already afflicts the modem criminal justice system.
Such insularity, if not outright anti-democratic,  is clearly dilutive of democracy.
This is forcefully evidenced by the rate of guilty pleas.  When nearly ninety-five
percent of felony cases  are resolved with a guilty plea,123 by what fiction do we
conclude  that  our criminal justice  system  is truly an adversarial  model  or one
operated by citizens who make the Toquevillian decisions about the "direction  of
society"?
The late William Stuntz, one  of the most prominent criminal law scholars in
America  over the past twenty-five years, describes the jury in late nineteenth and
early  twenty-first  centuries  in  northern  immigrant  cities  as  part  of  "local"
democracy.124  In  contrast to  a sliver of felony  cases having  a jury trial today,
nearly  fifty percent of felony defendants received jury trials before  and after the
turn  of the twentieth century  in these northern and newly industrialized cities.125
Mourning the loss of this local democracy, which he considered to arise from the
complex web of political and civic ties that bound together police, victims, judges,
prosecutors,  and  other  citizens,  Stuntz  cautions  against  idealizing  that  era's
criminal justice system, while still unequivocally declaring it superior to the one in
place today.126  He observes "that system-at least the version that prevailed in the
nation's  Northeast  quarter-was  more  lenient,  more  locally  democratic,  less
discriminatory,  and  more  effective  than today's  counterpart"  and describes  the
modem system as "more centralized, more legalized and more bureaucratized." 27
In light of the framers'  intent, the modem near-abandonment  of juries and the
public's need for education about the criminal justice system in general  and our
wrongful  conviction  crisis  in particular,  it is clear that jury involvement  in the
Inquiry  Commission's  final  review  stage  would  strengthen  democratic  values.
Moreover,  at  the present  pace  of cases  reaching  this  final  stage,  to  provide
Innocence  Inquiry jurors would  not be  costly, but it would  reinforce  important
democratic values-functionally through actual case-specific decision-making and
symbolically through opening the process beyond criminal justice system insiders.
122. For example, individuals who complete jury service are more likely to vote in the next election
than an individual not selected for jury service.  Id. at 35-38.
123.  Douglas D. Koski, Introduction to The Declining Importance of the Jury Trial and the Plea
BargainingP roblem, THE JURY TRIAL INC RIMINAL JUSTICE 3, 4 (Douglas D. Koski ed., 2003).
124. WILLIAM J. STuNTz, THE COLLAPSE OF AMERICAN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 142 (2011).
125. Id at 139.
126. Id at 26-36.
127. Id. at 31.550 MAINE LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
B. Dampening MajoritarianP ressuresa nd Leading to More Balanced Decision-
Making
It  is  well-documented  that  political  concerns  can  and  do  affect  judicial
actors.128  Justice O'Connor opined, "[ejlected judges cannot help being aware that
if the public is not satisfied with the outcome of a particular case, it could hurt their
reelection prospects."' 29  Legal scholars Stephen B. Bright and Patrick J. Keenan
have  established that judges  who  had the option to  override  a jury verdict  and
impose  the  death  sentence  were  significantly  more inclined  to  do  so  if facing
reelection.'30  In the United States, the majority of judges are elected,"'  including
those  in  North  Carolina.132   The  presence  of  lay  citizens,  as  jurors,  in  the
deliberative  process of innocence claim review at the Inquiry Commission could
temper any active or latent politicization of the review process.
Because  judges  are  elected  in  North  Carolina,  the  three-judge  panel  is
composed of political creatures.  Jurors, representative  of the body politic,  could
counteract the self-interestedness  that accompanies any elected  office.  After all,
the jurors would be drawn from the very voters who, through elections, decide who
populates the North Carolina bench.  Presumably, if the decision-making did not
rest solely on their "electoral"  shoulders, elected judges would be more open to a
broader array of cases, namely those without definitive forensic evidence.
Additionally,  as the  cases  in the  Inquiry  Commission  are  inherently  fact-
bound, in contrast to the legal analysis found at the heart of appellate review, where
is  the  rationale  for  excluding  randomly  selected  community  members  whose
common  sense  and  everyday  experience  we  claim  to  value?l33   As  Professor
Findley has noted, "One of the reasons we employ a jury system is that it serves as
128. See, e.g.,  Stephen B. Bright & Patrick J. Keenan, Judges and the Politics of Death: Deciding
Between the Bill of Rights and the Next Election in CapitalC  ases, 75 B.U. L. REV. 759, 785, 792, 796
(1995) ("Passions, as we all know, can run to the extreme when the State tries one accused of a barbaric
act against society, or one accused of a crime that - for whatever reason - inflames the community.
Pressures on the government to secure a conviction, to 'do something,'  can overwhelm even those of
good conscience.  When prosecutors and judges are elected, or when they harbor political ambitions,
such pressures are particularly dangerous."); Julian N. Eule, Crocodiles in the Bathtub: State Courts,
Voter Initiatives and the Threat of Electoral Reprisal,6 5 U. COLO. L. REV. 733, 739 (1994) ("A judge
may hope that conscience will triumph over retention anxiety, but as Otto Kaus put it so well, ignoring
the political consequences of visible decisions is 'like ignoring a crocodile in your bathtub."').
129. Republican  Party of Minnesota  v.  White,  536  U.S.  765,  788-89  (2002)  (O'Connor,  J.,
concurring) ("We of course want judges to be impartial, in the sense of being free from any personal
stake in the outcome of the cases to which they are assigned. But if judges are  subject to regular
elections they are likely to feel that they have at least some personal stake in the outcome of every
publicized case.").
130. See Bright & Keenan, supra note  128, at 785-89; see also Corinna Barrett Lain, Deciding
Death, 57 DUKE L.J. 1, 5 (2007) ("[T]he politics of death only exacerbate [defendants']  vulnerability,
leaving little reason to trust other institutional actors to exercise self-restraint.").
131.  Bright & Keenan, supra note 128, at 777-78.
132. N.C. GEN. STAT. § 163-9 (2011).
133. HARVARD LAW REVIEW Ass'N, Developments in the Law: The Civil Jury, 110 HARV. L. REV.
1408,  1423 (1997)  ("a meaningful assessment of the [] jury as a judicial instrument must include a
number of different systemic criteria: ...  factfinding competence (the ability to understand, recall, and
draw logical conclusions from the evidence presented) ...").  See also THOMAs, supra note 18, at 211
("A jury that reflects the community should hear almost any evidence of innocence, assuming it is
sufficiently probative of innocence.").2012]  COMMISSIONING  INNOCENCE AND RESTORING CONFIDENCE  551
an expression of community values and shared understandings.  Juries bring to the
justice system a kind of community common sense."' 34
This  community  values  element'35  would  cohere  to  create  a  more  anti-
majoritarian and  balanced body.  Wrongful convictions strike at the heart of the
judicial system.  Excluding citizens from a final review process intended to rectify
grave harms of this sort is insular and shortsided.
C. Returning the Controversy to the Local Jurisdiction Who Was the Original
Sovereign Victim of the Crime in Question
Although crime's human face is the victim upon whom the unlawful  act (or
acts) was committed, the sovereign is also victimized as social order is upended.136
For this reason, the criminal charge (or charges) is brought by the state to vindicate
its rights.  To  make  the community whole  after being victimized,  the Supreme
Court  notes  the  importance of community  involvement  in  the  criminal  trial.131
Selection of a jury from the victimized community is essential to remedy the crime
against the greater society in addition to the individual victim of the crime.
134. Findley, supra note 10, at 624.  See also Bandes, supra note 16, at 419 ("Another safeguard is
the jury, which promotes the exchange of ideas among people with diverse perspectives...  .Contrary to
popular belief, judges are not exempt from the cognitive problems that beset other humans. They too
make erroneous assumptions and, left to their own devices, fail to correct them. The best check against
partiality and bias is debate with others.").
135. See supra Part IV.A.3.
136. See Laura I. Appleman, The Plea Jury, 85 IND. L.J. 731, 740 (2010) ("Restoring the offender to
the community  is an important theoretical  foundation of the jury plea, because when  an offender
commits wrongdoing, he or she  injures the community. By passing judgment on the offender-by
determining both the offender's crime and deciding on the punishment-the community can return itself
to where it was before the crime was committed."); Ndiva Kofele-Kale, Presumed Guilty: Balancing
Competing Rights and Interests in Combating Economic Crimes, 40 INT'L LAW. 909, 923 (2006) ("It is
not only the individual accused who benefits from the presumption of innocence but the community as a
whole. The latter has an interest to protect the system of criminal justice by maintaining the reasonable
doubt standard since it serves to protect its members from activity which injures them without justifiable
cause.  It is in the community's interest to ensure that conviction and punishment follow from evidence
which leaves no reasonable doubt as to guilt, without which there is a reasonable possibility that an
innocent person may end up being punished for a crime he did not commit.  If conviction is allowed
notwithstanding reasonable doubt, '[r]ight thinking members of th[e] community would then, justifiably,
withdraw  their trust and confidence in the criminal  law,'  thus undermining the moral force of the
criminal  law.").  See  also REVIEW  OF THE  CRIMINAL  AND  CIVIL JUSTICE  SYSTEM IN WESTERN
AUSTRALIA, supra note 9, at 51.
137. Press-Enter.  Co.  v.  Super.  Ct.  of Cal.,  464  U.S.  501,  508  (1984)  ("Criminal  acts,
especially violent crimes, often provoke public concern, even outrage and hostility; this in turn generates
a community urge to retaliate and desire to have justice done."); Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Va., 448
U.S. 555, 570 (1980) ("The early history of open trials in part reflects the widespread acknowledgment,
long before there were behavioral scientists, that public trials had significant community therapeutic
value.")
138.  Steven A. Engel, The Public's Vicinage Right: A ConstitutionalA rgument, 75 N.Y.U. L. REV.
1658, 1661  (2000) ("the vicinage presumption fulfills the jury's democratic function by allowing the
aggrieved community to participate through its representatives on the jury.  Community participation
injects a democratic component into the application of the laws and the outcome of the criminal trial.
By stamping the community's judgment on the verdict, the local jury legitimizes both the convictions
and the acquittals of criminal defendants.  This participation is essential to what the Supreme Court has
described as the 'community therapeutic value' of the trial, whereby the criminal trial becomes a vehicle552 MAINE LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:2
Exoneration  is evidence  of double-harm to the state-first, where the crime
occurred and then where the judicial process failed.139 The local jurisdiction should
be  tightly  woven  into the  potential  review  and redress  of such  process  error.
Citizens are entitled to be included in matters  of singular importance to the well
being of the community and are representative of the community  harmed by the
crime.140 Indirect involvement via the election ofjudges is simply not enough.
V. CONCLUSION
As Professor Findley wrote "[s]earching inquiries into truth are, and likely will
continue  to  be,  increasingly  important,  not just  as  a  matter  of justice  to  the
innocent, but also for protecting confidence in the process."141  This "confidence in
the system"  is the concern of this essay.  If system confidence  is at stake, and  it
clearly is, then who decides when and how a person is proven wrongfully convicted
is  at  least  as  important  as  fine,  detailed  decisions  about  doctrinal  reform  or
appellate and trial innovations.  The "who decides" part of the process needs to be
expanded.
While  the  Inquiry  Commission  is  a  healthy  step  forward,  altering  the
composition of the reviewing tribunals should further extend its reparative reach.
Presently composed  strictly  of judges,  including jurors  would bolster important
democratic values. Important questions regarding the number of jurors, voir dire,
and other practical  matters are beyond the scope of this short essay.  Nonetheless,
elevating the historical role both of the jury and local democracy, promoting citizen
understanding  of the phenomenon  of wrongful  convictions, assisting  in restoring
the public's confidence  and trust in its trial courts, and helping to ensure  a more
balanced review of the merits of each innocence case are some of the more obvious
benefits.
Although embracing jurors in the Inquiry Commission's final phase of review
will  not  change  our  plea-based  trial  system  nor  will  it  alter  the  traditional
limitations in the appellate process that make innocence  identification so difficult
in that arena, it will signal that citizens-ordinary  men and women-have a right
and a duty to face, assess, and weigh the claims of the innocent.  The costs are low
and the rewards, for democracy, the criminal justice system, citizens, and the local
community, are substantial.
for healing the social rupture caused by the crime.") (quoting Richmond Newspapers, Inc., 448 U.S. at
570.).
139. Boaz  Sangero, Are All  Forms of Crime Really  "Organized Crime"?: On the New Israeli
Combating Criminal OrganizationsL aw and ParallelL egislation in the US. and Other Countries, 29
Loy. L.A.  INT'L & COMP. L. REv. 61,  97  (2007) ("There is no greater  injustice than a wrongful
conviction. It causes significant harm to society as a whole.").
140. RANDOLPH  N. JONAKAIT, THE AMERICAN JURY SYsTEM  72 (2003)  ("the jury is generally a
better representative of the community than a judge and is the more appropriate source for the normative
assessments that the legislature has left to the trial decision maker.").
141.  Findley, supra note 10, at 608.