IT'S ABOUT TIME
DAVID FRISCH*
This Article critically evaluates the view widely held by courts that
contract  claims  for  lost  leisure  or  personal  time  do  not  justify
compensation. The  thesis of this Article is  that while the conventional
judicial wisdom may be correct about some forms of nonpecuniary loss, it
is entirely wrong regarding lost time. After setting aside assumptions, I
show that traditional arguments against this form of recovery are deeply
flawed Most importantly, I rely on the recognition of hedonic damages by
forensic economists to debunk the myth that loss of time is no more than an
everyday  aspect  of life  not  worthy  of judicial attention. This  Article
demonstrates the relevance of lost time claims to remedial policy generally,
showing that the denial of these claims undermines the  twin remedial
policies of fairness and efficient deterrence. Finally, I reject the various
hedonic models that have been used to measure leisure time on the ground
that they are either administratively cumbersome or are anti-egalitarian,
andp ropose a model that eliminates these two deficiencies.
The lack ofJudicial and academic attention given to lost personal time
claims  is  somewhat  astonishing, considering its  prevalence  in  legal
contexts.  This trend suggests that the traditional common  law position
against the recovery of nonpecuniary damages generally has a powerful
hold on our judicial intuition. A reevaluation of at least one aspect of this
slighted area of law would be goodp ublic policy, and it's about time.
I.  INTRODU CTION .....................................7.5.8........................................ 
II.  IN RE HANNAFORD BROS. Co. CUSTOMER DATA SECURITY BREACH
LITIGATION ......................................................................................  763
A . F ac ts ......................................7 .6 .3................................................ 
B.  The Maine Supreme JudicialC  ourt Opinion ..........................  764
III.  A CRITIQUE OF THE MAINE SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT'S OPINION766
A . Sh *tH   appens! .........................................................................  766
B.  UnprincipledC  lassification. ...................................................  775
C.  The Problem of Me asurement .................................................  794
IV . C ON CLU SION ..................................................................................  80 1
*  Professor  of Law, University  of Richmond  School of Law.  B.S., University  of
Pennsylvania; J.D., University of Miami School of Law; LL.M., Yale Law School. I would
like to thank John Spurlock-Brown for his research and editorial assistance.TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
I. INTRODUCTION
While people seldom agree on any proposition without reservation, few
would take issue with the old saying that "time is money."' Implicit in this
saying  is  the  observation  that  our personal  time  is  the  ultimate  scarce
resource  and  should  not  be  squandered  without receiving  something  of
value (such as money or enjoyment) in return.2  In conventional economics,
time is treated as a commodity to be bought and sold at will.3 However,
time  is  much  more  than  a  flow  of  future  income  payments.  The
irreplaceable  hours, minutes, and seconds of our lives are used to give and
receive love, participate  in activities that give us pleasure, and engage in
many other life elements that most everyone would agree are important.
There  are many ways that people exhibit information  about how  they
value their time. Some of the most obvious examples come in the form of
transportation decisions. Travelers regularly pay a considerably higher price
for an airline ticket rather than taking a less expensive, but slower, train ride
to the same  location. Likewise, commuters  often choose to drive on a toll
road when  they can reach  the  same destination  by a free, but  less direct
route. Employment relationships supply yet another common example. If a
worker is normally expected to be at work and receives payment for only
eight  hours  per  day,  the  employer  may  find  it  necessary  to  provide
additional compensation, in the form of overtime pay, to obtain more of the
worker's time.
We might, therefore, intuitively expect that civil recourse in private law
would be readily available  against those who wrongfully cause us to lose
time by breach of contract or otherwise. Although nonpecuniary  damages
are  a  regular  feature  of  compensation  claims  in  contract,4  with  few
1.  The etymology of this phrase is obscure, at best. We know that Benjamin Franklin
used it in his ADVICE TO A YOUNG TRADESMAN  (1748) ("Remember that time is money. He
that idly loses five shillings' worth of time loses five shillings, and might as prudently throw
five shillings into the sea."). However, there is a citation slightly earlier than Franklin's that
appears in  the  Oxford  English  Dictionary,  culled  from AMBROSE  PHILLIPS,  THE FREE-
THINKER 128 (1723)  ("In vain did his Wife inculcate to him, That Time is Money: He had too
much wit to apprehend her  ..." ).
2.  We are all time-limited. That is, a person has a limited quantity of time equal to 24
hours in a day. We all crave more time. Suffice it to say that if singer-songwriter Jim Croce
had succeeded  in saving  "Time  in  a Bottle,"  the value of that bottle  would have been
priceless. JIM  CROCE,  Time in a Bottle, on You  DON'T MESS AROUND  WITH JIM (ABC
Records 1972).
3.  See, e.g., Kurt V. Krueger, John 0. Ward & Gary R. Albrecht, Introduction to the
Whole-Time Concept, 14  J. FORENSIC ECON.  3,  5 (2001)  (noting that "money, time, and
goods can be equally substituted for each other").
4.  Although the primary purpose of this Article is to suggest that lost personal time
that results from a breach of contract is a real loss and that the aggrieved party should be
compensated for such a loss, nonpecuniary damages recoverable in tort will not be ignored.2012] FRISCH
exceptions, these claims have been largely ignored by legal commentators
•  5
and  have  received  merely  cursory  treatment  by  courts.  First,  let  us
understand what is meant by nonpecuniary damages. In my mind, these are
damages  that compensate  for losses that  are not generally  thought of as
being susceptible to measurement in purely economic terms, such as mental
suffering, inconvenience, loss of time, or humiliation.
One might argue that there are two general categories of nonpecuniary
damage  claims that may arise  in breach of contract cases. First,  there are
claims  for  some type  of psychic  harm.  These  are the  emotional  distress
cases,  regardless  of what  other descriptive  label  a court  or  litigant  may
choose  to  employ.  Perhaps  the  term  "psychic  harm"  might  be  a
classification  that better serves as  a new and useful  grouping of cases  in
which  judges  would  strive  for  consistency  and  litigants  would  feel
empowered to look for precedents. Instead, psychic harm currently does not
seem to be a recognized  category, and  it is  simply  a feature common to
many  cases bearing different  labels.  Second  are  so-called  claims for lost
time.  The  distinguishing  feature  of these  claims  is  their  temporal,  not
psychic, nature.  For some defined period of time, the aggrieved party has
5.  See John A. Sebert, Jr.,  Punitive and Nonpecuniary Damages in Actions Based
Upon Contract: Toward Achieving the Objective of Full Compensation, 33 UCLA L. REV.
1565, 1578 (1986)  ("Nonpecuniary losses, such as inconvenience, annoyance, and emotional
distress,  although  likely  real  in  many  situations,  are  rarely  recognized.").  The  most
prominent  exception  involves the  right of the  aggrieved  party  to recover  damages  for
emotional  distress.  See,  e.g.,  RESTATEMENT  (SECOND)  OF  CONTRACTS  §  353  (1981)
("Recovery for emotional disturbance will be excluded unless the breach also caused bodily
harm or the contract or the breach is of such a kind that serious emotional disturbance was a
particularly likely result."). Typically, emotional distress damages are only awarded in death
and burial cases, in cases where the breach is "accompanied by public embarrassment...  of
the plaintiff' or in cases where the breach results in physical harm to the plaintiff, as in
contracts for medical services. See Sebert, supra, at 1584-85; Douglas J.W haley, Payingfor
the Agony: The Recovery of Emotional Distress Damages in Contract Actions, 26 SUFFOLK
L. REv. 935, 940 (1992).
6.  In continental doctrine, this type of loss is known by the term  "dommage moral,"
that is, damage of a moral nature that does not affect a tangible part of a person's patrimony.
Saul Litvinoff, Moral Damages, 38 LA. L. REV. 1, 1 (1977). Such recovery is recognized by
statute in Louisiana, a jurisdiction whose law is based in part on civil law.
Damages for nonpecuniary loss may be recovered when the contract, because of
its  nature,  is intended  to  gratify  a  nonpecuniary  interest  and,  because  of the
circumstances  surrounding the formation or the nonperformance  of the contract,
the obligor knew, or should have known, that his failure to perform would cause
that kind of loss. Regardless of the nature of the contract, these damages may be
recovered also when the  obligor intended,  through his failure,  to aggrieve  the
feelings of the obligee.
LA. CIV. CODE ANN. art. 1998 (1985).TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
lost  the  opportunity  to  engage  in  an  alternative  activity;  it  is  in  this
opportunistic  sense that time has been lost. This Article engages  lost time
from  the  perspective  of claims  by  individuals  who,  for  one  reason  or
another,  are forced to spend  their personal or leisure  time in undesirable
ways, and for which no lost economic opportunity can be readily identified.
Claims of this sort can be described as "lost personal time."
It should be apparent  that not all lost time claims will necessarily  fall
into  this  category.  Consider,  for  example,  the  question  of  whether  a
business buyer  can recover  for the time spent by its employees  on tasks
made  necessary  by  the  seller's  failure  to  deliver  conforming  goods.  In
Keller v. Inland Metals All Weather Conditioning,I nc.,7 the buyer rightfully
rejected  a  dehumidifier  delivered  by  the  seller  and  sought  to  recover
damages  for  the  time  its  employees  spent  gathering  temperature  and
humidity  data  and transporting water  samples for testing.8  The trial court
allowed  this  claim  and  awarded  damages  based  on  the  employees'
respective hourly rates.9 On appeal, the Supreme Court of Idaho affirmed,
holding that these were incidental damages recoverable under U.C.C.  § 2-
715(l).1° Here, the  court was not dealing with a  claim for nonpecuniary
damages;  instead, the expense incurred in having employees do something
that  they  were  not  hired  to  do  could  easily  be  monetized  and  better
classified as a traditional incidental or consequential damages claim.
Some  of the  contexts,  outside  of statutory  frameworks,"  in  which
claims  for lost personal  time  have  been litigated  include  the  "time  and
effort" expended by those who are affected by data security breaches;12 the
"inconvenience,  aggravation, and distress" due to a service provider's delayX
in  performance;13  or a  breach of warranty  by various  types  of sellers.
7.  76 P.3d 977 (Idaho 2003).
8.  Id. at 979, 984.
9.  Id. at 984.
10.  Id. U.C.C. § 2-715(1)  permits a buyer to recover reasonable expenses incurred in
the  inspection, receipt, transportation, and care and custody of nonconforming  goods and
any reasonable expense incident to the delay or breach. U.C.C. § 2-715(1) (1977).
11.  Inasmuch as my larger goal is to suggest an approach to breach of contract cases, I
ignore  for the  time  being areas  of the  law where  legislative  enactments  dominate  the
landscape.  For  a  discussion  of  some  of these  enactments  see  infra notes  57-74  and
accompanying text.
12.  See, e.g., In re Hannaford Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec. Breach Litig., 4 A.3d
492, 496 (Me. 2010)  (holding that time and effort expended  to avoid or remediate harm
caused by fraudulent charges or identity theft by those whose credit card information was
stolen was not a cognizable injury for which damages could be recovered under the law of
negligence or contract). For more on this case, see infra notes 33-52 and accompanying text.
13.  See, e.g., Meador v. Toyota of Jefferson, Inc., 322 So. 2d 802, 805 (La. App. 4th
Cir. 1975) (the court denied recovery of damages resulting from defendant's unreasonable
delay in repairing plaintiff's automobile  because the principal object of the  contract was
physical gratification or utility).2012] FRUSCH
There is also the "time lost" as a result of phone calls made to straighten out
discovered  billing  errors by  a  wireless  communications  provider.15 And
then,  there is  the  "inconvenience,  loss  of time,  anxiety  and  frustration"
caused by being bumped as a result of flight overbooking. 16
These  several  examples  begin  to suggest  that  the  challenge  of lost
personal time claims is an urgent one. That confusion reigns is even evident
from  the  diverse  terminology  used  to  describe  these  claims.  What,  for
example,  is the relationship  between "lost  time"  and "inconvenience"?  Is
"inconvenience"  distinct  from  "distress"?  Does  it  matter?  Remarkably
enough,  no commentator or judge has  explained any  of these cases with
reference to the usual litany of harms alleged. Because these harms share a
common currency (i.e.,  each refers to a reduction in the overall enjoyment
of  life),  discussions  of  nonpecuniary  damages  tend  to  use  them
interchangeably,  creating the  appearance  of a uniform  problem when,  in
fact, the specific harms may vary widely.
To  put  this  observation  in  context,  consider  the  court's  opinion  in
Daniel v.  Virgin Atlantic Airways Ltd.17 The plaintiffs  in this case  were
passengers  on  a  flight  from  London  to  San  Francisco. 8 Following  an
alleged mechanical problem and fuel shortage,  the plane was  diverted to
Vancouver, British Columbia, where it sat "on the tarmac for one hour and
fifteen  minutes."' 9  After  the  passengers  were  finally  permitted  to
disembark,  they were  confined in  a transit lounge  for one  hour  and ten
minutes.20 As a result of the delays, they then had no choice but to spend
the night in Vancouver.21 This nightmare of a trip finally ended when their
plane  landed  in  San  Francisco,  twenty-five  hours  after  its  scheduled
arrival.22  The  plaintiffs  claimed  damages  for  "anxiety,  exhaustion,
frustration,  humiliation,  inconvenience,  mental  anguish  and  physical
discomfort., 23 Although the court decided that "emotional distress" is not a
legally cognizable harm in the absence of economic  or physical  injury, it
14.  Monsanto Agric. Prods. Co. v. Edenfield, 426 So. 2d 574, 575 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App.
1982); Lobianco v. Prop. Prot., Inc., 437 A.2d 417, 418, 422 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1981).
15.  See, e.g., Sisley v. Sprint Commc'ns Co., L.P., 284 Fed. Appx. 463, 466 (9th Cir.
2008) (although  the court expressed  doubt  whether the plaintiff had  stated a cognizable
injury, it nevertheless reversed the district court's dismissal for want of Article III standing).
16.  See,  e.g.,  Lopez v. E.  Airlines,  Inc.,  677 F.  Supp.  181,  183  (S.D.N.Y.  1988)
(holding that although plaintiff suffered a delay of only three to four hours, he should be
compensated for the "inconvenience, delay and uncertainty").
17.  59 F. Supp. 2d 986 (N.D. Cal. 1998).
18.  ld. at 987.
19.  Id.
20.  Id.
21.  Id.
22.  Id.
23.  Id. at 992 (internal quotation marks omitted).TENNESSEE LA W REVIE W [Vol.  79:757
had  no  qualms  about  permitting  the  plaintiffs  to  recover  damages  for
"inconvenience."24 Why?  The  court's  simple  answer  was  that  "time  is
money, after all ....,2 5
What does this analysis tell us? The answer  is that we  need to bring
greater discipline to the analysis of nonpecuniary  damage  claims, and, by
doing so, reveal trends and tensions in the judicial enterprise  that require
either a more deliberate or different response. Using, for example, the same
term-"inconvenience"--to  express  both  a  disruption  in  the  plaintiffs
schedule  of  activities  and  the  distress  caused  by  that  disruption  is
misleading.  People  who  experience  emotional  turmoil  as  a  result  of a
breach may, nevertheless, conduct their affairs as planned but with less joie
de  vivre.  Is  this  inconvenience  or  something  else,  such  as  emotional
distress? Whatever we may choose to call it,  it is certainly not lost time.
Strictly speaking, even time spent by airline passengers on the tarmac, in an
airport lounge, or asleep in a hotel room is not time lost. Each passenger is
still  experiencing  life, but  not in  the manner  she would  have  otherwise
chosen.  Notwithstanding  this  quibble  with  the  descriptive  accuracy  of
referring to these claims as "lost time" claims, the term  is a useful way of
highlighting a shared feature of a set of cases. For this reason, I avoid the
temptation to suggest a different description.
With these opening comments in mind, I do not intend to engage the
broader debate about whether nonpecuniary damages may be recovered for
breach  of contract  generally.  Rather,  this  Article  explores  the  narrower
question  of  whether  damages  are  appropriate  to  compensate  for  lost
personal time. 26 I suggest that thheyys should be recognized. In so doing, I will
seek to clear a path for their acceptability by removing certain doctrinal and
theoretical impediments to such recognition.
This  Article  unfolds in two  parts.  In Part  II, I consider in detail the
opinion of the Supreme Judicial Court of Maine in In re Hannaford Bros.
Co. Customer Data Security Breach Litigation2.7  This case is  a paradigm
for the position  that damages  for lost personal  time  are non-recoverable,
and provides a useful lens through which to analyze the issue.28 From my
24.  Id. at 994.
25.  Id. Interestingly, the court suggests that the amount of compensation awarded to
each plaintiff should reflect what he or she was prevented from doing as a result of the flight
delay. Id. at 994 n.6.  I argue  later in this  Article  that  this brand  of discrimination  is
inappropriate. See infra notes 218-19 and accompanying text.
26.  While claims for psychic harm typically accompany claims for lost time, there are
significant  differences  between  these  two  categories  of  claims  that  require  separate
treatment. For one thing, there is no metric for measuring the value of the former; whereas,
this Article will  suggest that there is a metric for the  latter. See infra notes  211-21  and
accompanying text.
27.  4 A.3d 492 (Me. 2010).
28.  See id. at 496 ("An individual's  time, alone, is not legally protected  from the2012] FRISCH
perspective,  the  court's  conclusion  and  reasoning  unfortunately  are
completely  wrong.  Understanding  why  this  is so requires  a  much closer
look at the objections  to  recovery on which  the court's opinion is based;
that will be the key task of Part III.  I then conclude  with a proposal for
determining the appropriate amount of an award for loss of personal time.
II.  IN RE HANNAFORD BROS. CO. CUSTOMER
DATA SECURITY BREACH LITIGA TION
A.  Facts
The events between December 2007 and March 2008 that gave rise to
the litigation in Hannaford involved a breach of the computer systems  of
the Maine-based  grocery  store  chain.29 This  led  to  a consolidated  class
action  brought  by  customers  whose  credit  and  debit  card  data  became
compromised  by the breach.30  A significant  legal obstacle that faced the
Hannaford plaintiffs was  that, at the  end of the day, few  class  members
actually  sustained  financial  harm.3'  Importantly,  even  in  those  instances
where the thieves used the stolen debit or credit card information to make
fraudulent charges, there was little or no out-of-pocket loss to the victims. 2
Consequently, the  plaintiffs  had to aver  that they were  harmed  in some
other concrete  way.33 And this they  did. The plaintiffs  claimed that they
were  entitled  to  be  reimbursed  for  their  expended  "time,  energy  and
expense"  to  ameliorate  the  financial  disruption  caused  by  the  security
breach.34 Among  other things,  they  had to  take  the  necessary  steps  to
identify and contest the fraudulent charges, cancel their existing cards, and
deal  with  pre-authorized  charges  by  registering  new  cards  with  online
sellers  and other  payees to whom pre-authorized payments were  made.
negligence of others.").
29.  Id. at 494.
30.  Id.
31.  Id.
32.  See  id. The  Truth  in  Lending  Act  limits  the  liability  of a  consumer  for
unauthorized charges to $50. Truth in Lending Act of 1968 § 133,  15 U.S.C. § 1643(a)(1)
(2006).  Even  the  $50 charge  is  often waived by the issuer. See, e.g.,  Visa Security &
Protection, Zero Liability, VISAUSA, http://usa.visa.com/personal/security/visa-security_pr
ogram/zero  liability.html  (last visited Jan. 15,  2012). The same $50 liability limitation is
also applicable to the unauthorized use of a debit card, provided the consumer reports the
loss of the card within a prescribed amount of time. See Electronic  Fund Transfer Act of
1978 § 909, 15 U.S.C. § 1693g (2006).
33.  In re Hannaford Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec. Breach Litig., 613 F. Supp. 2d 108,
115 (D. Me. 2009).
34.  Id.at  116.
35.  Id.764 TENNESSEE LA W RE VIEW [Vol. 79:757
Accordingly, In re Hannafordc an be viewed as a lost personal time case,
pure and simple.
The defendants sought a dismissal of the claims of the named plaintiffs
whose data had been  stolen but who had  not suffered any out-of-pocket
losses  as  a  result  of the  theft.36 Maine  District  Court  Judge  D.  Brock
Homby initially  granted the defendants'  motion  as to  all but one  of the
plaintiffs'  claims,  holding  that consumers  could  not be compensated  for
"the ordinary  frustrations  and inconveniences  that everyone  confronts  in
daily life with or without fraud or negligence" because there was no way to
monetize such a claim.37
The plaintiffs then asked Judge Homby to reconsider his ruling, arguing
that  it was  by  no means  clear how  Maine's  highest  court,  if given  the
opportunity,  would decide  the question of whether  lost time is a legally
cognizable injury. 8 Judge Hornby agreed with the plaintiffs, and proceeded
to certify two questions of state law to the Maine Supreme Judicial Court.39
The state's high court only addressed the following question:
In the absence of physical harm or economic loss or identity theft, do
time and effort  alone,  spent in a reasonable  effort to  avoid or remediate
reasonably  foreseeable  harm,  constitute  a  cognizable  injury  for  which
damages may be recovered under Maine law of negligence and/or implied
40
contract?
The court's answer was an emphatic "No.'
B.  The Maine Supreme Judicial Court Opinion
The state  supreme judicial court's brief opinion is best understood in
the context of examining whether  damages  for lost personal time  can be
recovered  through  the  lens  of what  the court  saw  as  a  series  of useful
categories.  The  court first  considered  the category  of tort and  the  sub-
36.  Id.a t 115.
37.  Id.a t 134-35.
38.  In re Hannaford Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec. Breach Litig., 660 F. Supp. 2d 94,
97-98 (D. Me. 2009).
39.  In re Hannaford Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec. Breach  Litig., 4 A.3d 492, 494
(Me. 2010). See also In re Hannaford Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec. Breach Litig., 617 F.
Supp. 2d  198,  201  (D. Me. 2009) (certifying questions to the Supreme Judicial Court of
Maine).
40.  In re Hannaford,4  A.3d at 494. The Supreme Judicial Court did not address the
second question, which was, "If the answer to question # 1 is yes under a negligence claim
and no under an implied contract claim, can a plaintiff suing for negligence recover damages
under  Maine  law  for purely  economic  harm  absent  personal  injury, physical  harm  to
property, or misrepresentation?"
41.  Id. at 498.2012] FRISCH
category of negligence.42 It was quick to point out that negligence provides
no recourse "for the typical  annoyances or inconveniences that are part of
everyday  life,"  and that  damage  claims for personal time are within this
category of non-compensable  harms.43  Yet  the court failed  adequately to
articulate a coherent explanation for why this is so. It did suggest, however,
that recovery was denied because the loss in question could not be assigned
a value.44 Thus, we are  told that damages for lost time can be recovered if
the plaintiff alleges personal injury or property damage and if the loss can
be  correlated  to  either earnings  or  earning  opportunities  (i.e.,  pecuniary
damages).45 The court then continued with its categorization of tort claims.
In its view, the cases relied on by the plaintiffs that allowed recovery for
loss of time were distinguishable because many of them involved at least
one intentional  tort.46  The  court  thus reasoned  that  "because  liability  is
often more extensive in cases of intentional  torts than those in negligence,
intentional  tort cases recognizing recovery  for time  and  effort have little
bearing on our analysis.'47 As well, it rejected the persuasive value of those
cases  cited because  they offered no guidance  as to how  the value of lost
time should be measured.48
Finally, the court turned its attention to the plaintiffs' breach of contract
claim. The analysis began with the recognition that "contract  damages are
more restricted than compensatory damages for a tort'49 and ended with the
court  reiterating  Judge  Hornby's  existential  observation  about  the
frustrations  and  inconveniences  of everyday  life.50  Thus,  those plaintiffs
who  have  suffered  no  direct financial  loss  are without a right of action
regardless of whether their claim is said to arise out of contract or tort.51
42.  4 A.3d at496.
43.  Id.
44.  See id. ("Because the time in question could be assigned a value... resulting from
personal injury or property damage, loss of time was a harm cognizable in negligence.").
45.  Id.
46.  Id. at 497  n.1; see, e.g., Prentiss v. Shaw, 56 Me. 427, 431,  435  (1869)  (false
imprisonment); Brown v. Watson, 47 Me. 161, 163 (1859)  (nuisance).
47.  4 A.3d at497.
48.  Id.
49.  Id. The court makes this point by stressing that damages for emotional distress are
typically unavailable in a breach of contract action. Id.
50.  Id.
51.  See id. at 498. This is a conclusion of real import. If case law is any indication, the
theft or loss of personal  information after it has been shared  with another is  a growing
problem. In some cases, the information  is obtained by hackers, see, e.g.,  Bell v. Acxiom
Corp., 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 72477, at *2 (E.D. Ark. Oct. 3, 2006);  Belle Chasse Auto.
Care, Inc. v. Advanced Auto Parts, Inc., No. 08-1568, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25084, at *2
(E.D. La. March 24, 2009). Sometimes the computer itself is stolen, see, e.g., Randolph v.
ING Life Ins. & Annuity Co., 486 F. Supp.2d 1 (D.D.C. 2007); Caudle v. Towers, Perrin,
Forster & Crosby, Inc., 580 F. Supp. 2d 273, 275 (S.D.N.Y. 2008);  Kahle v. Litton LoanTENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
III.  A CRITIQUE OF THE MAINE SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT'S OPINION
The brief discussion of relevant legal doctrine in Hannaford is stronger
on rhetoric  than analysis.  This is a shame, because the fact pattern  in the
case presents  a  wonderful opportunity  for  exploring  the  doctrinal  issues
posed by a claim for damages  for lost personal  time, a  subject that is  far
more complex and interesting than the court's opinion implies. Let us put
some flesh on the bare bones of the opinion, and, in so doing, take a closer
look at the justifications for the limitations on liability that the court found
to be persuasive.
A.  Sh*t Happens!
The first aspect of the Hannaford opinion that deserves a closer look is
the court's  supposition that the time and effort  expended by the plaintiffs
was no more than the "typical annoyances  and  inconveniences  that are  a
part  of everyday  life."52 Or,  to  put  it  in  more  colloquial  terms,  "sh*t
happens."  Perhaps the court only meant to say that it has never shaped its
negligence  and contract doctrines with the object of recognizing a stand-
alone claim for lost time. But it would not necessarily be a mistake to read
the  statement  more  broadly,  and to  suggest  that  there  are  two  entirely
separate  categories of harms:  those  of the "grin  and bear  it" variety  for
which no legal recourse is available and those for which there is. However,
this observation gives no indication as to why the loss of time alone should
fall within the former category and not the latter. As part of everyday life,
we also encounter negligent automobile  drivers who cause personal  injury
or property damage and those who breach contracts, causing the aggrieved
party to lose value directly as a result of the breach.3 Yet, no court would
tell the person lying in a hospital bed because of someone else's negligence
or the pizza restaurant  owner  who  is  forced out of business because  his
Serv'g LP, 486 F. Supp. 2d 705, 706 (S.D. Ohio 2007). Of the latter variety is Krottner v.
Starbucks Corp., 406 Fed. Appx.  129 (9th Cir. 2010). Notwithstanding the plaintiffs'  claim
that they were required to spend an inordinate amount of time monitoring their banking and
financial  accounts,  the Ninth Circuit  dismissed  the state  law claims  for negligence and
breach of contract based on Washington law. Ignoring the lost time component of the claim,
the court held that "mere danger of future harm" is not a cognizable injury. Id. at 131.
52.  In re Hannaford  Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec. Breach Litig.,  4 A.3d 492, 496
(Me. 2010). The district court reached the identical conclusion and expressed it in almost
identical language. In re Hannaford Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec.  Breach Litig., 613 F.
Supp. 2d 108, 134 (D. Me. 2009) (stating that the plaintiffs' time and effort represented "the
ordinary frustrations and inconveniences that everyone confronts in daily life").
53.  This is usually measured by the difference in value between what was promised
and what was received, see U.C.C. § 2-714(2) (2012), or the additional expense of obtaining
a replacement, see U.C.C. § 2-712 (2012), or its value. U.C.C. § 2-713 (2012).2012] FRISCH
pizza oven is delivered late that they have no recourse because "hey, that's
everyday life."
The Hannaford opinion lacks  a convincing  account  of the criteria by
which  claims  for  lost  time  should  be  compared  to,  and  therefore
distinguished  from, the vast array of compensable harms. After all, if our
goal  is compensation,54 then the fact of wrongdoing  rather than the form
that the resulting harm takes ought to be sufficient to empower plaintiffs to
prevail on the merits of their claims. However, this proposition assumes the
absence of practical or theoretical stumbling blocks to the recognition of a
particular form of harm. For example, many courts have  denied recovery
for  emotional  distress  because  of the  risk  of fabricated  or  exaggerated
claims5  or because  there is no market standard  to measure  its value.56 As
will be shown, these are not concerns that should caution against allowing
recovery for lost personal time.
Perhaps  implicit in the Hannaford court's characterization  of the lost
time claim as one of life's ordinary frustrations  is the belief that plaintiffs
were  not really  harmed  at  all. If they  were  not harmed,  they  therefore
needed  no  protection  from  actions  that  were  not  harmful.  Beyond  the
clich6d "time is money" response to this position, there is both judicial and
legislative  evidence  to  the  contrary.  As  previously  indicated  and  as
discussed infra, there is not a blanket prohibition against  damages for lost
personal time in all cases. Thus, the court that refuses to value lost personal
time in one context would have to explain why it suddenly takes on value in
a different context.
In recent years, we have also witnessed a growing legislative awareness
that personal time has value. In September 2008, President George W. Bush
signed the Identity  Theft Enforcement  and Restitution Act of 2008 ("the
Act").57  The  Act  applies  to  both  online  and  offline  information  theft,
amending  18 U.S.C.  § 3663(b) to require identity thieves  convicted under
the Act to "pay an amount equal to the value of the time reasonably spent
by  the  victim  in  an  attempt  to  remediate  the  intended  or  actual  harm
incurred by the victim from the offense."58 Unfortunately, the Act is of little
help in a Hannaford-type case. The information thief has typically vanished
or  is  insolvent,  so  the victims'  sole  recourse  is against  the company  to
whom they entrusted their information. With regard to such a claim, the Act
is silent.
54.  See infra notes 172-76 and accompanying text.
55.  See, e.g., Garvis v. Employers Mut. Cas. Co., 497 N.W.2d 254, 257 n.3  (Minn.
1993).
56.  See, e.g., Valentine v. Gen. Am. Credit, Inc., 362 N.W.2d 628, 630, 631 (Mich.
1984).
57.  Pub. L. No. 110-326, 122 Stat, 3560.
58.  18 U.S.C. § 3663(b)(6) (2011).TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
Moreover, in considering the question of whether compensation for lost
personal  time  can  be  recovered  for  violation  of statutes  that  do  not
expressly  speak  to  the  matter,  federal  courts  have  shown  a  marked
willingness to answer in the affirmative. For example, in Hurry v. Jones,59
the First Circuit Court  of Appeals  was presented  with this  issue  in  the
context of a claim under the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of
1975  (EAHCA).60  EAHCA  provided  "that  a  state  receiving  federal
assistance  for education of the handicapped must assure a free appropriate
public education.",61 As well, EAHCA provided "that parties aggrieved by
decisions affecting a handicapped child's education may bring a civil action
in  state  or  federal  court"  for  "'such  relief  as  the  court  determines  is
appropriate.' ' 62 The parents  of George Hurley,  a physically  and mentally
handicapped  minor,  sought  damages  from  school  and  transportation
officials  for  the  officials'  failure  to  provide  George  with  door-to-door
transportation to and from school.63  Among other items  of damages,  the
district court awarded the Hurleys $4,600.00 for the time they were forced
to  spend driving  George,  an amount the court calculated on the basis  of
$10.00  day  for the daily round trips.64 The  First Circuit affirmed the
6per 
award.6  The court held that recovery under EAHCA was not limited to out-
of-pocket  expenses,  but  could  also  include  compensation  for  the
expenditure  of time and effort.66 Although the court recognized the risk of
overcompensation  when reimbursing plaintiffs for the monetary equivalent
of time and effort, it thought the risk non-existent  in this case because the
award  was  "obviously  a  bare-bones  figure,  well  within  any  reasonable
67
estimate of fair reimbursement.,
Another  statutory  case  in  which  the  lost  time  damages  issue  was
squarely presented to the court is Beaven v. United States Dept. of Justice6.8
In  Beaven,  prison  employees  alleged  that  the  defendants  allowed  an
59.  734 F.2d 879 (1st Cir. 1984).
60.  Pub. L. No. 94-142, 89 Stat. 773. This is the predecessor statute of what is now the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. §§ 1400-82 (2011).
61.  Hurry, 734 F.2d at 882.
62.  Id.
63.  Id. at 881.
64.  Id.a t 884.
65.  Id. at 885.
66.  Id.a t 884.
67.  Id.S imilarly, in a case brought under what is now the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act, the Third Circuit affirmed an award of $6,842.00 to the parent of a disabled
child for the time she had to spend  in providing therapy to her daughter  after the county
failed to provide that service. Bucks Cnty. Dep't of Mental Health/Mental Retardation v.
Pennsylvania, 379 F.3d 61 (3d Cir. 2004). The amount of reimbursement was based on a rate
of $22 per hour, approximately half of what it would have cost the county to provide the
same treatment. Id.a t 69-70.
68.  622 F.3d 540 (6th Cir. 2010).2012] FRISCH
employee  roster  containing  their  sensitive  personal  information  to  be
disclosed to prison inmates and other prison staff.69 The plaintiffs sought to
recover lost time damages under the Privacy Act of 1974 (the "Act").  The
purpose of the Act is to address the handling of personal information by the
federal  government  and  to  provide  a  remedy  when  that  information  is
mishandled.71   One  cannot,  therefore,  overstate  the  importance  of  the
damages provision, which reads as follows:
In any suit brought under the provisions of subsection g(1)(C) or (D) of
this  section  in which the  court determines  that  the agency  acted  in a
manner which was intentional or willful, the United States shall be liable
to the individual in an amount equal to the sum of - (A) actual damages
sustained by the individual as a result of the refusal or failure, but in no
case  shall  a  person  entitled  to  recovery  receive  less  than  the  sum of
$1,000;  and (B) the costs of the action together with reasonable attorney
fees as determined by the court.72
The language of this provision immediately raises at least one question:
What did Congress mean by the term "actual damages"? Was the definition
intended to be a narrow one that excludes recovery for nonpecuniary harms,
or is a more expansive understanding of the term appropriate? This question
has  been  litigated  repeatedly  and  the  circuits  are  split.73 By  contrast,
because persons whose personal information is compromised may suffer in
a myriad of ways that cannot be easily measured in terms of dollars and
cents, commentators are unanimous in their position that the efficacy of the
Act depends upon its application to nonpecuniary harms. If not, they argue,
the Act would be rendered "[t]oothless.''7
69.  Id. at 544.
70.  Id. See generally Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-579, 88 Stat. 1896 (current
version codified at 5 U.S.C. § 552a (2011)).
71.  See Privacy Act §§ 2(b)(1)-(6), 88 Stat. 896.
72.  5 U.S.C. § 552a(g)(4) (2011).
73.  Compare Fanin v. U.S. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, 572 F.3d 868, 872 (11th Cir.
2009) (deciding that "[o]btaining  monetary damages under § 552a(g)(4)  requires proof of
'actual  damages,'  and in this circuit, that means pecuniary losses"), and Hudson v. Reno,
130 F.3d 1193,  1207 (6th Cir. 1997)  (deciding that "actual damages under the Privacy Act
do not include recovery for 'mental injuries, loss of reputation, embarrassment or other non-
quantifiable injuries'), and Fitzpatrick v. IRS, 665 F.2d 327, 328 (11 th Cir. 1982) (deciding
that "damages under the Privacy Act are recoverable only for proven out-of-pocket losses"),
with Johnson v. Dep't of Treasury, 700 F.2d 971, 972 (5th Cir. 1983) (deciding that damages
for mental injuries can be recovered as "actual damages").
74.  See  Anne  S.  Kimbol,  The  Privacy Act  May  be  Toothless,  HEALTH  LAW
PERSPECTIVES,  (Sept.  2008), http://law.uh.edu/healthlaw/perspectives/homepage.asp.;  Alex
Kardon, Damages Under the Privacy Act: Sovereign Immunity and a Call for Legislative
Reform, 34 HARV. J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 705, 767 (2011) ("An interpretation of the term 'actualTENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
Returning to Beaven, the Sixth Circuit was able to dodge the plaintiffs'
request to reconsider  its prior decision  in Hudson v. Reno 5 by drawing  a
sharp  distinction  between  damages  for  lost  time  and  those  that  would
compensate for some sort of mental harm. As the court put it:
Plaintiffs'  "lost  time"  damages does  not  require  us  to  decide  whether
actual damages may include non-pecuniary losses-any Privacy Act injury
incurred in the form of lost time  is necessarily a pecuniary harm that is
readily determined and does not require the court to speculate in the same
manner as general or presumed damages.76
The court then remanded the case to give plaintiffs the opportunity to
prove  their  out-of-pocket  losses  to  support  their  claim  for  lost  time
77
damages.
The logical problem with labeling lost time as a pecuniary loss is that it
seems  to depend  crucially  on the  claim that a metric  exists  by which to
measure the loss. This is obviously the case in situations where the plaintiff
can show that because of the defendant's wrongful act she was deprived of
the opportunity to  engage  in  an income  generating  activity. The Beaven
court made reference  in its opinion to the plaintiffs'  brief, in which they
chose their hourly wage rate as the appropriate factor by which to measure
their damages.78 The court chose not to explore the reason for this choice. If
it was because the plaintiffs had to take time off from work for which they
were  not  paid,  then  using  their  hourly  wage  in  making  the  damages
calculation makes perfect sense; this is analogous to calculating lost profits
which can be recovered if proved with reasonable certainty.79 On the other
hand, if the plaintiffs are suggesting that their hourly wage should be used
damages'  that excludes  recovery  for  nonpecuniary  harms  .. .would in fact render the
Privacy Act toothless."). See also Daniel Solove, The Nature of Privacy Harms: Financial
and Physical Harm vs. Emotional and Mental Harm, CONCURRING OPINIONS (Jan. 15, 2010
8:01  AM),  http://www.concurringopinions.com/archives/2010/01/the-nature-of-privacy-
harns-financial-and-physical-harm-vs-emotional-and-mental-harm.htm  (opining  that
excluding recovery for nonpecuniary harms would "mak[e]  a total mockery of the Privacy
Act").
75.  130 F.3d 1193,  1207 (6th  Cir. 1997). Recall  that the Hudson court determined
"actual  damages under the Privacy Act do not include recovery for mental injury, loss of
reputation, embarrassment, or other non-quantifiable injuries." Id.
76.  Beaven v. U.S. Dep't of Justice, 622 F.3d 558 n.13 (6th Cir. 2010).
77.  Id. at 559-60.
78.  Id. at 558.
79.  See DAN  B. DOBBs, HANDBOOK ON THE LAW OF REMEDIES  153-58 (West  1973).
This approach to valuation is also consistent with a distinction long recognized by courts and
is based on a division of time into work and leisure activities. Loss of the capacity to work is
considered an economic loss, whereas loss of the ability to enjoy leisure time is intangible
and not appraised as economic loss.20121 FRISCH
to value the hours of leisure time that they were forced to sacrifice in order
to deal with the disclosure of their personal information, then their choice
seems to have been the result of intuition rather than reasoned analysis. An
explanation may be that the more litigants are left to their own devices in
their attempts to convert nonpecuniary losses into pecuniary losses capable
of being included in the elements of economic damages, the more they tend
to use simple linear calculation strategies such as multiplying the number of
hours  lost  by  the  amount  of hourly  earnings.  Although  this  metric  is
commonly associated with the valuation of leisure time, I ultimately reject
its use later in this Article in favor of an approach that would facilitate a
simpler and more consistent law of damages. 0 The only point emphasized
here is that when courts no longer feel shackled by common law restraints,
they have  shown a willingness  to recognize lost time as  real harm that is
worthy of compensation.
Recent  years  have  also  seen  pressures  on courts  to allow  so-called
hedonic damages in wrongful death actions.8' The idea is that the value of a
person's life is more than the full economic  loss measured by the present
value of the decedent's market earnings and non-market services; there are
also non-market losses that relate to the leisure activities and emotions that
make life worth living. One economist has explained the concept of hedonic
damages as follows:
It derives from the word pleasing or pleasure. I believe it is a Greek word.
It is distinct from the word economic.  So it refers to the  larger value of
life,  the life at the pleasure of society, if you will, the life - the value
including economic,  including moral,  including philosophical,  including
all  the  value  with  which ,,ou might  hold  life,  is  the  meaning of the
expression "hedonic value.  2
Presumably,  a  policy  of compensating  tort victims  for  losses  or  of
deterring torts would not be fostered to the same degree as it would be if
compensation were not allowed for unconventional-albeit real-forms  of
loss."  If there are policy reasons to require wrongdoers to pay for hedonic
losses (the diminishment of the enjoyment of a person's life)  when a life
ends, those  same  policy considerations  would  support  damages  for  lost
personal time in non-death contexts. After all, if we accept the notion that
80.  See infra notes 217-21 and accompanying text.
81.  See generally Andrew Jay McClurg, It's a Wonderful Life: The Casef or Hedonic
Damages in Wrongful Death Cases, 66 NoTRE DAME L. REv. 57 (1990).
82.  Sherrod v. Berry, 629 F.  Supp.  159,  163  (N.D.  Ill. 1985)  (testimony of expert
witness).
83.  See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Has Voodoo Economics Come to the
Courts?, 1990 J. FORENSIC ECON.  1, 3 (arguing that loss of enjoyment of life damages has
what he calls "deterrence values"); see also infra notes 172-74 and accompanying text.TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
being unable to enjoy the totality of the minutes, hours and days that make
up a  person's life  is worthy of compensation,  it would  follow that if an
individual is prevented from enjoying  leisure activities  for some period of
time that  is merely a component part  of her life, that loss  too should  be
worthy of compensation.
Given that economic analysis supports the award of hedonic damages,
one may ask why they have not become commonplace  in death cases. The
conceptual  framework  of survival  statutes  and  of most  wrongful  death
statutes is relevant  in answering this question. The problem that arises in
connection  with hedonic  damages  in these actions  is not that the  loss of
non-market time (enjoyment of life) has no recognized value; it is that the
typical statute makes recovery an uphill battle.84
Survival statutes allow an individual's estate to recover damages that a
decedent,  if still  alive,  could  maintain  a  legal  action  to  recover.85 The
obvious difficulty is the fact that if, hypothetically, the decedent were still
alive,  there  would  be  no  loss  of life  damages.  Accordingly,  the  legal
action is treated as if it was a personal  injury action from the injury to the
individual's  death,  but then  becomes  a wrongful death  action thereafter.
The difficulty is that in a typical wrongful death action, it is the loss to the
84.  See McClurg, supra note 81,  at 90-91. Many of the problems that have plagued
plaintiffs seeking hedonic damages can be traced to the inherent difficulty of placing a dollar
value on the loss. Id. at 68-71 (discussing the speculative nature of hedonic damages). See
infra notes 211-18 and accompanying text (discussing some of the methods that have been
devised to measure hedonic damages).
85.  See McClurg, supra note 81, at 91.
86.  Andrew McClurg summed it up this way:
Hedonic damage claims do not fit within this statutory scheme because they are
predicated upon the death itself: the decedent's estate seeks damages for the harm
inflicted by death - the loss of life. Survival statutes merely authorize the damages
to which  the decedent  would have  been  entitled had  he  lived.  Had he lived,
however, the decedent would have had no claim for lost life. Accordingly, lost-life
damages are unavailable under true survival statutes.
McClurg, supra note 81 at 91. Most jurisdictions do permit the recovery of lost enjoyment-
of-life damages  in non-death  cases.  Samuel  R. Bagenstos  & Margo  Schlanger, Hedonic
Damages, Hedonic Adaptation, and Disability, VAND. L. REv. 745, 748 (2007). The issue
there  is whether  these  damages  should  be  separately  measured  or  are  more properly
considered to be a component  of a general  award  for pain and  suffering. Compare, for
example, Poyzer v. McGraw, 360 N.W.2d 748,  753 (Iowa  1985) (an  award for pain and
suffering necessarily includes damages for lost enjoyment of life), and Blodgett v. Olympic
Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 646 P.2d 139, 145-46 (Wash. Ct. App. 1982) (same), with Thompson v.
Nat'l  R.R. Passenger  Corp.,  621  F.2d  814,  824 (6th  Cir.  1980)  (damages  for pain  and
suffering  and  damages  for  lost enjoyment  of life are  not duplicative),  and Mariner  v.
Marsden, 610 P.2d 6, 12 (Wyo. 1980) (same).2012] FRISCH
survivors that counts, not the loss to the decedent.  The value of lost time
to the decedent  thus becomes relevant  only to the extent that it leads  to
losses by the relevant survivors.88
Although the foregoing  statutory obstacles  have deterred  courts  from
permitting hedonic  damages in state  law death cases, when other  statutes
are called  into  play, judicial reception  to these  damages  has been quite
different.89 For example,  federal courts have been sensitive to the benefits
attending hedonic damages in civil rights actions brought under 42 U.S.C. §
1983.90 The challenge these courts face, however, is to discover a basis for
ignoring state  law restrictions  on  loss of life  damages  in wrongful death
cases.91 The key analytical step to accomplishing this is to establish that a
state law restriction on such recovery is "inconsistent with the Constitution
and laws of the United States. 92 Although the U.S. Supreme Court has not
addressed this issue, it has received the attention of several lower federal
courts.93 For example, when faced with a Wisconsin statutory  scheme that
did  not  allow  damages  for  loss  of life,  the  Seventh  Circuit  succinctly
declared:
87.  See McClurg, supra note 81 at 93.
88.  See, e.g., McClurg, supra note 81 at 93. The author explains:
The wrongful death action is for the benefit of the statutorily designated survivors.
The object is to compensate  survivors for the losses they suffer because of the
death of a loved one. The damages that are available - lost pecuniary contributions
of the decedent supplemented in most states by damages for loss of society and/or
mental anguish - correspond with this purpose.
89.  Id. In fact, Congress on occasion has seen fit to expressly authorize the award of
hedonic damages within the statute itself. Such is the case for example with the law creating
the September 11 fund. See September 11 th Victim Compensation Fund of 2001, 49 U.S.C.
§ 40101.
90.  See, e.g., McClurg, supra note 81,  at 80 (observing that "[b]y  far, the warmest
reception  for lost  life damages has  been  in federal  courts entertaining  actions under 42
U.S.C. § 1983").
91.  42 U.S.C. § 1988 "directs courts to apply state law where the federal civil rights
statutes are deficient  in the provisions necessary  to furnish suitable  remedies."  id at  81.
There is little doubt that section 1983 is deficient as to damages issues. Id. at 81  ("Section
1983,  consisting  of only a  single operative  sentence,  is  deficient  as to many issues  of
substantive law, including damages issues.").
92.  Id.; 42 U.S.C. § 1988 (2006).
93.  The United States Supreme Court has, however, held that loss of enjoyment of life
damages can be recovered in personal injury cases brought under the Federal Tort Claims
Act. In Molzoff v. United States, 502 U.S. 301 (1992), the Supreme Court disagreed with the
definition of prohibited punitive damages under the FTCA as any damages that go beyond
compensating  for actual  pecuniary loss.  This ruling is  a clear  indication of the  Court's
willingness to expand victim's rights to include nonpecuniary damages.774 TENNESSEE LA W REVIE W [Vol. 79:757
In  sum,  we  hold  that  Wis.  Stat.  §§  895.01  and  895.04,  along  with
Wisconsin decisions  construing those  provisions, which  would preclude
recovery to [decedent's]  estate for loss of life, are inconsistent with the
deterrent  policy  of  Section  1983  and  the  Fourteenth  Amendment's
protection  of life.  The  Wisconsin  law  therefore  cannot  be  applied  to
preclude  the $100,000 damages recovered by [decedent's]  estate for loss
94
of life.
In light of this statement, the court's approach might be understood as
clear  recognition  of legislative  intent on  the  question  of deterrence.  Of
course  the  notion  of deterrence  should  not  be  taken  as  a  mechanical
application  of some actual legislative  decision;  Congress has rendered  no
general decision about what remedies are needed to effectuate the policies
behind § 1983.9' In the absence of a clear statement, however, allowing the
estate of victims killed in violation of their constitutional rights to recover
for loss of life would be consistent with Congress's concern for protecting
life and might improve the operation of the civil rights statute.
Thus  far  I  have  focused  on  legislative  and  corresponding  judicial
developments  that give  recognition to the normative view that the forced
inability to pursue leisure or recreation (i.e., the inability to use one's time
as one  wishes)  should be treated as  a separate  category  of noneconomic
damages that can be recovered by an aggrieved party. This poses a forceful
challenge to the Hannafordc ourt's conception of the plaintiffs'  lost time in
this  context  as  "typical  annoyances  or  inconveniences  that  are  part  of
everyday  life."96 As a result, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court and other
courts not only fail to recognize this crucial aspect of damages, but cannot
provide  a  critical  framework  for  distinguishing  recoverable  from
nonrecoverable noneconomic  damages  in particular contexts. Yet, because
recoveries  for noneconomic  damages  for  lost leisure time  are  needed  to
fully  compensate  aggrieved  parties  and  deter  wrongful  conduct,  their
preclusion also undermines the claim that economic theory has much to say
about the rationality of damage awards.97
94.  Bell v. City of Milwaukee, 746 F.2d 1205, 1240 (7th Cir. 1984). See also Linzie v.
City of Columbia, 651 F. Supp. 740, 742 (W.D. Mo. 1986) (holding that recovery for loss of
life is consistent  with Section  1983's deterrent policy); Guyton v. Phillips, 532  F. Supp.
1154 (N.D. Cal.  1981) (holding that recovery for loss of life is permitted, but future earnings
of decedent should not be factored into recovery for loss of life).
95.  See Bell, 746 F.2d at 1239-40 (observing that "the fundamental policies behind
Section  1983  are  twofold:  compensation  for  and  deterrence  of  unconstitutional  acts
committed under state law").
96.  In re Hannaford Bros. Co. Customer Security Breach Litig., 613 F. Supp. 108, 134
(N.D. Me. 2009).
97.  See infra notes 189-95 and accompanying text.20121 FRISCH
B.  UnprincipledC  lassification
As  previously  discussed,  the  Hannaford court  uses  a  classification
discourse  that  treats  damages  differently,  depending  on  whether  the
underlying  substantive  claim  involves  an  intentional  tort,  the  negligent
damage or destruction of personal property or personal  injury, or a breach
of contract.98  Given  this mode  of analysis,  it is  now  relevant  to inquire
whether a cause  of action approach  to the damage rules applicable to the
loss  of personal  time  is  conceptually  valid. Notwithstanding  the  lack of
explanation  by  the  court,  the  Hannaford court's  opinion  is  arguably
consistent  with traditional  doctrine  and the  dictates  of precedent.99 As I
explain below, however, equity and social utility suggest that there are no
persuasive  grounds  for  treating  the  different  categories  of  claims
differently.
As a  starting  point,  it is  worth noting that to  suggest that doctrinal
categories  are  sensible  tools  for  rationalizing  outcomes  may not  attract
much argument.00  Such an approach  to decision-making is in many cases
reasonable,  or even  efficient. Presumably,  those who  are called upon to
interpret  and  apply  the  law  (namely, judges)  are  more  likely  to  reach
predictable  results  when they need only  situate their decisions within an
existing categorical framework.0 l As Roscoe Pound explained:
Classification  is  a  shaping  and  developing  of traditional  systematic
conceptions and traditional systematic categories in order to organize the
body of legal precepts so that they may be:  (1) Stated effectively with a
minimum  of  repetition,  overlapping,  and  potential  conflict,  (2)
administered  effectively,  (3)  taught  effectively,  and  (4)  developed
effectively for new situations. 102
However,  the  costs  of  a  system  in  which  case  outcomes  are
predetermined  by whichever  category  the  court feels  is  applicable  may
sometimes cause us to think twice about the utility of our basic structures of
doctrinal classification. As is sometimes the case, the relevant category may
98.  See supra notes 27-51 and accompanying text.
99.  See supra notes 45-47 and accompanying text.
100.  See, e.g., Jay M. Feinman, The Jurisprudence of Classification,4 1  STAN. L. REV.
661, 664 (1989)  (noting that "[c]lassification in law is an important and ubiquitous aspect of
legal  reasoning");  Cass R. Sunstein, Burkean Minimalism, 105 MICH.  L. REV.  353,  356
(2006) (noting that "[judicial]  interpretation  should be conservative  in the literal sense -
respecting settled judicial doctrine but also deferring to traditions").
101.  See Feinman, supra note 100, at 676 ("Consistency in particular entails the internal
consistency of treating like cases  alike and  different cases  differently, and the  external
consistency  of justifying results  according  to some  general,  positive,  public  principle.
Classification helps maintain the order and validity of the legal process.").
102.  Roscoe Pound, Classificationo f Law, 37 HARV. L. REV. 933, 944 (1924).TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
be unclear or a particular fact pattem  may not quite fit within an existing
category. 103 As a result, there may be increased instances where judges are
less  than  forthright  when  presenting  the  legal  justification  for  their
opinions.'  Moreover, a legal system built around categories with separate
and distinct rules may lead to a certain amount of rigidity, which makes the
system less flexible and able to adapt to a changing society.1 Finally, a
05 
serious problem of consistency may result from the overlap between two or
more substantive doctrines.
Although the foregoing classification issues are general and can arise in
all fields of law, they have been of particular concern to contract and tort
scholars.  Several insights can be drawn from the much-litigated "economic
loss rule."  This rule  has potential  application to two broad  categories  of
cases: (1) cases where  the plaintiff has a contractual relationship with the
seller of a  defective  product, and  (2)  cases  where  the  plaintiff brings a
negligence action against a contractual stranger.106
Regarding the first category, the law has evolved to provide purchasers
of goods,  and sometimes  third parties, with  two possible  regimes  under
which they may seek recovery: tort law and contract law. Although tort law
makes available actions due to negligence, the most significant tort theory
open to plaintiffs is strict liability.07  In contract, the competing theory of
103.  A  useful  example  of this idea  is  provided  by Professor  James  Rogers  in  his
discussion  of restitution and unjust enrichment. See James Steven Rogers, Restitution for
Wrongs and the Restatement (Third) of the Law of Restitution and Unjust Enrichment, 42
WAKE FOREST L. REv. 55, 84 (2007). Rogers notes that as long as restitution is viewed as a
parasitic  doctrine  (i.e.,  permitting  recovery  only  when  the  conduct  in  question  is
characterized as wrongful by other law), courts will have an incentive to manipulate other
law if existing legal categories of wrongful behavior do not quite fit. Id. He contends, for
example, that courts often find abuses of fiduciary relationships by defendants, even though
such findings  are hardly  supported by applicable  law. Id.  For further discussion of the
judicial practice of strained characterization, see infra note 169 and accompanying text.
104.  See, e.g.,  Scott  Altman,  Beyond  Candor, 89 MICH.  L.  REv.  296, 328  (1990)
(suggesting  that "if judges more accurately revealed the forces that move them to decide,
lawyers and commentators would be able more directly to address judges'  real concerns").
One  possible  consequence  of a  legal  system  where  outcomes  turn  on  the  uncertain
categorization of fact patterns is the opportunities  it affords judges to engage  in covert
policymaking:  a  world  with  many categories  provides  judges  with  many  choices.  Id.
Concern  that there are  costs  associated with judicial opinions  in  which  the underlying
reasoning is inaccurately stated or deliberately obscured is a persistent theme in the literature
on judicial candor. Id.
105.  See, e.g., Frederick Schauer, Formalism, 97 YALE L.J. 509, 542 (1988)  (pointing
out that "[r]ules  stabilize by inflating the importance of the classifications of yesterday,"
leading to "inflexibility in the face of a changing future").
106.  Indemnity Ins. Co. v. Am. Aviation, 891 So. 2d 532 (Fla. 2004).
107.  A cause of action for negligence  generally requires plaintiffs to establish that the
manufacturer or seller has failed to use reasonable care to eliminate foreseeable dangers that2012] FRISCH
significance  is the implied  warranty  of merchantability.108 The economic
loss rule seeks to carve out a separate niche for tort and warranty based on
the type of damages involved.'  The rule's basic proposition is that when
the purchaser of a product sustains economic loss without personal injury or
damage to property,  the purchaser  must seek a remedy in contract, not in
tort.'
The ostensibly straightforward nature of the economic loss rule in this
context is belied by the confusion and conflicting case law it has spawned.
Even the basic question of whether damages for injury to the property itself
can be recovered  in tort has yielded inconsistent answers."'  The poles are
represented  by  the  majority-or  California-position  (i.e.,  where  a
defective  product  causes  only  monetary  damages,  warranty  liability
create an unreasonable risk of harm to the person or property of another. See RESTATEMENT
(SECOND) OF TORTS § 395 (1965).  In the case of manufacturing defects and defendants that
are not manufacturers,  this may be impossible to do. Whereas negligence focuses on the
actions  of the defendant,  a strict  liability claim focuses  on the product.  Thus,  it is not
surprising  that  plaintiffs  exhibit  a  preference  for  the  latter  theory,  which  is  currently
enshrined in the Restatement (Third)  of Torts:  Products Liability. Section  1 provides that
"[o]ne  engaged in the business of selling or otherwise distributing products who sells or
distributes a defective product is subject to liability for harm to persons or property caused
by the defect." RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF TORTS: PRODUCTS LIABILITY  § 1 (1998). Section 2
then proceeds to set forth three separate standards  for determining whether a product is
defective, depending  on whether  the claimed defect  is (1) a manufacturing defect,  (2) a
design defect, or (3) a failure to warn  or give adequate instructions. Id. at § 1. For further
discussion of the concept of defect, see infra notes 124-25 and accompanying text.
108.  UCC Article  2  recognizes  several "gap-filling"  warranties  that are  part of the
contract of the parties unless they are excluded  or modified by agreement. Section 2-314
provides that if the seller is "a merchant with respect to goods of that kind," then "a warranty
that the goods shall be merchantable is implied in a contract for their sale."  U.C.C. § 2-
314(1)  (2011). Determining the level of section 2-314 quality that is required by the term
"merchantable"  obviously calls for a fact-intensive inquiry guided by the criteria of section
2-314(2)(a)-(f).  See id. at § 2-314(2)(a)-(f. The usual focus in a products liability case is
whether the goods were "fit for the ordinary purposes for which such goods are used." Id. at
§ 2-314(2)(c). Because the warranty of merchantability is imposed on parties by law based
on public policy, it looks strikingly similar to the tort doctrine  of strict  liability-  hence,
Prosser's  colorful observation that implied warranty is "a freak hybrid born of the illicit
intercourse of tort and contract."  William L. Prosser, The Assault upon the Citadel (Strict
Liability to the Consumer), 69 YALE L.J.  1099,  1126 (1960).  In  addition to the implied
warranty of merchantability, a plaintiff may sometimes  be able to claim a breach of an
express warranty under section  2-313 or the warranty of fitness for a particular purpose
under section 2-315. Since these two warranties are not designed to address the basic safety
of goods, they will be ignored in the discussion that follows.
109.  Indemnity Ins. Co. v. Am. Aviation, 891 So. 2d 532, 536 (Fla. 2004).
110.  Id.
111.  See infra notes 112-15 and accompanying text.TENNESSEE LA W REVIE W [Vol. 79:757
preempts  the  field)"2  and  the  minority-or  New  Jersey-position  (i.e.,
allowing tort recovery  for injury to the product itself whether or not the
defect created an unreasonable risk of harm). 13 In between these two poles
are intermediate  positions,  seeking to  differentiate  between,  for example,
"the disappointed users ...  and the endangered ones,"'"14 or between "the
nature of the defect,  the type  of risk, and the manner in which the injury
arose."",15
With two different  avenues  of relief potentially  available to plaintiffs
(tort and contract), uncertainty, unpredictability, and confusion often result
when  the  two  regimes  compete. 16  Maintaining  the  crucial  distinction
between the categories of tort and contract and the significance of applying
one or the other necessitates that there be rule differences between the two
regimes.  And there are. For example,  the measurement  of damages  may
different, with only tort law permitting recovery of damages  for pain and
suffering and, in appropriate cases, punitive damages. In addition, under the
contract regime only, the implied warranty of merchantability can be freely
disclaimed'  7 and remedies  limited by including appropriate  terms in the
agreement of the parties." 8 Another difference exists in the applicability of
112.  See, e.g., Seely v. White Motor Co., 403 P.2d 145,  150-51 (Cal. 1965).
113.  See, e.g., Santor v. A & M Karagheusian, Inc., 207 A.2d 305, 308-10 (N.J. 1965).
114.  See, e.g., Russell v. Ford Motor Co., 575 P.2d 1383, 1387 (Or. 1978).
115.  See, e.g., Pa. Glass Sand Corp. v. Caterpillar Tractor Co., 652 F.2d 1165,  1173 (3d
Cir. 1981).
116.  This is not an original observation. See, e.g.,  Sundberg v. Keller Ladder, 189 F.
Supp. 2d 671, 676 (E.D. Mich. 2002) ("Although the separate action of 'implied warranty'
had long co-existed with more formal product liability tort actions, it became duplicative and
confusing."); RESTATEMENT (THIRD)  OF TORTS: PRODUCTS LIABILITY § 2 cmt. n (1998) ("To
allow two or more factually identical risk-utility claims to go to a jury under different labels,
whether  'strict  liability,'  'negligence,'  or  'implied  warranty  of merchantability,'  would
generate  confusion  and  may  well  result  in  inconsistent  verdicts.");  James  J.  White,
EvaluatingA  rticle 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code: A PreliminaryE mpiricalE xpedition,
75 MICH.  L. REv.  1262,  1270 (1977)  ("[D]rafters  . . . did not foresee  the considerable
potential for confusion between the Code provisions and such strict tort doctrines.").
117.  SeeU.C.C. §2-316(2011).
118.  It is not unusual  for the contract to contain a clause that excludes recovery for
consequential damages. See id. at § 2-719(3). Moreover, the buyer may agree to an exclusive
remedy such as "repair and replacement of non-conforming goods or parts,"  which would
effectively preclude  the recovery  of damages.  Id. at § 2-719(1)(a).  The approach of the
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products Liability is quite different:
Disclaimers and  limitation of remedies by product sellers or other distributors,
waivers by product purchasers, and other similar contractual exculpations, oral or
written,  do  not bar or reduce otherwise valid  products  liability claims  against
sellers or other distributors of new products for harm to persons.
RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF TORTS: PRODUCTS LIABILITY §  18 (1998).2012] FRISCH
statutes of limitation: the warranty statute in contract begins  to run at the
time the goods are tendered, while in tort, the statute typically begins to run
at  the  time  of injury.  Yet  another  difference  is  that,  unlike  breach  of
warranty  actions  in contract, tort actions  require no privity of contract. 19
Finally, notice of breach is a prerequisite to recovery in an action for breach
of warranty, while no such notice is required to recover in tort. "°
The foregoing differences between warranty claims and tort claims in
many ways are justified as a reflection of the different policies that underlie
the two categories. Contract law seeks to protect the economic expectations
of the parties that haveas their source the private allocation of risks and
costs that arise  from their agreement.  In  contrast, tort law  is designed to
accomplish a collective allocation of loss through the imposition of duties
that arise from society's interest in the avoidance  of harm, irrespective of
the  existence  of a  contract.  The  distinction  between  tort  and  contract
therefore  rests on the  importance  of the latter in promoting public  safety
and  the  need  for  the  former  to  protect  the  expectations  of contracting
121
parties.
At least as a general rule, these policy differences argue powerfully in
favor  of maintaining,  at least to  some  extent, the  two  products  liability
regimes that currently exist. To be sure, one could argue that burdening a
product  liability  case  with the  conceptual  baggage  of discrete  liability
regimes when the claim rests on the same factual predicate adds nothing but
confusion and, therefore,  consolidation  of the  two doctrinal  categories  of
liability  in  and  of itself would  improve  the  current  system. 122  Without
entering  entirely  into  the  fray  about  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of
complete  consolidation,  I wish to  suggest  that  although  tort theories  of
products liability and the implied warranty of merchantability coexist, the
119.  See RESTATEMENT  (THIRD)  OF TORTS:  PRODUCTS  LIABILITY  §  1 cmt. a (1998)
("Strict liability in tort for defectively manufactured products merges the concept of implied
warranty, in which negligence is not required, with the tort concept of negligence, in which
contractual privity is not required."). UCC Article 2 does contain a provision that extends a
warranty made directly to a  class of third parties not in privity with the  warrantor. See
U.C.C. § 2-318 (2011).
120.  See U.C.C. § 2-607(3)(a) (2011).
121.  See, e.g.,  Spring Motors Distribs. v. Ford Motor Co., 489 A.2d 660,  672 (N.J.
1985)  ("The purpose of a tort duty of care is to protect society's interest in freedom from
harm,  i.e.,  the duty arises  from  policy considerations  formed  without reference  to any
agreement  between the parties. A contractual  duty, by comparison,  arises from society's
interest in the performance  of promises.");  see also E.  River S.S. Corp.  v. Transamerica
Delaval, 476 U.S. 858, 870 (1986)  ("[Tlhe failure of the purchaser to receive the benefit of
its bargain [is] traditionally the core concern of contract law.").
122.  Some courts have merged the doctrines of tort and contract liability because they
are so intertwined. See, e.g.,  Hearn v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 279 F. Supp. 2d 1096,
1103 (D. Ariz. 2003) ("[I]n Arizona, when a complaint alleges product liability claims under
theories of both breach of implied warranties and strict liability, those theories merge.").TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
coherence  of  each  category  does  not  necessarily  require  a  different
approach to every issue.123
The  point  can  be  made  more  vivid  by  examining  the  distinction
between  the  defect  concepts  in  tort  law  and those  in  implied  warranty
theory. In a personal injury or property damage case, whether the claim is
based on  negligence,  breach  of implied  warranty,  or strict  liability,  the
product must be found to be unsafe (i.e., dangerous by some measure) to be
actionable. There  is simply no good reason why the relevant standard for
determining whether a product is unsafe should not be the  same under all
three  categories.  Not  surprisingly,  the  Restatement  (Third)  of Torts:
Pprroodduuccetsd  Lthiaeb niloiwty  deesfpuonucste sa mtheins dpeods iUti.oCn.,C 12.4  Aarntdic lthe e2  dargarfetiendg. 1c25ommittee that
123.  At least one court has ignored the characterization  of a plaintiff's claim when
deciding the applicable statute of limitations. See, e.g., Hambleton v. R.G. Barry Corp., 465
N.E.2d 1298, 1302 (Ohio 1984) ("[I]n determining which limitation period will apply, courts
must look to the actual nature or subject matter of the case, rather than to the form in which
the action is pleaded.").
124.  A comment to section 2 of the Restatement states:
Warranty. Liability for harm caused by product defects imposed by the rules stated
in  this  chapter  is tort  liability, not  liability  for breach  of warranty  under  the
Uniform  Commercial Code (U.C.C.). Courts may characterize claims under this
Chapter as claims for breaches of the implied warranty of merchantability. But in
cases  involving defect-caused harm  to persons  or property, a well-coordinated
body of law dealing with liability for such harm arising out of the sale of defective
products would adopt the tort definition of product defect.
RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF TORTS: PRODUCTS LIABILITY § 2 cmt. r (1998).
125.  See Amended U.C.C. § 2-314 cmt. 7 (2003). Amended Article 2 received  final
approval at both the 2002 annual meeting of the Uniform Law Commission and the 2003
annual meeting of the American Law Institute. Currently, there have been no state adoptions
and the sponsoring organizations withdrew their support in 2011.
Case law  on the  approach to the question  of whether proof that a product is
"defective"  under strict liability in tort will establish that a product is not merchantable, and
vice versa has been mixed. Perhaps the leading case denying such congruency is Denny v.
FordM  otor Co., 662 N.E.2d 730 (N.Y. 1995). In that case, the New York Court of Appeals
opined that the question of design defect for purposes of strict liability is to be determined by
application of a risk-utility balancing test that requires evaluation of a number of "policy-
driven  factors,"  whereas  the  question  of merchantability is  to be decided  according  to
whether the product satisfies ordinary consumer expectations. Id. at 735-36. For a contrary
view, see Chestnut v. Ford Motor Co., 445 F.2d 967, 968 (4th Cir. 1971)  ("The standard of
safety of goods imposed on the seller or manufacturer of a product is essentially the same
whether the theory of liability is labeled warranty or negligence or strict tort liability: the
product must not be unreasonably  dangerous  at the time that  it leaves  the  defendant's
possession ... ").2012] FRISCH
Even  if  the  considerations  marshaled  thus  far  show  that  overlap
between tort and contract law may be desirable in some situations, and that
barriers between  the two categories need to be adjusted when it comes to
establishing that a product defect exists,  it does not follow that these two
legal categories must also produce the same damages award. Countervailing
considerations,  some of them taken up below, make  it easy to understand
the continuing debate over the wisdom of maintaining remedial distinctions
applicable  in  the  two  different  substantive  areas. But  even  if it  can be
shown that distinctions are appropriate in some contexts, I attempt to show
that the  basic  arguments  against  a  unified  theory  of damages  are  not
decisive, and that a principle of congruence would improve the operation of
our legal system by making damages awards more fair and efficient.26
To put this observation  in context, consider,  first, the  economic  loss
doctrine and its rationale in situations where a contract is lacking.127 What
explains the reluctance of tort law to provide redress when the interest that
has been interfered with is of a purely economic nature unconnected with
damage to the plaintiffs person or property? The rule's basic utility that it
operates  as an administratively manageable  control mechanism for dealing
with the problems  caused by the  inordinate liability that might otherwise
result if economic loss were permitted, especially in cases involving large
scale disasters. In this regard, the warning of Fifth Circuit Judges Clark and
Gee in an economic loss case arising out of a collision between two ships in
the Mississippi River Gulf outlet is particularly pertinent:
An  oil spill  damages  hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,  of miles of coastal
area.  A cloud  of noxious  industrial gas leaks  out, kills thousands,  and
injures  thousands  more.  A  commonly-used  building  material  is
discovered,  years  after the  fact,  to  possess  unforeseen  lethal  qualities
affecting  thousands  who  have  worked  with  it  . . . . [T]he  dispute-
resolution systems of courts  are poorly equipped to manage disasters of
such magnitude and ...  we should be wary of adopting rules of decision
126.  This view has  been  expressed by others  in  other contexts.  See,  e.g., Paul  T.
Wangerin, Damages for Reliance Across the Spectrum of Law: Of Blind Men and Legal
Elephants, 72 IOWA L. REV.  47, 99 (1986)  ("One set of facts  can lead to three,  four, or
maybe even five separate claims. But, as such multiple theories reach the courts with greater
frequency, the courts themselves will soon realize that some consistent theory must evolve to
govern damages awards. A fair system of law, these courts will acknowledge, must produce
the same damages awards for relying promisees regardless of whether those promisees sue
asserting  contract, agency,  tort, insurance,  or restitution  theories.  Consistency  must be
achieved.").
127.  In those situations where there is no contract, the rule cannot be defended on the
ground that economic  losses  are generally best allocated  via  contract. The force of this
defense is particularly evident when the contract disclaims the warranty of merchantability
or limits remedies for breach. See supra notes 117-18 and accompanying text.TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
which, as would that contended for by the dissent, encourage the drawing
of their broader aspects before us.'28
But if this  is  the  modem rationale  for the  rule,  it  is  apparent  that
considerable  thought  ought  to  be  given  to  restructuring  it.  Resting  the
tortfeasor's liability for economic loss on whether there was corresponding
personal injury or property damage seems undesirable because (1) it lets an
all-or-nothing damages decision ride on a factor that is not finely geared to
preventing excessive liability for accidental injuries, (2) it is an unnecessary
constraint on liability in light of other existing tort doctrines, and (3) it can
lead to outcomes that are logically inconsistent with the remedial goals of
29
tort law. 
Professor  Silverstein  illustrates  the first objection  with  the following
hypothetical:
[I]f negligent maintenance of a utility transformer causes a telephone pole
to lop the chimney from a factory's roof, the utility must bear the costs of
repair;  if the falling telephone pole separates a person's little finger from
her  left hand,  the utility  is  liable  for her  medical  expenses,  pain  and
suffering,  and lost income.  Indeed, if the lopped off chimney costs the
factory  a few  days  of production,  or  if the  separated  finger  causally
disables an investor from effecting a FAX transmission authorizing a sale
128.  State of Louisiana v. MN Testbank, 752 F.2d 1019, 1032 (5th Cir. 1985) (Clark,
C.J. and Gee, J., concurring); see also Barber Lines A/S  v. MV Donau Maru, 764 F.2d 50,
55 (1st Cir. 1985)  (then-Judge  Breyer expressed concern that "liability for pure financial
harm, insofar as  it proved  vast, cumulative and inherently unknowable  in amount, could
create incentives  that are perverse.").  In a case involving  an investor's claim against  an
accounting firm  for negligently certifying a balance sheet,  Justice Cardozo had a similar
reaction to the threat of widespread liability:
If liability for negligence exists, a thoughtless slip or blunder, the failure to detect
a theft or forgery beneath the cover of deceptive entries, may expose accountants
to  a  liability  in  an  indeterminate  amount  for  an  indeterminate  time  to  an
indeterminate  class. The hazards of a business conducted  on these terms are so
extreme as to enkindle doubt whether a flaw may not exist in the implication of a
duty that exposes to these consequences.
Ultramares Corp. v. Touche, 174 N.E. 441, 444 (N.Y. 1931).
129.  The economic loss doctrine is not without its fair share of critics. See, e.g., Eileen
Silverstein, On Recovery in Tort for Pure Economic Loss, 32 U. MICH. J.L. REFORM  403,
438 (1999)  (arguing that "the categorical denial of the right to recover for pure economic
injury does positive injustice to our understanding of the significance of material insecurity
and economic integrity in American society"); see also Fleming James, Jr., Limitations on
Liabilityf or Economic Loss Caused by Negligence: A PragmaticA  ppraisal, 25 VAND. L.
REv.  43,  46-47  (1972)  (arguing  that a  logical  inconsistency  exists  between  the  rules
governing economic recovery under personal injury and non-physical injury).2012] FRISCH
of stock worth $2 million,  both losses are recoverable because they are
attendant on negligently inflicted damage to person (the broken finger) or
property (the damaged chimney). But if, instead of amputating a finger or
a chimney, the downed telephone pole merely causes the interruption of a
communication  authorizing  the stock transaction,  the  investor, not the
utility  company,  must  bear  the  $2 million  loss;  and  if the  damaged
chimney causes the factory to suspend operations for a few days, while the
utility is responsible to the factory owner for repairs and lost profits, it is
not  responsible  to  the  factory  employees  for  lost  wages,  since  the
employees  experienced  no  physical  impairment  of their  property  or
persons. 30
It should be obvious that the economic loss rule's achievement of the
advantages  of controlling the dimensions  of the problems  that could arise
from large-scale disasters is, at best, fortuitous. If the telephone pole falls to
the left and causes even a small amount of damage to the factory building,
the barrier to economic loss recovery is lifted, regardless of its amount. If,
however, the pole falls to the right and leaves the building unscathed, the
negligently inflicted losses must be born in full by the owners. If the fear is
of imposing  a "liability in an  indeterminate  amount for an indeterminate
time to an indeterminate class,"'13  why should the courts look exclusively to
whether  a plaintiff was injured  in a particular way, but not attend to the
magnitude of the loss? On this latter dimension-obviously  critical to the
accepted rationale for the historical reluctance to award damages for pure
financial harm-the economic loss rule has nothing to say. If the rule were
truly  finely  geared  to  respond  to  the  law's concern  with  indeterminate
liability, it would place its emphasis on the magnitude of damages involved,
not the form that those damages take.132
Of  course,  the  rule  may  be  defended  on  purely  administrative
convenience grounds. Even if it is a poor reflection of the law's overriding
concern  for  avoiding  unlimited  liability  for  negligently  engaging  in  a
socially  desirable activity, it does operate as  a bright-line  rule that can be
administered with little difficulty, and does to some extent avoid the flood
of litigation that would likely ensue if the rule were abandoned.'33 Indeed,
130.  Silverstein, supra note 129, at 404.
131.  Ultramares Corp., 174N.E. at444.
132.  Another  illogical  aspect  of the  economic  loss  rule  is  its refusal  to recognize
property damage as just another form of economic loss. See Silverstein, supra note  129, at
434 (recognizing that "damage to property is often nothing more (or less) than economic
loss"). Professor Silverstein also questions the coherency of permitting recovery for pain and
suffering but not pure economic loss. As she puts it, "[i]t is ironic, of course, that conditions
not measurable in money are allowable damages while consequences  like economic loss,
measurable only in money, may be deemed immune from recovery." Id. at 436 n. 163.
133.  As one commentator has noted, "only a limited amount of physical damage can
ever ensue  from a  single  act, while the number  of economic  interests a tortfeasor  mayTENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
the majority in M/V Testbank, while conceding that there is often a certain
arbitrariness  of  result,  nevertheless  praises  the  rule's  administrative
simplicity: "[W]hen  lines are drawn sufficiently  sharp in their definitional
edges  to  be  reasonable  and  predictable,  such  differing  results  are  the
inevitable [result] ....  But is the majority correct? Is application of the
rule as  simple  as  it assumes?  As  criticism of the rule has  grown,  some
courts have complicated matters by recognizing numerous  exceptions to its
application. 131
The difficulties inherent in the economic loss rule are well illustrated in
the Eastern District of Virginia case of Pruitt v. Allied Chemical Corp.'36
There  the defendant  manufactured  and  eventually  dumped  thousands  of
pounds of Kepone,  a highly toxic pesticide,  into  the Hopewell,  Virginia
sewerage  treatment plant.37 When this  dumping activity  was discovered,
the  State  of  Virginia  ordered  portions  of  the  James  River  and  the
Chesapeake Bay closed to fishing.38 Pruitt was one of several legal actions
that were  commenced  as a result of these events.  The plaintiffs  fell  into
three  different  groups:  (1)  commercial  fishermen,  shellfishermen,  and
oysterbed  lessors;139  (2)  wholesale  and  retail  seafood  enterprises  not
themselves  engaged in fishing operations, including restaurants; 40  and (3)
operators  of marinas  and owners  of boats  and owners of tackle and bait
shops.4' In addition to pressing their own claims, this latter group was also
permitted to act as surrogates for the claims of recreational fishermen.142
The complexity of the  legal issues  involved  is best revealed in Judge
Merhige's analysis of the rights of the commercial fisherman to recover for
all lost profits caused by a decline  in demand for what the public believed
might  be  tainted  seafood. 43  The  plaintiffs  had  to  overcome  both  the
destroy in a brief moment of carelessness is practically limitless." Comment, Foreseeability
of Third-Party Economic Injuries - A Problem in Analysis, 20 U. CHI. L. REv.  283, 298
(1953). This may be true, but I question whether the economic loss rule is best suited to
serve the particular function of limiting claims. See infra notes 155-71  and accompanying
text.
134.  State of Louisiana v. M/V Testbank, 752 F.2d 1019, 1029 (5th Cir. 1985).
135.  For many of exceptions  to the rule, see W. PAGE KEETON ET AL.,  PROSSER AND
KEETON ON THE LAW OF TORTS 707-10 (W. Page Keeton ed., 5th ed. 1984).
136.  Pruitt v. Allied Chem. Corp., 523 F. Supp. 975 (E.D. Va. 1981).
137.  Andrew W. McThenia & Joseph E. Ulrich, A Return to Principles of Corrective
Justice in Deciding Economic Loss Cases, 69 VA. L. REv. 1517, 1518 (1983).
138.  Id. at 1518 n.5.
139.  See Pruitt,5 23 F. Supp. at 976.
140.  See id. at 979 n.20.
141.  See id. at 980 n.23.
142.  Id. at 980.
143.  Because the only point I am trying to make here is that those who insist that the
economic loss rule is a rule of administrative  simplicity leading to predictable results are
oversimplifying the rule's application, I will ignore the other aspects of the case. For the best2012] FRISCH
Restatement  and  traditional  precedent-based  arguments  that  would  deny
recovery  in  cases  of this  kind.144  In  addition  to  case  law  from  other
jurisdictions that would require  plaintiffs to show an injury to a property
interest in the fish or fishing grounds, they had to contend with the decision
of the Fourth Circuit in Marine Navigation Sulphur Carriers,I nc. v. Lone
Star Industries, Inc. ,a a case brought by commercial parties to recover for
' 
business  losses resulting  from the  closure  of the James  River to marine
traffic after the defendants'  vessel struck a bridge. 46 In that case, the Fourth
Circuit held that because plaintiffs could not show damage to their property
or person, they could not recover. 47 In concluding that the economic loss
rule barred recovery, the Fourth Circuit refused to adopt the Ninth Circuit's
decision in Union Oil Company v. Oppen.148 In that case, the Oppen court
allowed the claims of commercial fishermen damaged by an oil spill on the
purely pragmatic ground that it would help foster environmental protection
policies.149 The Marine Navigation court rejected the Oppen oil pollution
exception as applying to its own factual situation.'50 In other words, it had
no  application  to claims  for economic  losses  not deriving  from harm  to
marine life caused by an event that implicates environmental concerns.'5'
Within the  framework  of the  foregoing  distinction between  Marine
Navigation and Oppen, Judge Merhige could have justified recovery for the
fisherman  by  concluding  that  the  case  before  him  was  factually  more
closely aligned  with the  latter than the  former.  The  acceptability  of this
justification in turn rests on accepting the irrelevance of the distinction that
in  Oppen, fish  died;  whereas  in  Pruitt, the  fish  survived,  but  demand
declined. s2 Indeed, it was this distinction that the defendant relied upon to
support  its  contention  that  the  plaintiffs'  claims  should  fail.53  Judge
Merhige did not directly assess the strength of these competing arguments,
instead concluding  that  Allied's  concession  that the  fisherman would  be
entitled  to  recover  lost  profits  for  actual  destruction  of the  fishery  was
and most comprehensive discussion of Pruitt,s ee McThenia & Ulrich, supra note 137.
144.  See Pruitt,5 23 F. Supp. at 977; RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 766C (1979).
145.  Marine Navigation  Sulphur Carriers, Inc. v. Lone Star Indus., 638 F.2d 700 (4th
Cir. 1981).
146.  Id. at 701; McThenia & Ulrich, supra note 137, at 1525.
147.  Id. at 702.
148.  See id. at 701; Union Oil Co. v. Oppen, 501 F.2d 558 (9th Cir. 1974).
149.  See Oppen, 501 F.2d at 570.
150.  See Marine Navigation, 638 F.2d at 701.
151.  Seeid. at 701-02.
152.  The fishermen were able to catch their quota of fish, but their customers refused to
pay normal prices for what they considered to be tainted seafood. See McThenia & Ulrich,
supra note  137, at  1527  n.51  (citing  Brief in  Support of Motion  for Partial  Summary
Judgment at 5-6, Pruitt v. Allied Chem. Corp., 523 F. Supp. 975 (E.D. Va.  1981)  (Civ. A.
No. 77-0035-R)).
153.  Id.786 TENNESSEE LA W REVIE W [Vol. 79:757
tantamount to a showing of a property right or interest in the fish.54  While
the  decision  was  a  clear  win  for  the  commercial  fishermen,  there  is
obviously some difficulty in finding legal support for this bit of alchemy. It
is hard to accept the proposition that those whose business it is to fish have
any type of property interest in fish that have not yet been caught. One can
surmise  that  although  Judge  Merhige  was  attracted  by  the  perceived
benefits of the economic loss rule, he nevertheless sought an approach that
would allow  the  fisherman  to  recover. As  his  opinion  demonstrates,  he
found such an approach.  Recovery  was permitted  and, at the same  time,
Judge Merhige was able to insist that the law only protects a plaintiff whose
person or property is physically injured.
It is a central dogma of the economic loss rule that its rationale can be
adequately explained as  a simple way of controlling the possible flood of
litigation which might otherwise ensue from large scale disasters. My point
above is that the rule's application is not necessarily simple. The question
now  is  whether it  is  necessary. To  suggest  an  answer  to  this  question
prompts reflection on some general features of tort law.
The classic case of Kinsman Transit Co. v. City of Buffalo provides a
convenient vehicle for examining several of the doctrinal devices that have
served to  limit  liability.' 55 The unfortunate  chain of events  in  this case
began when the defendants allegedly caused a vessel to break loose from
her  moorings. 56  The  vessel then  careened  down  the  Buffalo  River  and
struck  a second  vessel  which  in turn  broke  loose from  her moorings.157
Together, both vessels drifted further downstream, eventually crashing into
and collapsing the Michigan Avenue  Bridge. 58 The two vessels,  together
with the wreckage from the bridge, formed a dam which caused extensive
flooding and an ice jam.'59 As a result of this disaster, one plaintiff, the
owner of cargo  stored  on  a vessel  berthed below the  Michigan  Avenue
Bridge, sought to recover damages resulting from its inability to unload the
cargo directly into its grain elevators located above the collapsed bridge. 6
A second plaintiff had a somewhat different claim. At the time these events
transpired  it was  engaged  in  unloading  cargo  from  a  vessel  above  the
bridge. Apparently, this vessel was struck by one of the two vessels floating
down  the river, causing  it to  break loose  from the  dock to which it was
moored and get stuck in the ice jam. The upshot of all this was that special
equipment had to be rented to continue with the unloading.161
154.  Pruitt, 523 F. Supp. at 978.
155.  Kinsman Transit Co. v. City of Buffalo, 388 F.2d 821 (2d Cir. 1968).
156.  Id. at 822.
157.  Id.
158.  Id.
159.  Id. at 823.
160.  Id.
161.  Id.2012] FRISCH
The  court's  opinion  here  contained  a  concise  exposition  of  why
liability-limiting devices are needed: "Such limiting principles must exist in
any system of jurisprudence for cause and effect succeed one another with
the  same  certainty  that  night  follows  day  and  the  consequences  of the
simplest act may be traced over an ever-widening  canvas with the passage
of time.' 62
Courts faced with the problem of catastrophic liability often make use
of  one  or  more  flexible  concepts-proximate  cause,163   duty 64  and
foreseeability165-that  can be used to draw the line between whether or not
legal  responsibility  exists  for the  harm that has  in  fact  occurred  to the
plaintiff's interests. In Kinsman, the court proceeded on the assumption that
the  defendants  could  reasonably  foresee  the  consequences  that  would
follow  from their negligence.166 Thus, if the  court were  to  hold that the
defendants were not accountable, that assumption would require it to make
an instrumental  shift in orientation.  If the tort concepts that limit liability
are  conveniently  put  aside,  the  legal  responsibility  question  can  be
approached on explicit policy grounds. Indeed, the court opined that .' [i]t is
all a question of expediency ...o f fair judgment, always keeping in mind
the fact that we endeavor to make a rule in each case that will be practical
and in keeping with the general understanding  of mankind."",167 The court
ultimately denied recovery on the ground that "the connection between the
defendants'  negligence and the claimants'  damages  [was] too tenuous  and
remote.  ,,168
162.  Id. at 824.
163.  See KEETON ET AL., supra note 135, at 273 ("The term 'proximate cause' is applied
by the courts to those more or less undefined considerations which limit liability even where
the fact of causation is clearly established.").
164.  Id. at 274 ("It is quite possible to state every question which arises in connection
with 'proximate  cause'  in the form of a single question: was the defendant under a duty to
protect the plaintiff against the event which did in fact occur? Such a form of statement does
not, of course, provide any answer to the question, or solve anything what ever ...".).
165.  Id. at 280-81  ("At the risk of becoming wearisome, it must be repeated that the
question [of foreseeability] is primarily not one of causation, and never arises until causation
has been established. It is rather one of the fundamental policy of the law, as to whether the
defendant's responsibility should extend to such results.").
166.  See Kinsman, 388 F.2d at 824.
167.  Id.a t 825 (quoting Judge Andrews' statement in Palsgrafv. Long Island R.R., 248
N.Y. 339, 354-55 (N.Y. 1928)).
168.  Id. To further explain its conclusion, the court offered the following illustration:
To anyone familiar with N.Y. traffic there can be no doubt that a foreseeable result
of an accident in the Brooklyn Battery Tunnel during rush hour is that thousands
of people will be delayed. A driver who negligently caused such an accident would
certainly be held accountable to those physically injured in the crash. But we doubt
that damages would be recoverable against the negligent driver in favor of truckersTENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
The  conclusions  of proximate  cause,  duty,  and  foreseeability  are,
therefore, perhaps best understood as a covert policy judgment on the issue
of liability, based upon the fear of exposing the defendant to unknowable,
catastrophic  liability. But as  Professor Karl Llewellyn so famously put it:
"Covert tools are never reliable tools."'169 One justification for the economic
loss rule may be that  it minimizes  costs  by providing courts  with a less
problematic  alternative  for  protecting  against  unreasonable  risk.
Nevertheless,  support  for  the  economic  loss  rule  based  solely  on  the
indeterminacy of the various tort concepts misses the more salient point that
the rule serves as an absolute bar to recovery, even in those instances where
policy  considerations  might  otherwise  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the
defendant should  be legally  responsible.  In other  words,  why should we
maintain  a rule  that  consistently  benefits  wrongdoers  at  the  expense  of
those  who  are  victimized  by  the  consequences  of  the  wrongdoer's
actions?170 The emphasis should rest on the extent to which the imposition
of liability is consistent with the instrumentalist and other goals of tort law,
notwithstanding  the fact that this sort of analysis  cannot  be applied with
mathematical precision.17  The familiar tort concepts that currently serve to
or contract carriers who  suffered provable losses because of the delay or to the
wage earner who was forced to "clock in"  an hour late. And yet it was surely
foreseeable that among the many who would be delayed would be truckers and
wage earners.
Id.a t 825 n.8.
169.  K.N.  Llewellyn,  52 HARV.  L. REv.  700,  703  (1939)  (book review).  Llewellyn
wrote this in connection with his discussion  of the willingness of courts  to perceive  the
unfairness of a particular clause or contract and attempt to rectify it through misconstruction
of contract language or misapplication of particular doctrines. Evidence suggests that section
2-302 of the  Uniform Commercial Code ("Unconscionable  Contract or Term")  emerged
from Llewellyn's own calculus of the costs and benefits associated with what he perceived
to be the  less than  forthright  manner  in which courts reacted  against harsh  contractual
provisions. See Arthur  Allen Leff, Unconscionability and the Code: The Emperor's New
Clause, 115 U. PA. L. REv. 485, 525-27 (1967).
170.  This point was made in a dissenting opinion from Louisiana ex rel. Guste v. M/V
Testbank, 752 F.2d 1019, 1052 (5th Cir. 1985) (Wisdom, J., dissenting) (stating "absent hard
data,  I would rather  err on the  side of receiving  little additional  benefit from  imposing
additional  quanta  of liability  than err  by adhering  to Robins'  inequitable  rule and  bar
victims' recovery on the mistaken belief that a 'marginal incentive curve' was flat, or nearly
so. If a loss must be borne, it is no worse if a 'merely'  negligent defendant bears the loss
than an innocent plaintiff absorb the damages.").
171.  One such case is Kinsman, and People Express Airlines, Inc. v. ConsolidatedR  ail
Corp., 495 A.2d 107 (N.J. 1985), is another. There, the court declined to apply the economic
loss rule to prevent recovery of losses by an  airline when forced to evacuate its terminal
following the negligent release of a chemical from a nearby railroad car. Instead, the court
held  that an obligation  of due care  would exist if a plaintiff could  establish "particular
foreseeability,"  a standard calling for a case-by-case  inquiry. Id.a t 116. It had this to say2012] FRISCH
limit  liability  have,  therefore,  an  obvious  attraction.  In  sum,  their
imprecision,  together  with  ambiguity  in the  case  law,  enable  courts  to
discern and reach appropriate  results generally. This is something that the
economic loss rule is incapable of doing.
Let us now return to the specific  question of whether lost time claims
should be cognizable under the law of negligence. Once we recognize that
the economic loss rule should not bar such claims, it becomes apparent that
permitting such  recovery is  supported  by those same  considerations  that
justify tort damages generally. Courts and commentators seeking to provide
normative criterion for the remedial structure  of tort law typically fall into
two  groups. In one group  are the adherents  of law and  economics, who
argue that the remedial structure should be designed so as to create efficient
incentives.17  In  the  other  group,  we  find  the  supporters  of  corrective
justice, who stress the non-instrumentalist goal of compensating the victims
of wrongdoing.173
Now consider how the two groups would pursue their respective goals
if presented with a claimant who was wrongfully deprived of leisure time.
In this regard, it  is important  not to lose sight of the simple fact that the
claimant  has  suffered  a  real  loss.  From  the  perspective  of  law  and
economics,  the  key  is  to  deter  non-cost-justified  accidents  by  creating
incentives for actors to behave more carefully in the future. That is, liability
for negligence should be imposed in those instances where the costs to the
victim  were  greater  than the  benefits  to  the  actor.  In  this  respect, it  is
essential that the actor internalize the costs of her behavior if we expect to
see an optimal investment in precautions designed to avoid torts. It is only
then that the tort system can deter excessively risky activity in the future.174
about the economic loss rule:
Whatever  the  original  common  law justifications  for the  physical harm  rule,
contemporary tort and negligence doctrine allow- indeed, impel -a more thorough
consideration and searching analysis of underlying policies to determine whether a
particular defendant may be liable for a plaintiffs economic losses  despite the
absence of any attendant physical harm.
Id.a t 111.
172.  See, e.g., John C.P. Goldberg & Benjamin C. Zipursky, Tort Law and Moral Luck,
92 CORNELL L. REV. 1123,  1141 n.58 (2007) (suggesting that law and economics dominates
current discussions of tort law).
173.  See generally Jules Coleman, Tort Law and the Demands of Corrective Justice, 67
IND. L.J. 349 (1992)  (discussing the overall concept of corrective justice); Ernest Weinrib,
CorrectiveJ ustice, 77 IowA L. REV. 403 (1992)  (same).
174.  See, e.g., Richard Posner, Some Uses and Abuses of Economics in Law, 46 U. CHI.
L. REV. 281, 305 (1979)  ("One of the main purposes of law, from an economic standpoint, is
the control of externalities .... Property rights and liability rules ...  are devices by which
people are given incentives to internalize the costs and benefits of their actions so that anTENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
This instrumental  objective  of tort law cannot  be achieved if the  loss of
leisure time that results from wrongful activity is not reduced to a monetary
value in comparing it to what must be done to reduce the risk that that form
of loss might  occur. Only then would the right  amount of deterrence  be
produced  by  compelling  negligent  injurers  to  make  good  the  victim's
losses.
Corrective justice, on the  other  hand,  is indifferent  to  the economic
consequences of liability but is concerned with the injustice that results if a
wrong has been committed and the wrong is not "corrected"  by imposing
on the wrongdoer a duty to compensate the victim.175 Presumably, a policy
of compensating tort victims for losses would not be fostered by the failure
to take account of lost leisure time.  If compensation is the objective, then
the damages awarded to a victim should equal the value of what he has lost.
While it is true that damages for lost leisure time cannot truly "compensate"
in the same way that damages for pecuniary  losses can,76 the principle  of
corrective justice suggests that courts should provide recovery for this very
real  loss.  Failure  to  do  so  would  almost  certainly  produce
undercompensation.
In its discussion of the cases cited by the plaintiff, the Hannafordc ourt
speaks  in  terms  which  seem  singularly  curious.  These  particular  cases
allowed  recovery  for lost time where  the intention to harm was present.
This leads  the  court  to announce  that  "[b]ecause  liability  is  often  more
extensive in cases of intentional torts than those in negligence, intentional
tort cases recognizing recovery for time and effort have little bearing on our
efficient allocation of resources is achieved.").
175.  The corrective justice view has been described as follows:
The traditional view-largely unchallenged until recent years-was to look at the
law of torts as a study in corrective justice, as an effort to develop a coherent set of
principles to decide whether this plaintiff was entitled to compensation from this
defendant as a matter of fairness between the parties. Issues of public policy and
social control were of course not absent, but they did not dominate judicial or
academic attitudes either to particular cases or to general theory.
C. GREGORY, H. KALVEN, & R. EPSTEIN, CASES AND MATERIALS ON TORTS xxii (3d ed. 1977)
(emphasis in original).
176.  Damages for pecuniary losses can enable the victim to replace what was lost. For
example,  if property  is  damaged,  money  can  be used  to  make  repairs  or purchase  a
replacement. Damages for lost leisure time cannot achieve this result. When time is lost, it is
lost forever and no amount of money can actually provide for its replacement. In this sense,
lost leisure time damages  share common ground with nonpecuniary damages for pain and
suffering. Neither recovery really makes the victim whole. See Louis L. Jaffe, Damagesf or
PersonalI njury: The Impact of Insurance, 18 LAW & CONTEMP. PROBS. 219, 222-24 (1953)
(suggesting that damages for pain and suffering provide only consolation or solatium).2012] FRISCH
analysis.' 177  To justify its conclusion,  the court misplaces  its reliance  on
two cases. 78  In the first, the intentional nature of the defendant's conduct
formed no part of the plaintiff's prima facie case for damages, but became
relevant  only  as  a  means  to  override  a  valid  affirmative  defense  of
charitable  immunity. 79  The  second  case  involved  a  claim  for  mental
distress, a type of harm for which courts have long exhibited a reluctance to
allow recovery. 80 The objections to permitting legal redress for emotional
harm, though, do not necessarily counsel against recovery when negligence
results in lost time. One obvious difference between the two types of claims
supporting this conclusion is that lost time is far more difficult to falsify or
imagine.
The position that liability should sometimes be more extensive in cases
involving  intentional  harm  is  sometimes  defended  on the  instrumentalist
ground that there is an increased risk of an erroneous judgment if liability
can be based on something as equivocal as careless behavior. This risk may
have  the  untoward  effect  of creating  the  wrong  incentives.  Thus,  some
activities may be deterred that are not worth deterring. 8' The problem with
this argument rests in its failure to recognize that not all legitimate claims
should  be  barred  because  a  problem  of  proof may  permit  a  certain
percentage  of illegitimate  claims  to succeed.  Indeed,  such  an  argument
proves too much. A fear that the tort of negligence will yield false positives
could be used to override the tort, no matter what the loss. Once it is settled
that there is a tort of negligence for whatever reasons, it is impossible to see
why  the  plaintiff  should  be  denied  a  damages  claim  that  she  would
otherwise have if the action lay because the harm inflicted was deliberate.
Both  intentional  wrongs  and  negligent  ones  present  equal  occasions  for
177.  In re Hannaford Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec. Breach Litig., 4 A.3d 492, 497
(Me. 2010).
178.  Id.
179.  See Picher v. Roman Catholic Bishop of Portland, 974 A.2d 286 (Me. 2009).
180.  See Garland v. Roy, 976 A.2d 940 (Me. 2009). See generally KEETON ET AL., supra
note 135, at 54-66 (discussing claims for the infliction of mental distress).
181.  For example, Professor Perlman writes that:
[A]s  the  amount  of potential  liability  increases,  an  actor  must  attach  greater
significance to the risk that the substantive legal rule will be applied erroneously
or that he mistakenly will cross the line from no liability to liability. This increased
cost of error may inhibit socially useful activity. The problem is most acute where
liability is based  on negligence,  because the line between  careless and careful
behavior  is  ambiguous.  Courts thus tend to delimit  liability  more  strictly  for
negligence  than for intentional torts, where in many instances the line between
lawful and unlawful behavior is clear.
Harvey S. Perlman, Interference with Contract and Other Economic Expectancies: A Clash
of Tort and ContractD  octrine, 49 U. CHI. L. REv. 61, 70-71 (1982).TENNESSEE LA W REVIE W [Vol. 79:757
corrective justice.  In other words, the  moral culpability of the wrongdoer
should be irrelevant.
To  illustrate,  take  first  the  following  hypothetical  suggested  by
Professor Prosser:
Suppose a custodian, whose duty it is to lock up a library at 10 o'clock to
keep people  out, decides to lock it up at 9 o'clock instead, and locks in
those  who  refuse  to  leave.  Is  there  any  doubt  that  it  is  false
imprisonment?' 82
And because it is the intentional tort of false imprisonment, the plaintiff
is  entitled  to  damages,  including  compensation  for  lost  time.1 Now
3 
suppose the custodian has no actual knowledge that there are still patrons
inside the library, but he could easily have eliminated the risk of accidently
locking someone inside by a quick walk through the building or by a loud
shout announcing the  early closing.  If we  assume that  the custodian  has
acted negligently  in not taking these  precautionary  steps and that one or
more  persons  are  imprisoned  as  a  result,  the  Hannaford court  would
nonetheless deny damages for lost time. The harm to those who are forced
to spend  the night in the library is as before,  except that the element of
intention is lacking. The same goals of tort law apply regardless of which of
the causal  paradigms-be  it intentional  or negligent interference  with the
plaintiff's person-is applicable to the defendant's conduct.
The foregoing observations about the recovery of lost time damages in
tort leads  to  the  related  proposition  that  these  damages  should  also  be
recoverable in contract.84  Once again, we are seeking damages rules that
are  both fair  and efficient.  The typical  remedy  for breach  of contract is
money damages 18 in an amount sufficient to place the aggrieved party in as
good a position as it would have been in had the contract been performed, 86
or, as  is frequently said  , to give the  aggrieved  party "the  benefit of its
bargain.''187 This  full compensation  principle will  usually  be regarded as
fair  because,  at  least  in  theory,  it  provides  an  adequate  performance
182.  KEETON ET AL., supra note 135, at 53 n.72.
183.  See, e.g., Young v. Gormley, (Iowa  1903); Hewlett v. George, 9 So. 885 (Miss.
1891); Goodell v. Tower, 58 A. 790 (Vt. 1904).
184.  Those who reject the idea that lost time should be viewed as a cognizable harm in
a breach of contract action may justify their position on the ground that the amount involved
is too speculative. This Article will later demonstrate that the case for their recognition can
be made in simple and direct terms. See infra notes 196-221 and accompanying text.
185.  Because of the difficulties in forcing people to continue a relationship that they no
longer wish to continue,  the law  of contracts permits  parties to  compel  performance of
promises  through  legal  means  only  in  those  instances  when  monetary  damages  are
unsuitable. See RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS ch.  16, intro. n. at 100 (1981).
186.  See id at § 344(a); U.C.C. § 1-305(a) (2004).
187.  RESTATEMENT (SECOND)  OF CONTRACTS § 344(a) cmt. a (1981).2012] FRISCH
substitute for the aggrieved party. Furthermore,  it is economically  efficient
because of its incentive effects. The central economic concept that emerges
from a consideration of incentives is that of "efficient breach.' 88
Without entering into  the fray about the  strengths and weaknesses of
the theory of efficient breach, I will make a few points about its relation to
compensation.'89 According to this theory, incentives  for performance  are
efficient if they compel a promisor to balance the cost to him of performing
against the losses to himself and to the promisee that will result if he does
not perform.'90 This would correctly encourage breach only if the value of
the  gain  to  the  promisor  is  greater  than  the  value  of the  loss  to  his
counterparty.'9' If, on the other hand, the promisor's liability for damages
was  greater than  any benefit  to  be  gained  from breaching  the  contract,
presumably the promisor would elect to perform the contract instead.192 The
chosen  result (breach  or performance)  is  defended  on the  ground that  a
"Pareto-superior"  allocation of resources results because promisors  would
be encouraged to direct their efforts to the most valued use.193 If aggrieved
promisees  are  systematically  undercompensated,  promisors  would  not
internalize the full value of performance to the promisee and risk too much
breach.'94  Of  course,  overcompensation  would  have  just  the  opposite
result.195
188.  See generally RICHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS  OF LAW  118-31  (7th ed.
Aspen 2007).
189.  For  discussions of various  criticisms  of the  efficient breach  theory,  see, e.g.,
Daniel Friedman, The Efficient Breach Fallacy, 18 J. LEGAL STUD. 1 (1989); Ian R. Macneil,
Economic Analysis of Contractual Relations: Its Shortfalls and the Need for a  "Rich
ClassificatoryA  pparatus," 75 Nw. U.L. REv. 1018 (1981).
190.  See POSNER, supranote 188, at 118-31.
191.  See id.
192.  For judicial expressions of this idea, see, e.g., Patton v. Mid-Continent Sys.,  841
F.2d 742,  750  (7th  Cir.  1988) ("Even  if the  breach  is deliberate,  it  is not necessarily
blameworthy. The promisor may simply have discovered that his performance is worth more
to someone  else.  If so,  efficiency is  promoted  by  allowing him  to break his  promise,
provided he makes good the promisee's actual losses."); Giampapa v. Am. Family Mut. Ins.
Co., 64 P.3d 230, 251 (Colo. 2003) ("The theory of 'efficient breach' posits that the purpose
of contract law is not to discourage all breaches. To the contrary, certain breaches, such as
those where the breaching party's gains exceed the injured party's losses, are thought to be
desirable.").
193.  In addition to producing an  efficient allocation of resources, full compensation
also has the added benefit of encouraging reliance on contract rights because, breach or no
breach, the promisee knows that she will receive the benefit of her bargain.
194.  See William S. Dodge, The Casef or Punitive Damages in Contracts, 48 DUKE L.J.
629, 664 (1999)  ("If the breaching party is not responsible for the nonbreaching party's full
loses, then there is an incentive to breach even when the breach would not be efficient.").
195.  This  notion  accords  remarkably  with  the  historical  unwillingness  of courts  to
award  punitive damages  in breach  of contract  actions.  See RESTATEMENT (SECOND)  OFTENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol.  79:757
In  sum, the  failure of courts to award  damages  for lost leisure  time
involves more than issues of fairness and adequate compensation. There is
also the  possibility  that  this applied  rule of damage  recovery  generates
inefficient incentives to breach or go forward with contract performance, or
to optimally  invest in precautions  to  avoid torts.  Providing compensation
for lost time would eliminate this source of inefficiency.
C.  The Problem of Measurement
Given the fact that the Hannaford court discounted other cases finding
loss  of time  to  be  a  cognizable  injury  because  those  cases  failed  to
demonstrate how those damages were being measured,196 it is next relevant
to inquire how the damage structure might integrate such a claim. The crux
of  the  analysis  that  follows  is  that,  although  the  measurement  of
unconventional  forms of loss  is often difficult, the substitution  of market
time for leisure or nonmarket time can provide  a solution consistent with
the rules of damages assessment.
Frequently,  courts  have  stated  that  if the plaintiff fails  to prove  his
damages "with reasonable certainty," all recovery is denied.197 For example,
courts  have  asserted  that  the  profits  lost  by  a  new  business  are  too
speculative to permit their recovery.198 In applying the reasonable certainty
rule's  higher  standard  of proof, however,  courts  have  countenanced  a
departure from theory in several categories of litigation where the plaintiff's
proof is as precise and accurate as the situation permits. 199 Perhaps the most
CONTRACTS  § 353  (1981).  But see Dodge, supra note 194, at 663  ("Allowing  a party to
breach a contract and pay damages is not as efficient as forcing that party, with the threat of
punitive damages, to negotiate with the other party for a release from the contract.").
196.  In re Hannaford  Bros. Co. Customer Data Sec. Breach Litig., 4 A.3d 492, 497
(Me. 2010).
197.  See DOBBS, supra note 79, at 149-50. The effect  of this rule is "to increase the
injured party's burden of persuasion well beyond the usual one of making out his case by the
'preponderance  or greater weight of the evidence."' E. Allan Farnsworth, Legal Remedies
for Breach of Contract, 70 COLuM. L. REv. 1145, 1210-11 (1970).
198.  See DOBBS, supra note 79, at 154-55. But it would seem that a strong public policy
underlying the substantive  law involved may affect the degree of certainty required. Thus,
the  Supreme Court has  permitted a theater  owner to recover  lost profits resulting from
defendant's  anti-trust violations  even  though  there was great uncertainty  regarding  their
amount. See generally Bigelow v. RKO Radio Pictures Inc., 327 U.S. 251 (1946).
199.  See DOBBS supra note 79, at 151 ("[T]he plaintiff is probably expected to prove his
damages with as much accuracy as is reasonably possible to him, but precision not attainable
in the nature of the claim and circumstances is not ordinarily required."). As one English
court fancifully put it:
As much certainty and particularity  must be insisted on  . . . as  is reasonable,
having regard to the circumstances  and to the nature of the acts themselves by2012] FRISCH
extreme  example  of an accepted damage assessment for which no certain
metric exists is the pain and suffering award.2°°
Pain and suffering recovery has long been the subject of many exacting
criticisms. A primary criticism has been that the difficulties of monetizing
intangible  loss  lead to  awards  that  vary  significantly  from  one  case  to
another  and  are  not  consonant  with  the  compensatory  principle  of tort
damages.201 Although these arguments seem fairly compelling, courts have
been consistent in their position that the arguments do not warrant abolition
of the pain and suffering award because  it does  continue to serve several
useful purposes. 202 Courts, however, do require that the award be fair and
reasonable,  often  without  offering  a  real  guide  for  making  that
determination. 203 As a consequence,  a number of academics have put forth
which  the  damage  is  done.  To  insist upon  less would  be  to  relax  old  and
intelligible principles. To insist upon more would be the vainest pedantry.
Ratcliffe  v. Evans, 2 Q.B. 524 (C.A.  1892). Courts also have been known to invoke the
maxim that a wrongdoer cannot complain about computational uncertainty resulting from his
wrongful act. See CHARLES T. MCCORMICK, LAW OF DAMAGES  102-03 (West 1935).
200.  See Beagle v. Vasold,  417  P.2d 673, 681  (Cal.  1966)  ("Every  case which has
considered the issue [of pain and suffering] ...  has emphasized the difficulty faced by a jury
in attempting to measure in monetary terms compensation for injuries as subjective as pain
....  .).
201.  See generally Jaffe,  supra note  176,  at 219;  Joseph  H.  King,  Jr.,  Pain and
Suffering, Noneconomic Damages, and the Goals of Tort Law, 57 SMU L. REv. 163 (2004);
Robert L. Rabin, Pain and Suffering and Beyond.: Some Thoughts on Recovery for Intangible
Loss, 55 DEPAUL L. REv. 359 (2006).
202.  Pain and  suffering  damages  can  be justified  as serving at  least four distinct
purposes: appeasing both the victim's and society's sense of outrage over the defendant's
behavior; providing  a  sum  out of which  to compensate  the victim  for the expenses  of
litigation, including the fees paid to her attorney; deterring both the defendant  and others
from engaging in similar conduct in the future, and to provide the victim with the funds
needed to pursue  an alternative  lifestyle that takes into account her injuries. See DOBBS,
supra note 79, at 550.
203.  See, e.g., Seffert v. L.A. Transit Lines, 364 P.2d 337, 342 (Cal. 1961) (stating that
an award would be excessive if it "shocks the conscience and suggests passion, prejudice or
corruption on the part of the jury"); Tucker v. Lower, 434 P.2d 320, 327 (Kan. 1967) ("[Tjhe
only standard for evaluation is such amount as twelve reasonable persons estimate to be fair
compensation when that amount appears to be in harmony with the evidence and arrived at
without passion or prejudice."); Cuddy v. L & M Equip. Co., 225 N.E.2d 904, 909 (Mass.
1967)  (rejecting  the argument  that plaintiff's reference  to  possible per diem sums upon
which the jury could calculate damages for pain and suffering were  prejudicial). To help
guide  the  discretion  of the jury,  California has  adopted a model jury  instruction that
authorizes  the  recovery  of "[r]easonable  compensation  for  any  pain,  discomfort,  fears,
anxiety and other mental  and emotional distress suffered,"  and then instructs the jury that
"[iln making an award for pain and suffering you should exercise your authority with calm
and reasonable judgment and the damages you fix must be just and reasonable in light of theTENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
theoretical  proposals  to  make  pain  and  suffering  awards  more
predictable. °4
Two basic strategies for reform seem to dominate the literature. One is
the  idea  that  pain  and  suffering  awards  should  be  limited  to  a  fixed
percentage  of the  medical  and  related  expenses. 05  The  other  strategy
involves  constructing some sort of schedule of pain and suffering awards
based on the kind of injury and age  of the victim. The amounts  could be
determined by  prior awards  of a similar nature206 or by a consortium of
experts.207 Of course there are problems with both strategies. They may not
always  work as well as the reformers said they would-  hardly any reform
ever does.208 But, I have already noted how arbitrary and capricious the tort
system often is  in imposing  damage  awards for pain  and suffering;  such
caprice  tends  to undermine  whatever  deterrent  effects the present  system
may otherwise have. If sanctions are to be effective as a deterrent they must
be certain. The foregoing proposals do, at least, meet this criterion.
Are there analogies  in the area  of pain and  suffering  to determining
damages  for  lost leisure time?  We  should  start with  the  following three
evidence." Cal. Jury Instr.-Civ. 14.13 (2011).
204.  There has also been legislative action aimed at making awards more predictable.
Almost  30  states  have  sought  to  cap  the  amount  recoverable,  typically  in  medical
malpractice suits. Some of these legislative efforts have, however, been overturned on state
constitutional grounds. See Kevin Sack, Illinois Court Overturns Malpractice Statute, N.Y.
TIMES, Feb. 5, 2010, at A13 ("According to the American Medical Association, courts in 16
states have upheld the laws, while those in 11 states have overturned them.").
205.  See, e.g., Marcus Plant, Damages for Pain and Suffering, 19 OHIO ST. L.J. 200
(1958)  (proposing that the award  should be  limited to 50 percent of medical and related
expenses). Interestingly, Judge Posner has argued in favor of a ratio approach, when writing
for the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals in a wrongful death case involving a claim for loss
of consortium damages. See Arpin v. United States, 521 F.3d 769, 777 (7th Cir. 2008) ("The
first step in taking a ratio approach to calculating damages for loss of consortium would be
to examine the ratio  [of economic to noneconomic  damages]  in wrongful-death  cases in
which the award of damages was upheld on appeal.").
206.  See, e.g., James F. Blumstein, Randall R. Bovbjerg & Frank A. Sloan, Beyond Tort
Reform: Developing Better Tools for Assessing Damagesf or PersonalI njury, 8 YALE J.O N
REG. 171,  178-79 (1991)  ("[T]he middle range of prior awards of a similar nature should be
given 'presumptive'  validity.").
207.  See,  e.g.,  2  THE  AMERICAN  LAW  INSTITUTE,  REPORTER'S  STUDY:  ENTERPRISE
RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERSONAL INJURY 226 n.30 (1991)  (the amounts would be determined
"by  a consortium  of experienced judges,  lawyers,  insurers,  doctors,  and  others,  whose
conclusions would then be adopted by the state legislature or the state supreme court").
208.  The greatest problem with a ratio approach is that a plaintiff with small economic,
but large noneconomic, losses would recover little. Likewise, a scheduling approach suffers
from the questionable belief that all injuries can be fairly categorized. For a valuable critique
of these strategies, see Mark Geistfeld, Placing a Price on Pain and Suffering: A Methodf or
Helping Juries Determine Tort Damagesf or Nonmonetary Damages, 83 CALIF. L. REV. 773
(1995).2012] FRISCH
benchmarks  for assigning  a  dollar value  to  leisure  time. First,  whatever
method is selected for use it should not discriminate against plaintiffs with
little or  no  income.209  Second,  we  should  embrace  the  assumption  that
everyone values their leisure time equally. That is, we should consider an
approach  that is not claimant-specific.210  Third, there is a great deal  to be
said in favor of providing a formula that can be easily administered to yield
awards  that  are  consistent  across  cases  and  in  amounts  that  seem
appropriate to many.
Over the  past several  decades,  there has  been  a growing recognition
among forensic economists that the enjoyment of life is a component of the
value of life and should be recognized as a separate element of damages in
wrongful  death  and personal  injury  cases.  While  subtle  nuances  and
thematic variations exist, there appear to be two basic ways of making this
hedonic calculation. The first method of valuing the enjoyment of life might
best be termed the "willingness-to-pay"  ("WTP") approach.212 The first step
is to determine what an average person people would pay to have his or her
risk of fatal injury reduced  by a very  small amount. Economists Michael
Brookshire and Stan Smith have identified a number of sources that can be
consulted for this information. They include:
1)  Studies based on data regarding what private citizens spend on items
they  use  to  increase  their  own  safety,  such  as  airbags,  smoke
detectors, larger tires and so forth.
2)  How much more customers pay to fly on airlines  with better safety
reputations  and  similar  consumer  expenditures  based  on  safety
differentials in service delivery.
209.  Indeed, for this reason, one might legitimately object to a ratio approach to pain
and suffering awards  that is based on components  of pecuniary injury that includes  lost
earnings capacity.
210.  I am of the opinion, therefore, that the court in Daniel v. Virgin Atlantic Airways
Ltd., 59 F. Supp. 2d 986 (N.D. Cal. 1998) was mistaken in its view that "[tihe amount of
compensation could vary dramatically depending on what the [plaintiff] was prevented from
doing ... " Id. at 994 n.6. Whether the plaintiff was deterred from playing golf or attending
the wedding of a close friend or relative should not matter. The whole idea that a judge or
jury  can  rank  the  relative  value  of various  activities  in  a  meaningful  way  is  simply
preposterous. No one is an expert on another person's pleasures. The damages in all cases
should be uniform and based on the intrinsic value of leisure time.
211.  For an overview of existing case law on the issue of hedonic damages, see supra
notes 81-95 and accompanying text.
212.  This method has its genesis in a 1968 article by Thomas Schelling. See generally
Thomas Schelling, The Life You Save May be Your Own, reprinted in THOMAS SCHELLING,
CHOICE AND CONSEQUENCE  113 (Harvard Univ. Press 1984).TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
3)  How much more workers must be paid to accept jobs with greater life
risk, such as coal mining or high beam welding.213
By determining  what an  individual  would pay  to reduce  the  risk of
death or injury or the wage premium demanded to accept a position with an
increased risk of death or injury, the intrinsic value of life can be inferred.
For example,  if individuals  willingly spend  $1,000  to reduce  the risk of
death by 0.01%,  it can be inferred that the whole value of an individual's
life is $10 million ($1,000/0.0001).214
The foregoing whole life value does not, however, measure the value of
specific aspects of life. The next and final step in putting a specific  dollar
figure  on  the  enjoyment  of life component  of an individual's  life  is  to
subtract  from  the  whole  life  value  the  present  value  of  household
production and the income stream that would be derived from time spent in
market activities for the remainder of the individual's life expectancy.
This approach to arriving at hedonic value or enjoyment is not without
challenge.  For example, wage-risk premium studies assume labor mobility
and that individuals have perfect information about job safety. At least one
commentator  has  questioned  the  accuracy  of these  twin assumptions.215
Another common criticism is that the estimated value of an anonymous or
statistical person is not the same as the value that an individual places  on
her own life.216 Regardless of the merits of these and other criticisms of the
WTP approach as a basis for measuring the hedonic value of life, it is not a
methodology that is suitable  for lost leisure time valuations in the vast run
of cases. One basic point is decisive: it lacks administrative convenience in
application.  Whether  WTP-based  values  are  derived  from  wage-risk
studies,  consumption  studies,  or  surveys  posing  hypothetical  questions
about  risk,  the  approach  requires  time-consuming  and expensive  expert
testimony by forensic economists. These costs may be justified in the high-
stakes world of wrongful death and serious personal  injury, but are hardly
justifiable in the run-of-the-mill leisure time case  involving relatively few
hours.
213.  MICHAEL L. BROOKSHIRE & STAN V.  SMITH, EcoNoMIc/HEDONIC  DAMAGES: THE
PRACTICE BOOK FOR PLAINTIFF AND DEFENSE ATTORNEYS  167 (Anderson Pub'n Co. 1990).
214.  See,  e.g.,  Glenn  Blomquist,  Value  of Life  Saving: Implications of Consumer
Activity, 87 J. POL. ECoN. 540 (1979) (assessing the value of a person's life to be $370,000
based  on seatbelt  use);  Craig A. Olson, An  Analysis of Wage Differentials Received by
Workers on DangerousJ obs, 16 J. HUM. RES.  167 (1981)  (assessing the value of a person's
life to be $3.2 million based on the premium paid to workers in dangerous jobs).
215.  See,  e.g.,  William  T.  Dickens,  Assuming  the  Can  Opener: Hedonic Wage
Estimates and the Value of Life, 3 J. FORENSIC ECON. 51 (1990).
216.  See, e.g.,  Thomas  Havrilesky,  The  Misapplication of the Hedonic Damages
Concept to Wrongful Death and PersonalI njury Litigation, 6 J. FORENSIC ECON. 93 (1993).2012] FRISCH
A  second approach to estimating the value of life and its component,
the enjoyment of life, rejects the indirect calculation that underlies the WTP
methodology,  and  substitutes,  instead,  a  direct  measurement  of three
components  of life: work, services,  and enjoyment. The important insight
provided by this approach is that, because each person allocates his or her
time  so  as  to  maximize  total  utility,  on the  margin,  the  value  of each
component has the same price. Thus, it is accurate to say that that price is at
least the market-equivalent  wage rate applicable to the individual's actual
or potential employment opportunities. Gary Becker, the 1992 Nobel Prize
winner in economics, observes that "[t]he marginal utility from all uses of
time are equal in equilibrium because they have the same price (w), and the
marginal rate of substitution between time and each good equals the "real"
wage rate, where the price deflator is the price of the good.2 17 Thus, if an
individual  has a current  wage rate  of $15  per hour, the value of her lost
leisure time would also be estimated at $15 per hour.218
By providing an approach that has the advantage of making the value of
leisure time relatively easy to establish, the cumulative method of valuation
may appear, at first blush, to bring us to the end of our pragmatic search for
a suitable method to set damages in lost time cases. Moreover, in addition
to  its  efficacy,  it has  the  added  advantage  of keeping  courts  out of the
business of ranking the worth of various activities. But this approach suffers
from two deficits.
Let us understand first that using an individual's actual wage-rate  as a
measuring rod to value lost leisure opportunities raises substantial  equality
concerns. To my mind, such an approach is inconsistent with the dignity of
universal  human  worth by  positing  that  leisure  time  is  worth  more  to
neurosurgeons than it is to law professors. Why would this be? After all, it
might well be that those with lower paying jobs under difficult conditions
may  value  their  leisure  time  more  than  those  who  toil  in  high  paying
positions that bring with them high degrees of respect and self-satisfaction.
What  is  needed  is  a  damages  rule  that  is  indifferent  to  the  earning
characteristics  of different people, but simply seeks to measure lost time in
a manner that is not intractably discriminatory.
217.  GARY S. BECKER, A TREATISE ON THE FAMILY 22 (Harvard Univ. Press 1991).
218.  For a good discussion of the application of this approach to an injured housewife,
see RICHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS  OF LAW 80 (Little, Brown & Co. 1972). It is
suggested that the appropriate wage-rate should be assessed net of taxes since the return on
nonmarket time is not taxable. Id.T hus, that would be the rate that an individual would
consider relevant when trading between work time and leisure time so as to maximize his
total utility. Because the effect of taxes on the total recovery in the type of case envisioned
by  this  Article  would  be  de  minimis,  I suggest  that  they  should  be  ignored.  Their
consideration would only add an unnecessary complicating  feature to the calculation. For
these two reasons,  I would also ignore the typical work-related expenses of transportation,
clothing, etc.TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW [Vol. 79:757
Even if I am reluctant to embrace an approach that implicitly rejects the
assumption that everyone enjoys life equally, the notion that earnings in the
market (i.e.,  "opportunity cost of leisure time") provides the basis  for an
acceptable standard of measurement should hardly be dismissed in toto. If it
is just the claimant-specific determination that is troublesome, then why not
simply use the median or mean wage-rate paid by employers in all industry
sectors  in  metropolitan  and  nonmetropolitan  areas  as  the  relevant  real
219
wage?
There  is still one more step to consider. A disadvantage  of lost leisure
valuation  based on the composite  median or mean wage  is that in  some
cases-indeed perhaps in most cases-we would have to make an upward
adjustment to the hourly wage-rate  of specific  individuals to truly reflect
the realities of the marketplace. In an unpublished paper, Melville Wolfson
advances  the  truly  novel  notion  that  leisure  time  is  worth  more  than
working time.220 He argues that the hourly earnings rate undervalues leisure
time  because  it neglects  to  take  into  account  the real  possibility  of an
overtime  premium,  which  can  be  time-and-a-half,  double-time  and
sometimes even triple-time, depending upon the industry. Thus, in his view,
some multiple (1.5,  2.0 or 3.0) of the hourly earnings rate should be used.221
Admittedly, there is room for disagreement about what the multiple for
valuing leisure time ought to be. If, however, tort and contract law are to be
understood  from  a  meliorative  perspective,  it  is  clear  to  me  that  some
multiple  should, in fact, be used. Probably the two  most common  social
policies promoted by both tort and contract law are the compensation  for
losses and the creation of incentives for optimal levels of behavior. When
tort  and  contract  law  are  assessed  in  connection  with  their  meliorative
functions, one may question the wisdom of adopting a measure of damages
that  increases  the  likelihood  of undercompensation.  Other  things  being
219.  A snapshot of these wages  can be obtained from the U.S. Department of Labor.
See, e.g., NATIONAL OCCUPATIONAL  EMPLOYMENT AND WAGE  ESTIMATES
(May 2010), http://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oesnat.htm  (documenting a median hourly rate
of $16.57  and a mean hourly rate of $21.74). Because the primary purpose of this Article is
to provide a conceptual legal and economic framework for assessing the loss of leisure time,
I leave the choice between the two wage-rates to the court or state legislature. States may
choose to pass statutes as a means of resolving this problem. Statutes prescribing a rate of
interest on claims and judgments provide a workable model. See, e.g., 28 U.S.C.A. § 2516
(2011); VA. CODE ANN. § 6.2-302 (2011). If a specific dollar amount is selected, legislatures
should pay heed to increases in the wage-rate and increase the statutory amount from time-
to-time, as necessary.
220.  Professor  Wolfson's death  prevented  him from completing  the paper.  For  an
abstract and Editor's Note explaining his thesis, see Melville Z. Wolfson, Is Leisure Time
Worth More Than Working Time, 14 J. FoRENsIc EcON. 35 (2001).
221.  A second reason suggested for using a multiple is that the true yield to a worker
for a marginal hour at work should include the utility or pleasure gained from the act of
working. See id. at 36.2012] FRISCH
equal, the wrongdoer should bear the  slight risk that the specific multiple
chosen  might overvalue  leisure time. Without this kind  of approach,  it is
hard to see that the policies of contract and tort law can be implemented on
a  large  scale.  I  need  not  now  assess  the  relative  strength  of  these
multipliers.  Nor need I  conclude whether the  selection  should be by the
court or legislature. None of this is necessary to understand the more central
point: the lost leisure valuation should posit an equal quality of life for all
individuals.
IV.  CONCLUSION
In this Article, I have attempted to demonstrate some of the deep flaws
in  the  reluctance  of  courts  to  award  damages  for  lost  leisure  time,
particularly  in breach of contract cases.  This reluctance,  coupled with the
fact that it adds to the pervasive undercompensation  of contract plaintiffs is
not without social significance.222 I have sought to demonstrate that there
are strong policy grounds for setting damages at an amount that equals the
value  of what  the plaintiff has lost.  The two  most basic of these  are to
compensate the aggrieved party and to deter conduct that brings about more
harm than  good. I have  attempted  to show  that  the present  structure  of
damages, by not giving much attention to claims for lost personal time, has
created  the  possibility  of a  divergence  between  loss  and  compensable
damages,  and is thus insensitive to these policy grounds. In this Article, I
offer a  conceptual  framework based  on this  observation.  Finally, I have
argued  that  existing  techniques  for  measuring  leisure  time  are  either
administratively cumbersome or are anti-egalitarian. I propose  a technique
that is narrowly tailored to respond to these two deficiencies.
The  lack  of judicial  and  academic  attention  to  lost  leisure  time
situations  is  in  some  sense  astonishing,  considering  the  plethora  and
diversity  of contexts  in which  this type  of loss  is  likely to  occur.223  It
suggests  that  the  traditional  common  law  position  against  recovery  of
222.  Undercompensation  of contract  plaintiffs  results,  in  no  small  part,  from  the
continued adherence of courts to the American rule on attorneys'  fees. Unless the contract or
a statute provides  otherwise, each party is ultimately responsible to compensate her own
attorney. See generally Symposium, Attorney Fee Shifting, 47 L. & CONTEMP.  PROBS.  1
(1984).  For tort plaintiffs,  on  the other hand, punitive  damages  and pain  and  suffering
awards can help ease the burden of litigation expenses.
223.  See supra notes 11-16 and accompanying text. Another example of an everyday
scenario that implicates such a nonpecuniary loss involves a frustrated consumer seeking to
rectify a problem caused by a commercial provider of goods or services. For example, in a
telephone interview, Richmond, Virginia attorney Anne Stratton explained that a lawsuit she
had filed against Verizon for time spent seeking to correct a variety of billing errors was
dismissed because the court refused to recognize that lost time was a compensable injury.
Telephone Interview with Anne Stratton, Attorney (Jan. 8, 2012).802  TENNESSEE LA W REVIEW  [Vol. 79:757
nonpecuniary damages generally has a powerful hold on our legal intuition.
A re-evaluation of this slighted area would be good public policy and, it's
about time.