Beyond Training: Law Librarianship’s Quest for the
Pedagogy of Legal Research Education*
Paul Douglas Callister**
After examining an earlier debate about “process” versus “bibliographic”
approaches for teaching legal research skills, Mr. Callister explores the cre-
ation of a flexible pedagogy that emphasizes frameworks to facilitate the learn-
ing process.
The pilot and copilot did exactly what they were trained to do,but the plane crashed any-
way because they failed to think. . . . 
—Tom Woodall,Engineering Fellow at Raytheon,
commenting  on the crash of a passenger jet1
Contents
The Nature and Extent of the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
History of the Debate and Its Aftermath  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Round I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
The Wren Indictment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
The Wrens’Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
Round II  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
Countercharge from Traditional Law Librarians  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
Proposal of Berring and Vanden Heuvel  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
The Wrens’Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
Conclusion of the Wren Debate and Its Aftermath  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
End of the Debate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
Impact on Law Librarians as a Profession . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
CALR Overshadows the Debate   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
The Concurrent Shift in the Nature of Legal Research  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
Summary of Developments and Aftermath  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22
Requisite Elements of a Pedagogical Model for Legal Research Instruction  . . . . . . . .23
Objective of Teaching Legal Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23
* © Paul Douglas Callister,2003. 
** Law Reference Librarian and Assistant Professor of Library Administration,University of Illinois
College of Law,Champaign,Illinois. The author would like to thank the following people for their
assistance,encouragement,and comments:Peter Hook,Paul Healey,Linda Smith,Frank Houdek,
and Virginia Callister.
1. Statement made in conversation with the author.
78 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
Nature of Legal Sources   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .25
Mathetics:The Nature of Students and the Conditions of Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . .27
The Wrens and the Mathetic Imperative—Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27
Reformulation of the Mathetic Imperative—Building Frameworks  . . . . . . . . . . .32
Criteria for Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .34
The Author’s Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .35
Final Thoughts on Frameworks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .44
A Consistent Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .44
Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45
¶1 Few problems have been more universally deliberated than the proper role and
methods of law librarians in teaching legal research to law students. The debate
has been hijacked historically by advocates with semantically entrenched alle-
giances (e.g.,the “process-oriented”approach versus the “bibliographic”approach),
and more recently has been obscured by the advent of computer-assisted legal
research (CALR). Meanwhile, the debate has failed to focus on the real issue of
creating a suitable, yet flexible, pedagogical model for the acquisition of legal
research skills. By neglecting to develop a comprehensive pedagogy, our profes-
sion provides training but often does not educate law students to think about and
solve legal research problems. That distinction—between training and educa-
tion—has become the decisive factor for survival in an increasingly diverse and
complex research environment.
¶2  Etymologically, “train” and  “educate” have  similar  root  meanings.
However, the distinction I wish to maintain is between “training” whereby one is
conditioned to apply, in a specified manner, certain tools and methods to a partic-
ular type of problem,and “education”where one is taught to thoughtfully analyze
the characteristics and nature of the problem at hand in order to develop the most
appropriate technique for solving the problem, given one’s understanding of the
strengths and weaknesses of the various tools and resources at hand. For instance,
the pilots mentioned in the introductory quote followed procedures they had
learned by rote for dealing with a very specific range of problems. However,their
failure to think through the problem and consider the appropriate plausible solu-
tions may have led to the loss of their aircraft and the lives of those onboard.
¶3 In the first section of this article I outline the nature and extent of the dis-
satisfaction with legal research instruction and demonstrate that the problem pre-
dates CALR,although exacerbated and obscured by it. In the next section I present
the history of the debate, focusing on a heated exchange between advocates of a
“process-oriented” approach  and  proponents  of  the  traditional, “bibliographic”
methods. In the third section I present the requisite elements of a satisfactory peda-
gogical model.
¶4 In discussing a satisfactory pedagogical model, I propose that a complete
model requires (1) an identifiable and fully understood objective in teaching legal
research (which objective must distinguish between the kinds of research done by
attorneys,scholars,and librarians); (2) a theory and understanding of the nature of2003-01] Beyond Training 9
legal  source  materials  (which  contemplates  changes  in  volume, accessibility,
“gestalt,” etc.); (3) a theory of mathetics, or the nature of students and how they
learn (with emphasis upon the provision of conceptual models for internalizing
research techniques); and (4) a methodology consistent with the previous ele-
ments. Besides proposing the elements of the pedagogical model, I explore the
subtle issues surrounding each element (including examples of frameworks),con-
cluding that a pedagogical model will be appropriate for a law school only if its
design is based on the particular circumstances and needs of that school.
The Nature and Extent of the Problem
¶5Criticism about the alleged decline in legal research skills of law students comes
from both practicing attorneys and formal studies evaluating such skills. Recently,
this concern has manifested itself in criticism of law students and recent graduates
who rely too heavily on CALR. A partner and member of the hiring committee at
a Chicago law firm expressed his frustration: “In my brief decade and a half of
practice,I have noticed the development of a disturbing trend in legal research:the
primary reliance on CALR to the exclusion of other legal resources.”2
¶6While current complaints focus on the detrimental effects of CALR,the state
and decline of law student research skills have been an unvarying constant of legal
education for decades. Even before Westlaw and LexisNexis made “free” pass-
words (at least from the student’s point of view) and unlimited online access avail-
able to virtually all law students,3 complaints about attorney and student research
skills as well as legal research instruction were common themes in the literature:
l From 1902:“I have been amazed at the helplessness of law students,and even
of lawyers when they go into a library to search for authorities. . . . Law
schools should teach their students how to do these things.”4
l From 1918: “Lawyers in active practice, even long standing, either admit that
they do not know easily how to extract information from their books. . . .
Indeed,the [law] schools as such cannot lay claim to the credit of having rec-
ognized the need and acting promptly.”5
l From 1949: “I speak from an experience of 25 years on the bench, an experi-
ence sometimes painful . . . ,when I say to you that one of the big mistakes in
legal education today is relative neglect of this important subject of legal
research in law school.”6
2. Bret A. Rappaport,Lawyer’s Etcetera:Time for the Wooden Shoe:Legal Research in the Computer
Age,13 CBAREC.,Oct. 1999,at 50,50.
3. Marilyn R. Walter,Retaking Control over Teaching Research,43 J. LEGALEDUC. 569,581 (1993). 
4. Horace E. Deemer,1 AM. L. SCH. REV. 404 (1902).Deemer was a justice of the Iowa Supreme Court.
5. Frederick C. Hicks,The Teaching of Legal Bibliography,11 LAWLIBR. J.1,2 (1918).
6. Proceedings of the Forty-First Annual Meeting of the American Association of Law Libraries Held at
Pennsylvania Hotel,New York City on June 21 to 24,1948,41 LAWLIBR. J. 161,170 (1948) (remarks
of Hon. Bernard L. Shientag).10 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
l From 1959:“I have been concerned with the teaching of legal bibliography for
nearly thirty years. . . . I am certainly not satisfied with what we are doing or
with what anybody else is doing.”7
l From 1968: “The teaching of legal research is one of those areas that we all
talk about—and do least about. . . . Those who do it well . . . readily move on
to more ‘worthwhile’things—such as teaching Torts.”8
l From 1977: “Why do recent law school graduates have difficulty using a law
library? This question is a never ending source of puzzlement to private law
librarians and others who come in contact with new lawyers.”9
l From 1981: “There has been a great deal of dissatisfaction with [legal bibli-
ography] courses among both students and faculty. . . . There is also some con-
cern about whether these courses really convey the techniques of research.”10
l From 1985: “Frequently, lectures, library exercises, readings, and written
examinations seem to have little long-term effect on the law student’s ability
to perform even simple research. All too commonly,first-year students obtain
a clerkship, then discover they forgot or never learned very much in legal
research class.”11
l From a 1988–89 survey of legal research skills: “In [my] eighteen years as a
law firm librarian, I find legal research skills totally lacking among summer
associates . . . .”12
l From 1989: “Although the literature is replete with ‘new’methodologies for
[legal] research instruction, none of it has demonstrated that even the best
taught and most innovative of legal research courses can compare with the
excitement and intellectual interest that often can be found in the ‘substantive’
first-year courses.”13
¶7The crowning indictment is found in a 1990 article by Joan S. Howland and
Nancy J. Lewis reporting the results of a study conducted in 1987 and 1988 that
surveyed law firm librarians from eight metropolitan cities as to their views on the
7. The Teaching of Legal Writing and Research—A Panel,52 LAWLIBR. J.350,367 (1959) (remarks of
William R. Roalfe).
8. Charles D. Kelso,Curricular Reform for Law School Needs of the Future,20 J. LEGALEDUC.407,
412 (1968).
9. Robin K. Mills,Legal Research Instruction in Law Schools,the State of the Art or,Why Law School
Graduates Do Not Know How to Find the Law,70 LAWLIBR. J. 343,343 (1977). 
10. Rhonda Carlson et al., Innovations in Legal Bibliography Instruction, 74 LAW LIBR. J. 615, 615
(1981).
11. Paul Richert, Oral Competence Testing in Legal Research Techniques, 77 LAW LIBR. J. 731, 731
(1984–85). 
12. Joan S. Howland & Nancy J. Lewis, The Effectiveness of Law School Legal Research Training
Programs,40 J. LEGALEDUC.381,385 (1990) (quoting a librarian participating in a study conducted
in 1988–89).
13. Thomas A. Woxland, Why Can’t Johnny Research? or It All Started with Christopher Columbus
Langdell,81 LAWLIBR. J. 451,458–59 (1989).Woxland complains in his opening sentence,“Many
law graduates are incompetent to perform adequately one of the most vital of lawyerly functions—
legal research.”Id. at 451. 2003-01] Beyond Training 11
adequacy of the legal research skills of summer and first-year associates.14“Sixty-
four percent of the summer clerks and forty-eight percent of the first-year associ-
ates were judged by the respondents to have less than satisfactory abilities in
determining appropriate research sources for a specific subject matter.”15 They
concluded:
There is a growing awareness among law librarians and practicing attorneys that the
research skills of law students and recent law school graduates are painfully inadequate and
are perhaps becoming increasingly so. The survey confirms the perception that most sum-
mer clerks and first-year associates are unable effectively and efficiently to research issues
that appear routinely in cases handled by middle-sized and large law firms.16
The significance of the dates of the study and the complaints noted earlier is that
they occurred prior to the implementation of universal access to CALR services for
law students, and indeed many of the criticisms were made before the birth of
LexisNexis in 1973 and Westlaw in 1975.17Thus the decline in legal research skills
and dissatisfaction with legal research courses is not just a CALR issue, although
the tendency to rely exclusively upon CALR has contributed to the problem.
History of the Debate and Its Aftermath
¶8 This section discusses the furor created by a single article which blamed the
inadequacy of legal research skills among attorneys and law students on the
research instruction they received in law school,and specifically on its traditional,
bibliographic emphasis. The resulting fire was also fueled by the perception that
the criticism had come from outside the profession. Well-respected librarians from
Berkeley vigorously responded to the perceived attack.  Additional criticisms have
surfaced since the end of the exchange, and the issues raised have been overshad-
owed by concern over commercial CALR training at law schools. Finally, the
impact of CALR has coincided with a perception that traditional legal tools are
inadequate to deal with the magnitude of legal source material.
Round I
The Wren Indictment
¶9The veritable “shot across the bow” was fired in a Law Library Journal article
by Christopher G. Wren and Jill Robinson Wren,18 father and daughter, who had
14. Howland & Lewis,supranote 12. 
15. Id.at 383.
16. Id.at 389. Apparently,as of 1997,a follow-up study (although promised) had never been undertaken.
Michael J. Lynch,An Impossible Task But Everybody Has to Do It—Teaching Legal Research in Law
Schools,89 LAWLIBR. J.415,428 (1997). I am unaware of any follow-up study. 
17. Donald J. Dunn,Why Legal Research Skills Declined,Or When Two Rights Make a Wrong,85 LAW
LIBR. J. 49,59 n.44 (1993). 
18. Christopher G. Wren & Jill Robinson Wren, The Teaching of Legal Research, 80 LAW LIBR. J. 7
(1988).12 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
earlier authored the well-received and popular The Legal Research Manual: A
Game Plan for Legal Research.19 Neither was a librarian. Christopher Wren was
the Assistant Attorney General for the Criminal Appeals Unit of the Wisconsin
Department of Justice and a graduate of Harvard Law School. His daughter, Jill
Wren,was the legal affairs editor for Adams & Ambrose Publishing in Wisconsin
and a graduate of Boston University School of Law. In a 55 page article with 177
footnotes, the Wrens attacked traditional methods of teaching legal research,
which they described as “bibliographically oriented,”containing too much unnec-
essary information about law books without grounding students in the proper con-
text of the legal research process.20 In making their arguments, the Wrens traced
the origin of the bibliographic model to Professor Frederick C. Hicks,a law librar-
ian at Columbia and later Yale,whom they credited with winning academic accept-
ance for legal bibliography as a course.21 The Wrens, however, found fault with
this approach:
Hicks’s success, however, camouflaged two deeply flawed assumptions underlying his
campaign:first,that law students needin-depth descriptions or histories of law books to
understand how to do legal research and,second,that artificially isolating instruction about
what lawyers do with them is a desirable or effective way to show students how to use law
books to solve legal problems.22
In the Wrens’eyes,while Hicks contributed to the teaching of legal research,some
of his ideas were based upon faulty assumptions. For the Wrens,current problems
were directly traceable to the seventy-year hold that Hicks’s methods had had on
legal research courses.23
The Wrens’Model
¶10The Wrens’own model for teaching legal research called for the use of “frame-
19. CHRISTOPHERG. WREN& JILLROBINSONWREN,THELEGALRESEARCHMANUAL:A GAMEPLANFOR
LEGALRESEARCH(2d ed. 1986) [hereinafter LEGALRESEARCHMANUAL]. That the manual was both
popular and well thought of is evidenced by the following review:“If you didn’t get the first edition,
buy the second edition. If you have the first edition,the second edition is even better . . . . As pre-
dicted by LOEM three years ago,many law schools have adopted the book as required reading mat-
ter for law students.”Book Review,The Legal Research Manual:A Game Plan for Legal Research
and Analysis,28 LAWOFF. ECON. & MGMT.126,126 (1987).
20. Wren & Wren,supranote 18. The Wrens went on to distinguish process-oriented instruction from the
traditional approach:
Process-oriented instruction,by presenting information about law books as part of a compre-
hensive explanation of the research process, not only gives students as much bibliographic
information as they need,but inherently emphasizes that law books are simply tools to use in
solving legal problems. Id.at 9. 
21. Id.at 26–33. Commenting favorably on Professor Hicks’s contribution,the Wrens wrote:“For the
legal academic community,. . . Hicks implicitly offered reassurance that including instruction about
legal bibliography would not dilute the intellectual rigor of the rest of the curriculum or undermine
the emerging movement to standardize legal training and bring scientific methods to bear on legal
education.”Id. at 32–33.
22. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 32.
23. Seeid.at 33.2003-01] Beyond Training 13
works,” which in their analysis was the same method used by “substantive” law
courses.
The fundamental goal of a substantive law course is to teach students ways of thinking
about and solving problems in a given area of the law. . . . To accomplish this objective,
professors in substantive courses . . . select a course context for information that will help
students develop appropriate ways of thinking about the material presented in the course.
This context consists of a series of related frameworks for solving problems in the area
of law being studied. These frameworks guide students toward categorizing legal princi-
ples in order to apply the principles effectively. By the end of a substantive course,students
have learned not only individual principles of law, but how to draw creatively and com-
prehensively on those principles to solve legal problems.24
In contrast, the Wrens argued that a bibliographically oriented research course
“undercuts student comprehension because the course’s content and context fail
collectively (in addition to failing individually) to advance the student’s under-
standing of the research process. In other words, the course content, on its own
terms, confuses students because the instruction purports to explain how to do
legal research but instead surveys law books.”25 The context and content of sub-
stantive courses, on the other hand, “work symbiotically to illuminate the process
and to equip students to engage in it.”26
¶11 In the tradition of substantive courses, the Wrens proposed the utilization
of three interrelated frameworks to help engage students and “organize legal
research as a readily understandable process and get students as quickly as possi-
ble from studying about legal research to actually doing it.”27 The three frame-
works stressed (i) the relationship between “law-creating”28 institutions and law
books, (ii) analysis of the problem before using the library (and presumably,
online) materials,and (iii) methods to employ once the “library phase”of research
had begun.29
¶12 To illustrate the Wrens’concept of frameworks, consider the first frame-
work which was designed to bridge the gap between high school civics’instruc-
tion in the three branches of government, the type of law each branch generates,
and the corresponding source books for each type of law.30 The relationship
between kinds of law (as well as the two fundamental types of their arrangement—
24. Id.at 20 (emphasis added).
25. Id.
26. Id.
27. Id.at 33.
28. I have chosen to use the term “law-creating”rather than “lawmaking”to emphasize the function that
institutions other than the legislature have in creating law. Generally,“lawmaking”has been associ-
ated with the legislative branch of government. See, e.g., BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY 893 (7th ed.
1999) (referring to “LEGISLATION”under the definition of “lawmaking”).
29. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 33.
30. Id.at 34. The legal framework for the law-creating institutions is nicely set forth in the Wrens’Legal
Research Manual. LEGALRESEARCHMANUAL,supranote 19,at 2 fig. A,4 fig. B. The courts’unique
structure is also illustrated in the Manual. Id.at 8 fig. D,9 fig. E,10 fig. F.14 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
chronological and topical) is illustrated by table 1, a reproduction of the “matrix”
provided by the Wrens in their article.31 The representations of tables or figures
should not be confused with the “framework” itself; they are merely a pedagogi-
cal aid in expressing the framework. To understand the whole of the framework
requires greater study. For instance,the entirety of the framework for the relation-
ship between law-creating institutions and law books is set forth in the first chap-
ter of the Wrens’Legal Research Manual and includes several figures and tables,
not just table 1.32
Table 1
Legal Authorities and Publication Forms
Where the Law Is Published
Kind of Law Chronological Arrangement Topical Arrangement
Statutory law Session laws Statutory codes
Common law Case reports Case digests (summaries
of primary authority)
Administrative law Administrative registers  Administrative codes 
(for rules) (for rules)
¶13 For the Wrens, frameworks (with their constituent tables, figures, and
matrices) represented the means of “mastering access”to what would otherwise be
an “undifferentiated mass of law books.”33 The Wrens expounded the virtues of
their frameworks at length:
By providing generic categories for conceptualizing legal authorities, the framework
enables students to see patterns in the way the law and law books are organized,i.e.,that
different authorities are published in similar kinds of arrangements (chronological and top-
ical) and that these arrangements remain constant across different jurisdictions. . . .
. . . [S]tudents can better absorb and retain bibliographic details about primary author-
ities:the framework enables students to systematically pigeonhole bibliographic informa-
tion in essentially the same way the frameworks in their substantive law courses make it
possible to pigeonhole legal principles.
. . . The framework thus lets students fit new data into a larger picture that remains con-
stant and familiar.34
¶14The use of frameworks is a reaction to the published criticisms of several
legal scholars and instructors:
31. See Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 35 matrix A. More elaborate tables,stressing the institutional
sources as well as various reporters,are presented in the Legal Research Manual. LEGALRESEARCH
MANUAL,supranote 19,at 12 fig. G,16–19 figs. J–M.
32. LEGALRESEARCHMANUAL,supranote 19,at 1–19.
33. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 35.
34. Id.at 35–36.2003-01] Beyond Training 15
l In 1986, Jill Ramsfield from Georgetown University commented: “The bibli-
ographic approach fails to explain the organization of legal resources, which
is a complex system intended to both deliver new information quickly and cat-
alog the information in several places. This system can overwhelm entering
law students. New legal researchers need strategies to put legal sources into
context.”35
l Robert Redmount, with a doctorate in education as well as a law degree,
argued in 1972 that “‘[l]earnability’requires that subject matter material con-
form to properties of logic and intellect. This means that form, sequence and
organization  are  important  in  each  of  the  complexes  of  material  to  be
observed.”36 Redmount elaborated:
[A law student] needs “learning handles”to aid him in the exercise of his motivational
dispositions and logical capacities, and thereby produce a meaningful and effective
learning result. He more readily and skillfully perceives relationships,analyzes con-
nections, orders results and transfers elements of learning if he can see or already
appreciates substance and importance in the materials he is dealing with. Without
these conditions and this experience,learning may not take place or it may prove to
be short-lived or decorative.37
¶15 The efforts of the Wrens to develop suitable frameworks is a reaction to
such criticisms, as well as an effort to bring legal research courses within the
“mainstream” of legal courses. 
By eliminating the intrinsic pedagogical anomalies of the bibliographic approach,process-
oriented instruction creates the conditions for the legal research course to enter the aca-
demic  mainstream: the  process-oriented  frameworks  bring  a  functional, conceptual
coherence to legal research as an academic discipline and result in the legal research
course,like other law school courses,teaching a lawyering skill.38
Whether bringing legal research courses into the mainstream with “substantive”
courses will sufficiently address the unique complexities of legal research as a sub-
ject matter is a question for another day. In any event,the Wrens’reaction to ped-
agogical  criticisms  of  legal  research  instruction  and  their  desire  to  improve
teaching methods (through what seems to work in “substantive”courses) is behind
their emphasis on frameworks.
35. Jill Ramsfield,Book Review,SEC. LEGALWRITING,REASONING& RES. NEWSL.,Oct. 1986,at 15,
cited inWren & Wren,supranote 18,at 17 n.32. A thorough reading of the passage suggests that Jill
Ramsfield’s statement is probably more accurately applied to the second and third frameworks of the
Wrens’model,which deal with the process of research itself; however,the statement about the need
for context and the lack thereof is applicable to all three frameworks.
36. Robert S. Redmount,A Conceptual View of the Legal Education Process,24 J. LEGALEDUC.129,140
(1972),cited inWren & Wren,supranote 18,at 18 n.34.
37. Id.at 140,cited inWren & Wren,supranote 18,at 51 n.143.
38. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 60. The Wrens apparently hold the view that all law courses teach
skills,rejecting the distinction between “substantive”and “skills”courses. See alsoinfra¶ 37.16 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
Round II
Countercharge from Traditional Law Librarians
¶16 Not surprisingly, the Wrens’article drew significant attention and an immedi-
ate, vehement response. Professors Robert C. Berring (director of Berkeley’s law
library, a former dean of the School of Information Studies at Berkeley, a gradu-
ate of Boalt Hall,Berkeley’s law school,a coauthor of a major legal research trea-
tise,39 and founding editor of Legal Reference Services Quarterly) and Kathleen
Vanden Heuvel (the deputy director of the law library at Berkeley,former manag-
ing editor of Legal Reference Services Quarterly, and also a graduate of Boalt
Hall) responded with their own scholarly analysis.40Although acknowledging the
significance of the Wrens’article,41 Berring and Vanden Heuvel alleged that the
Wrens had given short shrift (or a “strawman”argument) to the traditional biblio-
graphic approach and its author, Frederick Hicks,42 and refuted the superiority of
the Wrens’model as “dangerous and misguided”and as a “variation on the laissez-
faire approach currently used by most law schools.”43
¶17With respect to the Wrens’characterization of the bibliographic method as
developed by Hicks, Berring and Vanden Heuvel describe it as an oversimplifica-
tion that confused the study of the context of a book and its origins with the bibli-
ographic emphasis on its internal components:
The Wrens characterize the bibliographic method as a mechanical enterprise in which
students only learn the internal components of individual books. This is certainly not what
Hicks meant when he talked about a bibliographic method of instruction. . . . Hicks is say-
ing that to understand law books you must view them in context,in the information stream
of time and place in which they are published.44
39. MORRISL. COHEN,ROBERTC. BERRING,& KENTC. OLSON,HOWTOFINDTHELAW(9th ed. 1989).
Berring has also authored a more concise text which originally was an abridgement of How to Find
the Lawbut evolved into a distinct textbook. ROBERTC. BERRING& ELIZABETHA. EDINGER,FINDING
THELAW(11th ed. 1999).
40. Robert C. Berring & Kathleen Vanden Heuvel,Legal Research:Should Students Learn It or Wing It?
81 LAWLIBR. J.431 (1989).
41. Id. at 431 (“The Wrens take the problem of legal research instruction seriously. Their article,which
contains 177 footnotes in 55 pages of text,presents a detailed examination of the substantial body of
literature on the teaching of legal research. . . .”).
42. The depiction of bibliographic methods as developed by Hicks offended Berring and Vanden Heuvel.
We also take strong exception to the Wrens’characterization of the “bibliographic”method of
teaching legal research. They identify the most dismal approach to research training as the
norm and then associate the worst elements of this approach with law librarians. Most law
librarians will find Wrens’analysis quaint if not downright offensive. Even more egregiously,
they interpret the work of Frederick Hicks so perversely that they accomplish metamorphosis
turning a brilliant scholar who possessed a grand and complex vision of legal research train-
ing into the father of the most incompetent,mundane approach to legal research imaginable.
Id. at 432.
43. Id.at 431–32 (“Their theories,as expressed in their article and book,are dangerous and misguided,
and play into the hands of those who think legal training is a minimalist’s enterprise best handled in
a cheap and easy manner.”). 
44. Id.at 433–34 (citingHicks,supranote 5,at 6).2003-01] Beyond Training 17
¶18 After addressing the Wrens’ criticisms of Hicks and the bibliographic
method, Berring and Vanden Heuvel proceeded to attack the Wrens’“learning by
doing” model, comparing it to the legal process courses being taught at the time
which inadequately introduced research tools and only provided limited problem-
solving skills.
Students learn to do only “A to B”research,in which they solve a research problem using
tool “A”to find answer “B.”Because they never learn how the tools work together or why
certain types of information are found in certain types of research tools,students come to
assume that tool “A”can only be used in one particular way,for one particular purpose:to
reach point “B.”A process-oriented research program gives students tunnel vision.45
Elsewhere the Wrens’ model was equated with “research on the fly” and, ironi-
cally, “treasure hunts,” something the Wrens vociferously deplored.46 Further
emphasizing the insufficiency of the Wrens’methods,Berring and Vanden Heuvel
criticized the Wrens’Legal Research Manualas a book that was “adopted and used
in many programs that employ . . . the ‘minimalist’s approach’to legal research. . . .
A book like the Wrens’, which is an excellent outline of legal research can be
exploited by law schools that refuse to devote time and resources to the actual
study and understanding of research.”47
¶19 Interestingly, in spite of Berring and Vanden Heuvel’s distaste for the
Wrens’treatment of Professor Hicks and the bibliographic method, and their dis-
trust of what they characterized as a minimalist and “hands-off” approach to
research instruction, they never directly attacked the Wrens’ insistence upon
frameworks as either unsound or lacking originality.
Proposal of Berring and Vanden Heuvel
¶20In contrast to the Wrens’emphasis on frameworks,Berring and Vanden Heuvel
facilitated the learning process in their advanced legal research course (rather than
during the first-year) by posing probing questions to identify the distinctions of
bibliographic materials:
Why were looseleaf services created,and how well do they fulfill their purposes? What are
the functions of citators, and how does their original purpose affect the way they work
today? Why did Frank Shepard choose to cite comprehensively to all cases in his citators,
how did the citators evolve, and how do the new Shepard’s citators fit into the whole
scheme? Do Auto-Cite and Insta-Cite have a different function from Shepard’s citators?
How can they be used in the research process? To what extent are these tools reliable? Is
there anything essentially different about cases reported online and those reported in paper
format? How do indexing theories and strategies affect the ways researchers gain access to
cases and statutes?48
45. Id. at 439.
46. Id.at 440.
47. Id.at 439.
48. Id.at 444.18 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
Through this method,Berring and Vanden Heuvel sought to build a historical and
conceptual foundation for bibliographic tools.49
¶21By changing the timing of concentrated instruction in legal research (to an
advanced course during the second or third year) and drawing attention to the dis-
tinctions of various research tools,Berring and Vanden Heuvel presented what they
believed was a realistic response to the deficiencies of legal research instruction.
The Wrens’Response
¶22 In characteristically scholarly fashion, the Wrens responded with another
lengthy article,although this time only thirty pages in length with 128 footnotes.50
Mirroring the complaint of Berring and Vanden Heuvel, the Wrens alleged that
their work, including its discussion of Hicks and the bibliographic process meth-
ods, had been mischaracterized (even given “short-shrift” treatment).51
¶23With respect to Hicks and the bibliographic method,the Wrens made clear
that their criticisms concerned the application of Hicks’s methods in modern times.
“We’re not sure why Berring and Vanden Heuvel want to entrench legal research
training in a 1918 conception that even its originator characterized as an ‘experi-
ment.’”52 The Wrens noted that the responsibility for teaching legal research had
shifted from the practicing bar (under an apprenticeship model) to law schools. In
addition, the wealth (or glut) of legal resources made Hicks’s model outdated.53
Moreover,the explosive increase in the quantity and variety of legal publications that
has occurred since 1918 makes a bibliographic orientation to legal research instruction self-
defeating today. . . . Today,more than ever,teachers need a standard for critically evaluating
course material so they can excise material that might otherwise seem necessary but, in
reality,does not advance students toward greater competence in doing legal research. . . .54
Legal research, in its modern context, must cover so many sources and kinds of
materials that selectivity necessitates the imposition of more rigorous standards for
defining course content.55
¶24 With respect to Berring and Vanden Heuvel’s criticism of the Wrens’
process-oriented method as leaving students on their own with an “on the fly”
approach, they responded: “Many of Berring and Vanden Heuvel’s objections
seem to derive from a notion that process-oriented teaching eliminates all instruc-
tion about law books in favor of simply having students use them. We did not write
that,however,and we do not believe that.”56In addition,claiming that Berring and
49. See id.
50. Christopher G. Wren & Jill Robinson Wren,Reviving Legal Research:A Reply to Berring and Vanden
Heuvel,82 LAWLIBR. J. 463 (1990).
51. Id.at 464.
52. Id.at 468.
53. See id. at 469–70.
54. Id.at 470–71.
55. See infra¶¶ 33,39–43 for a discussion of how legal materials and research have changed.
56. Id.at 472.2003-01] Beyond Training 19
Vanden Heuvel misrepresented the Wrens’position with respect to instructor over-
sight, the Wrens pointed out that they did not advocate the elimination of “all
instruction that deals with descriptions of law books,”57but rather a “reorientation
away from the Hicks-inspired emphasis on books and toward an approach that
emphasizes the process in which researchers use law books.”58
¶25 Finally, the Wrens criticized the Berring and Vanden Heuvel emphasis on
an advanced legal research course taught to upper-class students, arguing that legal
research contributed to the “imprinting”of new law students and that a mature com-
prehension of legal terminology was not necessary to learn legal subjects as demon-
strated by other programs and law courses.59The Wrens contended that their proposed
three frameworks provided useful assistance. The first helped students understand the
institutions that create law. In many law schools,this may be the only opportunity
to become acquainted with these concepts.60The Wrens’second framework,which
prepared students for visiting the library by emphasizing fact gathering and fram-
ing legal issues, helped students see what they missed from reading their case
books—that the cases originated in facts.61 Finally, the third framework, the
“library phase,” taught students how to read legal authorities, and it counterbal-
anced the case book approach of the students’substantive courses.62According to
the Wrens, teaching an advanced legal research course of the sort advocated by
Berring and Vanden Heuvel merely moved what should have been taught in the
first year to later years, which by definition was not “advanced,” but remedial.63
Conclusion of the Wren Debate and Its Aftermath
End of the Debate
¶26 Berring and Vanden Heuvel called for the end to the debate in a page-and-a-
half rejoinder reaffirming the necessity of the bibliographic method as part of the
“picture of the entire ‘juridical life’of society.”64 They also refuted the Wrens’crit-
icism of their advanced legal research course by asserting that the course was a
realistic response to the present conditions in law schools which did not permit
sufficient time in the first year to fully teach legal research.65
Impact on Law Librarians as a Profession
¶27 The debates between the Wrens and Berring and Vanden Heuvel became a
Rorschach test for librarians and legal research instructors,who tended to find that
57. Id.at 474.
58. Id.at 468.
59. Id.at 482. For a discussion of other programs,see id. at n.80.
60. Id.at 483.
61. Id.at 483–84.
62. Id.at 484. For a discussion of being “case-book bound,”see id.at n.89.
63. See id.at 481,490.
64. Robert C. Berring & Kathleen Vanden Heuvel,Legal Research:A Final Response,82 LAWLIBR. J.
495,495 (1990).
65. Id.20 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
their own previous views (on either side of the issue) were substantiated. For
example, Joyce Janto and Lucinda Harrison-Cox, both librarians at University of
Richmond Law School,sided with the Wrens:“We intentionally omit as much bib-
liographic detail as possible. Because we are teaching law,not library science,stu-
dents, our students receive only the information necessary for them to use the
information correctly.”66Janto and Harrison-Cox then explicitly linked their views
with those of the Wrens and indicated their perception of the popularity of their
position: “We were pleased to see that this attitude is gaining widespread accept-
ance. While we do not agree with the Wren approach in entirety, we feel they are
moving in the right direction.”67
¶28 Others, in stark contrast, viewed the Wrens’ “research process” as con-
vincingly discredited by Berring and Vanden Heuvel, and in particular, by the
results  of  transferring  research  instruction  to  combined  research  and  writing
classes staffed by writing instructors.68 For example, Michael Lynch at John
Marshall Law School concludes:
This view has been widely discredited. According to Berring and Vanden Heuvel, self-
instruction and instruction using the process-oriented approach both produce “[t]he most
dangerous kind of learning,because they constrict the student’s research universe. . . . They
learn only the narrowest,and often most ineffective,paths to solving their research because
they have no idea what the larger picture of legal research looks like.”69
¶29 Lynch directed yet an additional criticism at the Wrens’ work, accusing
them of equating the reading of cases with understanding them,70 and unwisely
placing “fact-related steps” before the general identification of legal issues and
background readings.71
¶30As a whole, the additional criticisms tended to touch upon the tangents of
the earlier debate. The episode remains an inkblot test for those who follow—they
see what they are predisposed to see. The fundamental issues have yet to be
resolved. 
CALR Overshadows the Debate
¶31In the end,the furor surrounding the debate initiated by the Wrens fizzled,not
because the issue had been conclusively decided, but as a result of the impact of
commercial CALR (LexisNexis and Westlaw) upon legal research instruction.
The Academic Special Interest Section of the American Association of Law Librarians has
set up an Ad Hoc Committee on LEXIS/WESTLAW Policies, chaired by Cam Riley,
66. Joyce Manna Janto & Lucinda D. Harrison-Cox,Teaching Legal Research:Past and Present,84 LAW
LIBR. J. 281,290 (1992).
67. Id.at 290 n.65 (citing Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 10).
68. See Dunn,supranote 17,at 56–58. 
69. Id. at 57–58 n.40 (citing Berring & Vanden Heuvel,supranote 40,at 439).
70. SeeLynch,supranote 16,at 418 n.4.
71. See id.at 423 n.11.2003-01] Beyond Training 21
Librarian and Associate Professor at West Virginia University College of Law. Riley
reports receiving letters from law librarians all over the country who are concerned about
the libraries’[sic] becoming the marketplace for LEXIS and WESTLAW,about the con-
flict between the educational program and the selling of a product,and about the increas-
ing influence and demands of the computer companies in light of the difficulty many
schools would have in using their own resources for CALR instruction.72
Of particular concern were the perceived overreliance of law students upon CALR
to the exclusion of other legitimate means of research, and the students’failure to
consider the cost of online searching in a law practice.73 Concern also was
expressed about who was providing training to CALR students. Lack of faculty
control had led to some undesirable consequences.74 “Students are now liberated
from the supervision and help of teachers and librarians and from interaction with
their fellow students. They go their merry ways at home—floundering around,
printing instead of reading, and enjoying the fun of free computer time.”75 
¶32Indeed,the extent of LexisNexis and Westlaw’s influence over the nation’s
law students was quite staggering:
West Publishing Company,for example,has some involvement in teaching first-year stu-
dents in about 80 percent of law schools across the country. If pre-summer-job training is
included,the figure is closer to 95 percent. . . . Mead Data Central provides 100 percent of
the Lexis training at 55 percent of the country’s law schools,and 50 to 95 percent of the
training at 31 percent of the law schools.76
The enormous investment by LexisNexis and Westlaw in legal research training
(although beneficial) had not gone unnoticed. The response to it had, however,
overshadowed the more fundamental issue of the proper mode of teaching legal
research, as raised by the Wrens and subsequent debate. 
The Concurrent Shift in the Nature of Legal Research
¶33 Not only had concern been voiced about the influence of LexisNexis and
Westlaw,but librarians,including Berring at Berkeley,had been forced to come to
grips with the effectiveness of traditional research tools in the face of an accumu-
lation of legal source material that was mind-numbing in its dimensions (an esti-
mated 54,059 cases were published in 2001, with another 385,343 appearing in
electronic format).77 Furthermore, the superabundance of published cases, when
72. Walter, supra note 3, at 581 n.79 (citing a telephone conversation with Cam Riley, Librarian and
Associate Professor,West Virginia University College of Law (Feb. 22,1993)).
73. See id.at 580–81 (citing Howland & Lewis,supranote 12,at 388).
74. Id.at 581.
75. Id. 
76. Id. at 581 n.80 (citing telephone conversations with William Lindberg, Manager, Educational
Services,West Academic Program (Feb. 23,1993) and Marsha Diamond,Legal Education Manager,
Mead Data Central (June 7,1993)).
77. E-mail from Donna Weinberg,Academic Account Manager,West Group,to Paul D. Callister (Sept. 6,
2002) (on file with author). See alsoRobert C. Berring,Collapse of the Structure of the Legal Research
Universe:The Imperative of Digital Information,69 WASH. L. REV.9,27 (1994); infra¶¶ 39–40.22 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
combined with increased access to legislative and administrative materials, had
shifted the traditional emphasis from judicial opinions to the other aforementioned
sources of law.78Confrontation with such phenomenal growth when coupled with
online information systems like LexisNexis and Westlaw had forced librarians to
reconsider the effectiveness of traditional research methods and tools (with related
consequences for the teaching of legal research).
The nature of legal research has changed. Under the old system,sloppy research instruc-
tion was not fatal. The student could blunder along, safe in the controlled environment.
Research was an intricate part of analysis. This explains the grouping of research,writing,
and analysis into one course at many law schools. The purely mechanical aspects of
research,of finding the right book,were minimal. But this is no longer the case. Now the
research environment is rich,and getting richer. . . .What is clear is that intuitive,on-the-
fly searching,supported by the familiar law of the digest system and West’s world view is
impossible. We now need research training that is devoted to research skills,that sees those
skills as useful and vital. Finding information,information of all sorts,not just cases will
be a vital function of the twenty-first century lawyer.79
The pedagogical implications of the exponential growth of legal publications and
electronic resources are reviewed later in this article.80
Summary of Developments and Aftermath
¶34 Since Berring and Vanden Heuvel concluded their debate with the Wrens,
scholars have generally seen vindication on both sides of the issue. More notably,
the debate has been overshadowed by growing concern over the impact of com-
mercial CALR systems, and the overdependence of law students and new attor-
neys on such tools. In addition,the online search capabilities seem to have brought
clearly into focus the present magnitude of legal source material, its exponential
growth, and the need for more finely tuned research skills. In spite of new issues
interjected into the debate, however, the fundamental disagreement between the
Wrens and Berring and Vanden Heuvel has not been resolved and the negative per-
ception of law student research skills has not changed. In essence, the fundamen-
tal difference of approach (between process and bibliographic methods) remains
the same, but the complexity of the problem has increased. 
¶35 It is now appropriate to take up the issue again, but this time to keep in
mind all of the various aspects of the problem—historical weakness of legal
research instruction, commercially subsidized CALR training, the magnitude of
current legal sources, and the need for more precisely honed research skills. The
question remains: how is legal research best taught?
78. Id.at 29.
79. Id. at 33.
80. See infra ¶¶ 39–43.2003-01] Beyond Training 23
Requisite Elements of a Pedagogical Model for 
Legal Research Instruction
¶36Any pedagogical theory for teaching legal research must consist of the follow-
ing elements: (1) identification of the objective of such instruction, (2) a theory
and understanding as to the nature of legal sources,(3) a mathetic theory as to the
nature of students and the conditions of learning, and (4) a methodology that is
consistent with the other three elements. Although the Wrens took positions with
respect to each of these elements, it is their thoughts about the third element—
mathetics—that are the most valuable. The real contribution of the Wrens is not
their advocacy of a pragmatic “process-oriented”approach (as opposed to the tra-
ditional bibliographic orientation), but their insistence upon the search for and
implementation of frameworks that could facilitate the learning process. In this
section, I explore each of these elements, as well as the Wrens’ contributions,
opposing views,and possible alternatives. In an effort to adequately address math-
etics, I present a possible system of interrelated frameworks.
Objective of Teaching 
Legal Research
¶37 What is the objective of teaching legal research? This question is not as easy
to answer as it might appear. The centerpiece of “substantive”legal education has
been teaching law students to “think like a lawyer.”81 “The fundamental goal of a
‘substantive law course’is to teach students ways of thinking about and solving
problems in a given area of law, whether those problems arise as hypotheticals
posed by the professor during the course or as real disputes,involving novel facts,
that the students will confront after graduation.”82Like substantive courses,83legal
research courses should teach students to solve problems in ways that will tran-
scend the classroom and graduation into their careers. But what kinds of prob-
lems? Obviously the problems are research problems, but will the research be
scholarly in nature? Will it be for a paying client? If so, is this different from a
scholarly problem? Are the problems that law librarians research different from
those of attorneys? There are different kinds of research:
81. Berring & Vanden Heuvel,supranote 40,at 13.
82. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 20.
83. The Wrens disapprove of the distinction between “substantive”and “skills”courses in law school. 
This debate [whether law school education should orient itself to the profession or to aca-
demics] has created and perpetuated seemingly intractable,mutually exclusive,but ultimately
irrelevant classifications of law school courses as “substantive” or “skills.” The presumed
dichotomy camouflages the reality that all soundly structured law courses,whether labeled as
“substantive”or “skills,”are fundamentally alike in their goal of seeking to train students to
solve problems like lawyers do,in their process-based subject matter,and in their need for
teaching approaches that reflect their process-based subject matter. Id. at 25. 
For a discussion about the debate between an academic and a profession-oriented approach to legal
education,see id.at 24.24 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
Scholarly legal research is comprehensive and directed toward general conclusions. A pro-
fessor or a lawyer writing a scholarly piece, surveys a broad legal topic, or takes a very
general view of a more restricted legal question,attempting to find and discuss (or at least
mention) all relevant authorities and to reach general conclusions. Although the scholar
may begin with desired conclusions, the typical scholar is free to follow the argument
where it leads. And the scholar is not overly concerned with how long a project takes; a
line of thought may be followed without too much worry as to whether it will serve the
purpose of the present project. Scholarly librarians work with similarly general intentions.
The typical product of the scholarly librarian is a comprehensive bibliography. . . .
What practicing lawyers do when they conduct research is quite different from this.
The research of a lawyer is concerned with the discovery and application of legal author-
ity relevant to the precise question presented by a client. Usually the research is directed at
problems presented by events that have already happened, though sometimes, usually in
business-planning contexts,the research is directed more broadly toward the consequences
of several possible courses of action. Even this more general search is almost always more
narrowly focused than the scholar’s broad-based approach.84
¶38 There are some distinct differences between the research of practicing
lawyers and scholars—focus versus comprehensive breadth,loyalty to a particular
side of an issue versus freedom to look for the best position,and limitations of time
and economics. An additional difference,particularly between lawyers and librar-
ians, is the relationship of the research to the analysis in their respective tasks.
[T]he research experience of law librarians often predisposes them to a limited view of
research that emphasizes the comprehensive search for all relevant sources over the strug-
gle to understand authorities that are found in the context of a restricted problem controlled
by the client’s interests. . . .
One pleasant part of the law librarian’s job is that interesting problems are presented,
some material is located,and then,while the lawyer or law student settles down to the strug-
gle for understanding,the librarian goes on to the next patron. Thus all problems may look,
to the librarian,like information problems [like the statute of limitations for alimony or the
order of intestate succession (which are contrasted with “understanding problems”)].85
Thus,law librarians may need to stretch (or reflect on earlier days when they prac-
ticed law) to fully understand the package of skills needed by their students.
Furthermore,the law firm librarians’low opinion of the research skills of summer
clerks and first-year associates expressed in the Howland and Lewis survey may
have occurred because the librarians did not use the correct set of criteria to assess
the skills. On the other hand, it can be argued that the librarians surveyed in the
84. Lynch,supranote 16,at 419. Not only is the final objective of lawyers and librarians different,but
the nature of legal research differs significantly from traditional scholarship (which,arguably,much
of academic library science is designed to serve):
The essence of scholarship in the modern sense is not learning but criticism. And the criti-
cal scholar who has fulfilled all of the requirements of patient collection of material,of scien-
tific investigation,of skeptical detachment,of philosophic synthesis is a rare person,so rare
indeed that we are not likely to meet many of them in law or anything else. Max Radin,On
Legal Scholarship,46 YALEL.J. 1124,1141 (1937).
85. Lynch,supranote 16,at 421.2003-01] Beyond Training 25
Howland and Lewis study all work for attorneys,who are not generally looking for
comprehensive research. In any event, the contrast between the tasks of law pro-
fessors, librarians, practicing attorneys, and even different kinds of attorneys is
important to understanding the objective of teaching legal research.
Nature of Legal Sources
¶39 If there was ever an area where the scholarship of legal bibliography is help-
ful, it is that of legal source material. While the Wrens make the distinction
between the sources of legal authority (i.e., the judicial, legislative, and adminis-
trative branches of government) and the books themselves,86 it is Berring who
makes the more important pedagogical contribution by identifying and describing
the emerging impact of the scale of accumulated legal source material.
It is estimated by West that 60,000 cases entered into its printed reporter system last year
[1993]. Perhaps another 40,000 appeared exclusively in an electronic format. There is no
printed organizing system (at least none with the complexity of the National Reporter
System and the American Digest System) that can handle that much input without becom-
ing unmanageable. . . . The American Digest System was designed in an era when less than
a thousand cases a year were published. . . . But even if the printed volumes could accom-
modate the system,the volume of published cases is breaking down the intellectual struc-
ture of the system,weakening what we have called the gestalt of legal thought. . . . Where
the research enterprise once consisted of finding a relevant precedent or two and exploring
the universe of cases around them,now each side in any dispute can find bunches of rele-
vant cases. . . . Whatever linear nature precedent could once claim is now gone.87
The deluge of published cases,when combined with new legal research tools such
as CALR, directly impacts research techniques and raises the threshold level of
skill required for their mastery. “Given the plethora of choices now available to
research, how can one know what to do? What is clear is that intuitive, on-the-fly
searching, supported by the familiar law of the digest system and West’s world
view is impossible.”88
¶40Added to the growing loss of faith in traditional research methods and tools
in the face of the explosion of legal source material is an assault on the historical
classification and organization of the law by West’s editors (who had played the
greatest role in creating access points to American legal bibliography).
It is well documented that subject headings promulgated by Library of Congress are
riddled with inadequacies,which some contend reflect conservative,white,male-centered
86. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 34. The Wrens also distinguish between “law”and “law books”
themselves. Wren & Wren,supranote 50,at 478 (“Focusing law students’attention on the history
and economics of law book publishing,as Berring and Vanden Heuvel do,obscures the point that
legal research revolves around finding and analyzing law—not around evaluating law books, as
Berring and Vanden Heuvel suggest.”).
87. Berring,supranote 77,at 27–28. 
88. Id. at 33.26 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
values and perspectives. The LC and West systems of classification,however,dominate the
structure of legal information. . . . The system is basically closed.89
Professor Berring,as an arch-defender of teaching legal bibliography,similarly noted:
In effect,West produced what Daniel Dabney [West’s Senior Director for Research and
Development] once called “a universe of thinkable thoughts.”No judge could determine a
point that did not have a location in the West system; it was complete. The conservative
aspects of this are obvious. New ideas and theories are classified back into existing cate-
gories. New fields like civil rights and feminist jurisprudence are broken apart and dropped
into pre-existing categories. West would add new topics,but only when absolutely com-
pelled to do so by major changes,and only after the passage of many years. . . . 90
¶41The advent of CALR brought into question the whole concept of a classi-
fication system,not just the idea of a single classification system or West’s classi-
fication system in particular.  “Recent work in the power of categorization and
classification help reveal that any such scheme is no more natural than its utility.”91
One scholar has advocated encouraging “‘concept’searching on online databases
so that users can approach the materials from other than conventional perspec-
tives.”92 The potential impact on legal research (and legal research instruction) of
the growing scale of legal source material coupled with relatively new methods of
accessing it (i.e., without using traditional indexing and classification schemes)
can no longer be ignored.
¶42 The new circumstances, besides making traditional research techniques
and tools less effective,have an impact on the ultimate source of law (whether leg-
islative, administrative, or judicial)—the legal mind. In 1987, Berring was even
more ominous and intriguingly “subversive” (to both traditional legal doctrines
and research techniques) when he wrote:
We are at the point where the ability to search without an imposed structure will
nakedly expose the myth of the common law and the beauty of the seamless web to the
general legal world. There is no underlying rational structure to law other than what posi-
tivists give it. Allowing people to go online in free text liberates them from any require-
ment to fit their thoughts into a pre-existing structure.
89. Jill Anne Farmer,A Poststructuralist Analysis of the Legal Research Process,85 LAWLIBR. J.391,
400 (1993).
90. Berring,supranote 77,at 21. Further criticizing the singularity of the West classification system,
Professor Berring noted problems with the federal system and the diversity of America’s various juris-
dictions:
Only a rudimentary knowledge of the federal nature of American law is required to recognize
how bizarre it is to think that one subject classification system could serve all the states and
the federal system as well. One of the most salient facts about the American federal system is
the difference between the legal systems of jurisdictions. To apply a uniform subject arrange-
ment to California,Delaware,and New York is marvelously crazy,and it only grew crazier as
the jurisdictions grew more complex and law played a larger role. Id.at 21–22.
91. Id.at 22 (citing SOCIALSCIENCECONCEPTS:A SYSTEMATICANALYSIS(Giovanni Sartori ed. 1984);
David Collier & J. Mahon, Conceptual Stretching Revisited: Alternative Views of Categories in
Comparative Analysis,87 AM. POL. SCI. REV. 845 (1993)).
92. Farmer,supranote 89,at 403. But see generallyMichael Duggan & David Isenbergh,Poststructuralism
and the Brave New World of Legal Research,86 LAWLIBR. J.829 (1994) (rebutting Farmer’s article).2003-01] Beyond Training 27
. . . This could create a crisis in legal thinking. . . . As new generations of lawyers find
themselves practicing law without old conceptual constraints,they will take law into more
positivist,specialized categories.93 
Here the Wrens’ distinction between law and law books becomes significant.
While legal books may continue to be published, the orderly system of legal
thought, and indeed the law itself (be it a naturalist system of rational legal prin-
ciples or the biased expression of the historical power structure),is breaking down.
West’s framework for viewing the legal universe is being overrun. Ultimately,it is
the source of law that is being affected, and paradoxically, not the books them-
selves. 
¶43The implications for law students are significant.  The neat order presented
by the casebook method is illusory,a pedagogical nicety but an oversimplification
of the world they will face in practicing law. To prepare for independence and to
be weaned from their sterile law school environment of neatly tied case studies,
students will need to learn to build their own paradigms. No subject offers a bet-
ter opportunity to practice making order out of chaos than legal research.
Mathetics: The Nature of Students and the 
Conditions of Learning
¶44This section will (1) introduce the mathetic imperative for frameworks,includ-
ing the Wrens’ philosophical grounding in and application of frameworks; (2)
reformulate the mathetic imperative to stress student involvement in their con-
struction; (3) present criterion for establishing and evaluating frameworks; (4)
present a series of interrelated frameworks that I have selected or developed; and
(5) part with some final observations on their proper employment.
The Wrens and the Mathetic Imperative—
Frameworks
¶45 The third element of a proper pedagogy for legal research instruction really
belongs to mathetics,which is the art or discipline of learning as opposed to teach-
ing. Mathetics comes from the ancient Greek, mathetes or µαθητη´ζ, meaning
learner,pupil,or disciple.94It is this aspect of the “pupil”that I wish to stress since
the essence of learning is in the nature of students themselves.95 Reducing the
93. Robert C. Berring,Legal Research and Legal Concepts:Where Form Molds Substance,75 CALL.
REV. 15,26–27 (1987).See alsosupra¶ 33. It is not surprising that in this modern era,legal subjects
like sports law,cyber law,feminist jurisprudence,and gay and lesbian studies begin to emerge as
acceptable subspecialties.
94. See JAMESSTRONG,Greek Dictionary of the New Testament,in THEEXHAUSTIVECONCORDANCEOF
THEBIBLE45 (root no. 3101) (10th prtg. 1936).
95. Similarly,but with slightly different emphasis,modern usage of “mathetics”has accentuated “self-
discovery”and “learning-by-doing.”See,e.g.,SEYMOURPAPERT,MINDSTORMS:CHILDREN,COMPUTERS,
ANDPOWERFULIDEAS120 (1980). I feel,however,that a thorough understanding of the pupil and,
more fundamentally,the learning mind,are prerequisites to finding the best methodology for learn-
ing facilitation (whether through “learning-by-doing”or some other technique).28 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
problem of mathetics to its most fundamental element,the inquiry becomes one of
first-order metaphysics, the nature of the human mind.
¶46The Aristotelian belief that “the mind is at birth a blank slate [tabula rasa]
upon which experience writes was the basis for studying the effects of learning on
behavior.”96During the Enlightenment,Locke built upon this theory. According to
Locke, “[i]f the mind is considered to be a blank tablet upon which experience
writes, then the writings can be assumed to be reliable inferences as to the nature
of the world insofar as objects in the world have caused them. For Locke,our per-
ceptions of the world come to us pre-organized,and do not require cognitive struc-
turing on the part of the perceiver.”97 In a sense, all that a student needed to do in
order to learn was to take in experience—an organized stream of data—which would
organize the mind for him or her.  A teacher, in such a model of learning, simply
needed to “pour into” the student—the result being organization of the student’s
mind by the order of experience he or she was acquiring. Locke’s views empha-
sizing experience and perception,although tempered by Rousseau’s romantic nat-
uralism, helped forge subsequent English and American educational doctrine.98
¶47The Wrens’theories presuppose a starkly different philosophical tradition,
expressly drawing upon the philosopher of science,Thomas Kuhn:
All education consists of an effort to simplify masses of knowledge through the use of par-
adigms. Moreover,as Thomas Kuhn has noted,“something like a paradigm is prerequisite
to perception itself. What a man sees depends both upon what he looks at and also upon
what his previous visual-conceptual experience has taught him to see. In absence of such
training there can only be,in William James’s phrase,‘a bloomin buzzin confusion.’”99
96. Motivation,Human,in24 THENEWENCYCLOPAEDIABRITANNICA436,437 (15th ed. 2002). Indeed,
thinking itself is seen to be as a passive exercise. “Thinking is treated by Aristotle as analogous to per-
ceiving. The mind is related to intelligible objects in the same way that sense is related to sensible
objects. It is thus impassive and is itself nothing but potentiality (namely,the potentiality of receiving
forms),and it has no forms of its own.”G. B. Kerferd,Aristotle,in 1 ENCYCLOPEDIAOFPHILOSOPHY
151,158 (Paul Edwards ed.,reprint ed. 1972). Quoting Aristotle directly,“the intellect,prior to think-
ing,. . . should [be regarded potentially] as [being] in a tablet which has no actual writing.”Aristotle,
On the Soul,inARISTOTLESELECTEDWORKS290 (Hippocrates G. Apostle & Lloyd P. Gerson trans.,
2d ed.,1986).
97. Perception,inTHEINTERNETENCYCLOPEDIAOFPHILOSOPHY,at http://www.utm.edu/research/iep/p/
percept.htm (last modified Apr. 27, 2001). This may be an oversimplification of Locke’s position
since Locke recognized that the mind operated on “external sensible objects”to create new ideas.
Let us then suppose the mind to be as we say,white paper,void of all characters,without any
ideas:–How comes it to be furnished? . . . To this I answer,in one word from EXPERIENCE.
. . . Our observation employed either,about external sensible objects,or about the internal
operations of our minds perceived and reflected on by ourselves,is that which supplies our
understanding with all the materialsof thinking. These two are the fountains of knowledge,
from whence all the ideas we have, or can naturally, do spring. John Locke, An Essay
Concerning Human Understanding,in 35 GREATBOOKSOFTHEWESTERNWORLD121(Robert
Maynard Hutchins ed.,1952) (bk. II,ch. i.,pt. 2). 
In any event,the theory of learning represented by Locke considered perception as occurring in the
“raw”without a priori conditioning of the mind.
98. See Philosophy of Education,in25 THENEWENCYCLOPAEDIABRITANNICA725,727(15th ed. 1997).
99. Wren & Wren, supra note 18, at 55 n.156 (citing THOMAS KUHN, THE STRUCTURE OF SCIENTIFIC
REVOLUTIONS113 (2d ed. 1970)).2003-01] Beyond Training 29
This is a fundamentally different approach which has its origins in Kantian phi-
losophy.100 The flow of experience will not necessarily organize the mind, as in
Aristotle and Locke’s model, but instead its perception and understanding are
dependent in part upon the mental paradigm constructed from experience. For
instance,the Wrens compare the learning process with viewing a pointillist paint-
ing where,without a conceptual framework,the beholder sees nothing but random
colored dots.
In legal research,each fact and legal authority should,like the dots of color in a pointillist
painting,cumulate into a larger,coherent picture. However,for students who lack a sys-
tematic way of understanding research as a process for problem-solving, the facts they
work with and the authorities they examine fail to resolve into a unified problem-solving
response.101
¶48 For the Wrens, the problem with bibliographic teaching is that it, by defi-
nition,cannot provide such a structure or paradigm. In essence,a paradigm for per-
ceiving the nature of books is not appropriate for perceiving the nature of the
research process. Such a position may assume its own conclusion—although per-
haps unlikely, it may be that the nature of books and the research process are one
and the same thing. However,the point is a good one—the students’perceptions of
the research problems they will encounter require that they build the best paradigm
possible for perceiving both the nature of the research problem and its solution.
Some may counter that the bibliographic teaching approach also has an organizational
device,but this contention begs the question of the bibliographic device’s appropriateness.
From a researcher’s perspective, the organizing principle for bibliographically oriented
research instruction is inappropriate because it centers on familiarity with book character-
istics,not familiarity with the research process.102
¶49 The Wrens’paradigms are called frameworks. They emphasize their util-
ity in the hope that students will latch onto them to facilitate their own perception
of research problems and solutions. An example of a Wren framework, presented
earlier in table 1,underscores the relationship of various reporters,their organiza-
tion (chronological or by subject), and the various sources of law (judicial, leg-
islative, and administrative) by illustrating that each source has at least two
reporters, one arranged chronologically and the other by subject. The purpose of
such a framework, or at least the representation of it in the form of a table, is to
assist students in building their own framework to help them in the perception of
the problem of legal research.
100. Kant recognized a need for a priori “categories”to give “unity,organization,and permanence to what
we perceive. Without the categories,all that we perceive would be a chaotic confused blob of sensa-
tion. The categories are ways the understanding gives form to the matter taken in by the sense.”
Robert W. Hall,Immanuel Kant,inCLASSICSOFWESTERNPHILOSOPHY847 (Steven M. Cahn ed.,2d
ed. 1977).
101. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 48.
102. Id. at 55 n.156.30 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
¶50 In supporting the use of frameworks, the Wrens look to substantive law:
For example,a professor of contract law would convey contract principles through sev-
eralrelated frameworks that mirror the components of a contract problem,e.g.,a framework
for organizing and examining legal principles pertaining to the concept of making an offer,
a framework for considering principles about accepting an offer,a framework for dealing
with principles about breach of contract, and a framework for studying principles about
damages flowing from breach. . . . In each instance,the frameworks contribute to the stu-
dents’understanding of how to approach the subject matter.103
However,the problem with the bibliographic approach,according to the Wrens,is
that it presents no problem-solving frameworks, its structure instead being organ-
ized around the books themselves.104
¶51 The closest thing to frameworks that Berring and Vanden Heuvel present
is their list of questions designed to distinguish among bibliographic resources.
True, the  Wrens’ framework  serves  the  same  function  as  Berring  and 
Vanden Heuvel’s questions by helping students distinguish among resources.
However, the two techniques are hardly equivalent, and the Wrens’ frameworks
serve as more than a mnemonic device for capturing the distinguishing character-
istics of legal bibliographic tools. To illustrate, as noted earlier the Wrens’frame-
work represented by table 1 relates the fundamental sources of law (legislative,
judicial, and executive) to various kinds of law (statutory, common, and adminis-
trative)  and  further  demonstrates  the  two  common  methods  of  arrangement
(chronological and topical). In doing so the Wrens present the system as a whole—
emphasizing multidimensional characteristics—rather than stressing each individ-
ual bibliographic tool. In essence, they give the student a sorting shelf, like that
used in a mail room, to organize legal research. The sorting shelf relates how the
law  is  made  to  how  it  can  be  organized, topically  and  chronologically.
Furthermore, the Wrens’ model builds on what law students already know—the
three branches of government.
¶52This is not to say that legal research instruction can be reduced to a single
conceptual device. The Wrens’genius is not in table 1 (indeed, they offer several
pedagogical constructs105) or even in the totality of them,but in the recognition of
the need for such aids. 
¶53 In contrast, if Berring and Vanden Heuvel’s set of questions106 could be
organized into a coherent,systematic whole,their methods would have merit equal
or perhaps even superior to those offered by the Wrens. What is missing from
Berring and Vanden Heuvel’s approach (as presented in the debate) is a systematic
mode of analysis worthy of their narrow discipline. If law can strive to be a sci-
103. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 21.
104. See id.
105. Seesupra notes 30,31.
106. Seesupra ¶ 20 for Berring and Vanden Heuvel’s questions.2003-01] Beyond Training 31
ence,or proper academic discipline,then education as to the proper use of its prin-
cipal tools (i.e., electronic resources and print libraries) should likewise strive for
systematic methods and analysis.
¶54The need for systematic organization should not be confused with organi-
zation such as found in current textbooks on legal research, as illustrated by their
tables of contents. What is imperative is to build a system on what is known—to
the students, that is. The Wren model of the kinds of law and methods used to
organize them works because it begins with and builds upon knowledge the stu-
dents gained from high school civics—the branches of government. When pre-
senting strategies for finding the law, the Wrens likewise base their pedagogical
models upon what is already known. For instance, for situations when the student
knows a statute,regulation,or case,the Wrens offer strategies based on the known
statute,regulation,or case in question.107In the Wrens’progression of tables in the
Legal Research Manual,the strategy illustrated in figures T and V108ties directly to
their initial model (fig. C)109 based upon the sources of law. Thus, the Wrens con-
tinue to build on previous models and what the student already knows. Considering
a different kind of research problem—when the source of the law (or legal author-
ity and citation) is unknown—the Wrens’models for various approaches are still
based on what is known—descriptive words or facts, general topics, etc.110 But
again, the analysis is broken up into lines that distinguish the three branches of
government (i.e., legislative, judicial, and executive).
¶55 While  the Wrens’ approach  (with  respect  to  basing  analysis  on  the
branches of government) may be new to the discipline of legal research, it is sim-
ilar to a technique already developed in the library and information sciences with
respect to government documents.111 This technique categorizes queries, based
upon what is known, into five basic kinds of searches: known item, subject,
agency, statistical, and special techniques. By firmly basing their pedagogical
models on what the student already knows—either as part of the research problem
or from prior education—the Wrens assist the student in building a series of inter-
related constructs for solving research problems.
¶56The use of frameworks in general as a pedagogical tool is also not unique
to the Wrens. Under different names and terminology (like “constructs”and “con-
structivism,” “schemata,” “ecological learning,” “cognitive approach,” etc.), this
theory has found its way into many other disciplines,including the teaching of law,
107. See LEGALRESEARCHMANUAL,supranote 19,at 54–55 fig. T,59 fig. V.
108. Id.
109. Id.at 6 fig. C.
110. See,e.g.,id.at 52 fig. S.
111. See,e.g.,JEANL. SEARS& MARILYNK. MOODY,USINGGOVERNMENTINFORMATIONSOURCES:PRINT
ANDELECTRONIC6–9 (2d ed. 1994). The approach taken by Sears and Moody refines models devel-
oped by other librarians and information scientists commencing in the 1960s. See id.at 9–10 n.2.32 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
although apparently not within the education of legal research itself.112 The rela-
tive absence of such articles from the legal research literature suggests an unwill-
ingness to learn from the pedagogical advances and devices of other disciplines,
perhaps further evidencing the Wrens’ criticism that traditional legal research
courses are too bibliographically centered.113The pedagogical boundaries of legal
research education appear to be narrowly drawn indeed,focusing on the most tan-
gible aspect of the subject—the book itself.
Reformulation of the Mathetic Imperative—
Building Frameworks
¶57In spite of the Wrens’excellent insights,an element is missing from the Wrens’
analysis of the methods used by substantive courses—the understanding that it is
the student who must build a suitable framework, and the utility of Socratic 
inquiry to facilitate that process by forcing the student to test the adequacy of his
or her framework. A classic illustration of this principle is found in Plato’s
112. See, e.g., Brook K. Baker, Beyond MacCrate: The Role of Context, Experience, Theory, and
Reflection in Ecological Learning,36 ARIZ. L. REV. 287 (1994); Richard L. Roe,Valuing Student
Speech:The Work of Schools as Conceptual Development,79 CAL. L. REV.1271 (1991); Ronald W.
Staudt, The Future of the Legal Profession: Does the Grandmother Come with It? Teaching and
Practicing Law in the 21st Century,44 CASEW. RES499 (1994); Ian Weinstein,Lawyering in the
State of Nature:Instinct and Automaticity in Legal Problem Solving,23 VT. L. REV. 1 (1998); Kurt
M. Saunders & Linda Levine,Learning to Think Like a Lawyer,29 U.S.F. L. REV.121 (1994). A for-
mer colleague and classmate,Peter Hook,recently introduced “schema”and theories of cognition
such as semantic network theory. Peter Hook,Creating an Online Tutorial and Pathfinder,94 LAW
LIBR. J.243,248–52,2002 LAWLIBR. J.18,¶¶ 18–28,42.
113. Besides an article by Peter Hook,supranote 112,there are three notable exceptions to the lack of lit-
erature on legal research instruction with respect to mathetics. All focus on the needs of law students
with diverse “learning types.”See Eileen B. Cohen,Teaching Legal Research to a Diverse Student
Body,85 LAWLIBR. J.583 (1993). However,Cohen acknowledges:
Surprisingly,however,few articles in the law library literature discuss improving teaching
methods by incorporating an understanding of the different learning styles of students. One
article presents several learning styles and provides a broad overview of the application of
these modes to teaching in general. No article addresses differences in learning styles of stu-
dents in the increasingly diverse student population as a method of improving the teaching of
legal research. Id.at 585 (citing David W. Champagne,Improving Your Teaching:How Do
Students Learn?83 LAWLIB. J. 85 (1991)).
The other prominent exceptions are a pair of recent articles by Gerdy that,in addition to discussing
learning types, also explore the “learning cycle.” Kristin B. Gerdy, Making the Connection:
Learning Style Theory and the Legal Research Curriculum,LEGALREFERENCESERVICESQ.,2001
no. 3–4, at 71; Kristin B. Gerdy, Teacher, Coach, Cheerleader, and Judge: Promoting Learning
through Learner-Centered Assessment,94 LAWLIBR. J.59,2002 LAWLIBR. J.4. See alsoRobin A.
Boyle & Rita Dunn,Teaching Law Students Through Individual Learning Styles,62 ALB. L. REV. 213
(1998) (addressing legal instruction in general); Vernellia R. Randall, The Meyers-Briggs Type
Indicator,First Year Law Students and Peformance,26 CUMB. L. REV.63 (1995–1996) (addressing
legal instruction in general); Jane Thompson,TeachingResearch to Faculty:Accommodating Cultural
and Learning-Style Differences,88 LAWLIBR. J. 280 (1996) (discussing law school faculty only); Terry
Jean Seligmann, Beyond “Bingo!” Educating Legal Researchers as Problem Solvers, 26 WM.
MITCHELLL. REV.179 (2000) (discussing qualities of successful researchers and ways to cultivate
those traits). Although articulating differences in learning styles and qualities of successful
researchers,none of these articles addresses how legal research skills are actually acquired,or dis-
cusses the development of frameworks.2003-01] Beyond Training 33
Meno,114 where Socrates, through a process of dialectical examination, goads a
slave boy into reexamining his understanding of the world, specifically rudimen-
tary geometry, until the boy deduces from his own paradigm (thus extending it
himself) that the square of the hypotenuse of a triangle is equal to the sum of the
squares of the adjacent sides (the Pythagorean theorem).115
¶58 Forcing students constantly to reassess their own mental frameworks is a
key element to the success of substantive law courses, and a missing element of
the Wrens’model (instead they stress the inherent utility of their own frameworks).
“[B]y conceptually organizing primary authorities into just a few generic cate-
gories, the ‘legal system orientation’framework enables students immediately to
classify for research purposes a large portion of the law library’s collection.”116
Thus, the Wrens emphasize utility, specifically by suggesting frameworks to their
students. This is not to say that Socrates did not facilitate learning through pre-
senting frameworks—he presents the slave boy with a geometric arrangement of a
square divided by several other squares as a pedagogical aid, but for Socrates
dialectic examination is a critical element of the process.117 It is what makes the
boy understand,by being forced to examine his own framework through which he
understands the world.
¶59 Some have argued that legal research cannot be taught using the Socratic
method employed in “substantive” courses:
An attempt to teach legal research by case method is a travesty of the Langdellian model.
[Dean Langdell introduced the case method at Harvard Law School around the turn of the
century.] It is not the case method of Socratic analysis of issues and holdings,of the induc-
tion of general principles from selected cases. Rather,it is merely the use of a case as a
vehicle from which to hang an expostulation of legal research tools:a course in bibliogra-
phy with an inapposite pedagogical label.118
However,such criticisms confine the use of the Socratic method to case law analy-
sis, without seeing its more fundamental use—to force an examination of one’s
own view of the world, including the mental frameworks one develops for under-
standing and solving problems. In this latter sense, the Socratic method is an
appropriate and perhaps even necessary tool to facilitate the learning experience of
114. PLATO,Meno,inGREATDIALOGUESOFPLATO43–49 (ll.81B-85C) (W.H.D. Rouse trans.,Erich H.
Warmington & Philip G. Rouse eds.,New American Library ed. 1984) (1956).
115. Socrates employs a geometric construct to assist the slave boy in deducing the Pythagorean Theorem.
Socrates’figure is represented:
A Id. at 48 diagram 3. In the figure,the square formed by A (which area is repre-
C sented by two of the small triangles) is one-half of the square formed by C
(which is represented by four small triangles forming a larger square that is
askew and in the center).
116. Wren & Wren,supranote 18,at 48.
117. PLATO,supra note 114.
118. Woxland,supranote 13,at 458.34 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
law students studying legal research. The real question is how the Socratic method
should be adapted for use in the legal research classroom.
Criteria for Frameworks
¶60 The essential criteria for developing or selecting any framework is that (1) it
must relate to something that the students already know (i.e., it must extend the
mental construct of what students know into the unknown); (2) it must serve as a
vehicle for education and not simply training, meaning that the student must be
able to effectively adapt the framework to solve a wide range of future research
problems and to recognize the utility of new research tools and resources as they
are developed; and (3) it must be scalable, such that it can be expressed in a sim-
ple form (to facilitate quick understanding), yet be capable of vast expansion and
comprehensiveness (to permit students to appropriately manipulate and expand
their model when they are ready for more sophisticated analysis).
¶61A favorite philosophy professor of mine once commenced a course by ask-
ing,“What is a good question?”119His answer was that a good question is always
on the edge of what the individual knows—on the edge of the individual’s con-
struct of reality. Relating a framework to what a student knows can be done in a
variety of ways. Two of the most common are to have a model that either is famil-
iar in its use (known in the field of human-computer interface as “scripting” or
“schemata”)120 or permits association of an unfamiliar problem or resource with
problems or resources that are familiar and for which the use has already been
tried. An example of scripting would be the icons on any MS Windows-based oper-
ating system. A “trash can” is used to delete files, a “folder” signifies a directory
containing files, a “window” signifies something that can be opened giving view
to another directory or application,and the “desktop”suggests items close at hand
for easy access. The “Who,What,Where,When,How”framework presented later
in table 3 also functions as a scripted framework because its use is already famil-
iar to students as a result of high school English courses. In contrast, an example
of an associative framework is a table or three-dimensional model in which items
are placed into categories based upon common properties, such as presented later
in figures 2 and 3.
¶62 Besides linking the unknown to what is already known, effective concep-
tual frameworks must be sufficiently flexible for new situations. After graduation,
students may encounter research problems unlike anything they experienced in
law school. One of my first research assignments as a new attorney was to find sta-
tistical evidence of the average age of retirement for OB/GYN physicians in the
United States, preferably in the Los Angeles area. Unfortunately, the research
methods discussed in law school never addressed finding statistical information. In
119. Author’s recollection of Professor Chauncey C. Riddle’s opening remarks to an honor’s philosophy
seminar taught at Brigham Young University in winter 1986.
120. See generally JENNYPREECE,HUMAN-COMPUTERINTERACTION142–54,456–63 (1994).2003-01] Beyond Training 35
addition to new problem types, students must be prepared to rapidly understand
the appropriate uses of new research services and publications, particularly how
they fit into the larger scheme of legal research.
¶63 As  emphasized  by  the  title  of  this  article, the  critical  objective  for 
legal research instruction is to help law students become educated researchers.
This means that their training must not be limited to simply using a given 
resource or solving several different kinds of problems. Rather they must be 
sufficiently adept in adjusting their own mental construct of legal research to 
meet new research conditions. The student must be able to manipulate his or her
framework so that he or she can rapidly classify and understand new kinds of 
problems and the resources for solving those problems. Even if a new problem
seems strange or alien, can the student rapidly compare and contrast it with prob-
lems with which he or she already has experience in solving? Can he or she 
recognize how a new research tool is similar to or distinct from other familiar legal
research resources? Like pilots encountering a hitherto unknown threat to their 
aircraft in flight, will students simply start down a mechanical checklist, or will
they think and dissect a problem to understand exactly how it relates to their 
experience (allowing them,in effect,to write their own new guidelines for solving
the problem)?
The Author’s Frameworks
¶64 I have been developing my own frameworks—based upon the work of the
Wrens and others—to facilitate the acquisition of legal research skills. In discern-
ing the various components of legal research problems, I divide the process into
three facets: (1) understanding the problem itself, (2) conceptualizing the sources
in relation to the law, and (3) conducting the search itself, which includes match-
ing resources to the kind of problem and then updating the results. Each of these
three facets has two aspects as illustrated by table 2. To simplify the learning
process, I have tried to select from existing models to develop appropriate frame-
works for each of these six aspects. The frameworks are discussed in the next sec-
tions of this article.
Table 2
Facets of Legal Research Process
The Problem The Sources The Search
Who, what, where, when, how? Primary/secondary Matching sources to the problem
The kind of problem Arrangements of the law Being thorough
Who,What,Where,When, and How?
¶65“Who,what,where,when,why,and how?”is a familiar “script”to any student
who has ever had a high school English class. The trick is to extend the application36 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
of this paradigm into the unfamiliar realm of legal research.  Table 3 illustrates an
attempt to do that.
Table 3
Applying Familiar Paradigm to Legal Research
Who Who are we representing (i.e.,which side of the issue are we on—buyer or seller,
plaintiff or defendant,etc.)? What legal entities are involved (any trusts,corporations,
partnerships,etc.)?
What What are the most descriptive words of the legal and factual issues involved? Are
there any specific topics,subject headings,or terms of art I need to be using in my
search? Are there any specific bodies of law that you had in mind? Is there anything
you have already covered in your research or which I should ignore?
Where What are the pertinent legal jurisdictions?
When What time periods are relevant? When is this project due? When do I need to report
with preliminary results? Does this project take precedence over _____?
How How is this to be done? Are there any specific legal resources that I am expected to
use? How should the results of my research be measured in terms of precision or
recall (i.e.,do you want the quick answer or an exhaustive analysis)? What form
should my results take (e.g.,memorandum,highlighted copies of documents,bibliog-
raphy)? How much time should I spend on this? May I use LexisNexis and Westlaw?
Are there any limits on billing?
¶66I have intentionally omitted “why”questions because they generally come
later (e.g., “why is this document relevant?”). The emphasis in research is to find
out everything that is a “known” in the problem. In the film Apollo 13, there is a
poignant moment when Ed Harris, playing NASA flight director Gene Kranz,
demands that panicking NASA engineers “work the problem” rather than just
guess. In teaching law students the skill of how to approach a legal research prob-
lem, this same advice applies—first find out everything known from the problem
itself and then define what that problem is. Care should be taken not to confuse a
table with the framework. In fact,the “Ed Harris”example is as much a part of the
framework as table 3.
¶67To illustrate the skill of “working the problem”(in the context of selecting
terms for full-text searching), I often use the hypothetical problem illustrated in
figure 1.121The “who,what,where,and when”of the problem are identified in this
example. I usually have the students work through the problem first, and then I
walk them through the identification of terms. To effectively teach the skill of
working the problem using the “who, what, where, when, how” framework, the
problem should probably be isolated from later steps involving actual searches on
LexisNexis or Westlaw.
121. The example first appeared in print in an article on state tax research on the Internet. Paul D. Callister,
A Framework for Conducting State Tax Research on the Internet,J. MULTISTATETAX’N,Oct. 2001,at
26,29.2003-01] Beyond Training 37
Figure 1. “Working the Problem” Hypothetical
Applicable Law? Term of Art Primary
Who (Caution: "Red Herring" (entity involved) Subject
(entity involved) & Acronym) Term
Your firm has been asked to represent O.J. Simpson in an action in a federal bankruptcy 
court in California in which creditors are attempting to seize assets of his profit-sharing 
plan. O.J. Simpson had set up a corporation (which sponsored a profit-sharing plan) for 
his commercial endorsements. There is approximately four million dollars in the plan. 
Distinguishing The senior partner at your firm informs you that the federal statue, ERISA, generally 
Fact or Issue protects profit-sharing plans from the reach of creditors. However, because O.J. Simpson 
was the sole shareholder of his corporation, the plan is not deemed to have any employees, 
and consequently does not fall under the exemption provisions (i.e., it is not exempt from 
creditors under ERISA). Statute
Primary Involved
Subject
Terms You have been asked to find out if, after 1990, any Federal bankruptcy court (or appellate 
court) in California has applied exemptions under California law (Federal bankruptcy law 
allows debtors to elect to use state exemptions under 11 U.S.C. 522(b)) to successfully block
Where creditors from reaching the assets of a profit-sharing plan (and specifically, a “single-person” 
(jurisdiction) plan which didn’t fall under ERISA). You are reminded to search the Courts of Appeal for the
Ninth Circuit, as bankruptcy matters are often appealed to the Federal Courts of Appeal and
District Court.
Additonal Subject Term When (time period)
What Kind of Problem Is It?
¶68 As mentioned earlier,122 information scientists and government document
librarians have developed a technique for distinguishing among kinds of informa-
tion problems, thus enabling them to develop appropriate strategies and resources
based upon problem type. Table 4 is an “associative” kind of framework.123 It
draws attention to relationships among examples of various kinds of information
problems. Hopefully,students will realize that a particular problem is like another
problem they already know how to solve. Table 4, in essence, builds connective
links that help students associate similar problems and solutions from experience.
The use of concrete examples illustrating the kind of problems is important
because often it is the examples, rather than formal names or descriptions of the
classes, that are remembered. The idea is to facilitate association.
Table 4
Framework for Classifying Kinds of Legal Information Problems
Problem Type Used For Example
Known Item (1) You know the citation,case name, (1) You need Roe v. Wade. (2) You 
or popular name of an act,etc.; (2)  need the California murder case in 
you need a case,statute,regulation, which the court found that a fetus 
or other document applicable to a  cannot be a human being and the 
specific range of issues or  defendant was acquitted of murder
(cont.)
122. Seesupra ¶ 55.
123. I first published this framework in a similar table in an article on state tax law research on the Internet.
SeeCallister,supra note 121,at 28. The framework is based on the previous work of Jean L. Sears
and Marilyn K. Moody. SeeSEARS& MOODY,supra note 111.38 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
Table 4 (cont.)
Problem Type Used For Example
circumstances; or (3) you are looking  after beating up his girlfriend 
for documentation of very specific  resulting in the loss of the fetus. 
information,such as tax rates. (3) You need the Hawaiian income 
tax rates for trusts.
Subject You are not looking for a specific  You are looking for an explanation 
item but for information on a particu- of the law concerning charitable 
lar subject. exemptions to property and sales 
tax.
Institution or  You know what you are looking for  You need Department of Justice 
Agency will be found at a particular agency, rulings and opinion letters on 
institution,or organization; or you  when the merger of two large 
want to find out what agency  medical groups falls within the 
administers a particular program or  safe harbor provisions for antitrust 
enforces a particular law. issues.
Statistical You need statistical information. You need the percentage of chil-
dren living below the poverty level 
in Los Angeles.
Special Expertise You are searching for materials that  (1) You need to file federal and 
require special interpretive skills or  possibly state gift tax returns for 
prior knowledge such as concerning  a gift made in December of 2000. 
the state or federal budget,census  (2) You need information on 
information,historical documents  aircraft jet engine life cycles and 
and manuscripts,international law, are looking for some official 
patents,politics and elections,tax  government reports. (3) You need
forms and procedures,government  to search patent records to see if 
technical reports,and public records, your client’s new product has been 
etc.  previously patented.
News You need to find information on  You need accounts of the lawsuit
current developments or information  in France by Jewish groups against 
that may never be formally reported  Yahoo for providing access in 
in a legal or tax reporter or service. France to the sale of Nazi paraphe-
nalia. 
Primary, Secondary, and Combined Legal Sources
¶69 A fundamental distinction in legal bibliography has always been based upon
the difference between primary and secondary sources. Hopefully, most students
are familiar with the terminology of “primary”and “secondary”sources from their
undergraduate education. The key is to help them to distinguish previous concep-
tions of “primary” and “secondary” sources from the terms as applied to legal
materials. In other disciplines,“primary”sources are ones that are proximate to the
data or an observer. For legal bibliography, primary sources have some binding
legal effect on someone (even if it is only the institution or agency promulgating
the rule or regulation). A framework by type of source is illustrated in table 5. Note
that although case law digests and Words and Phrases are not traditionally thought
of as primary sources because of their arrangement by subject, they are included2003-01] Beyond Training 39
with other primary materials because they provide direct access to case law,which
is a primary source. As noted in table 5, the appropriate use of a source depends
upon whether it is primary, secondary, or combined. As with the framework for
classifying kinds of legal information problems, the objective is to help students
associate new legal resources with sources with which they are already familiar as
well as the kinds of problems that they can expect to solve with the new resources.
Table 5
Framework by Type of Source
Type of Source 
or Access Tool General Examples Binding Upon Used For
Primary Constitutions All branches of govern- Known item and institu-
ment. tional searches where 
you need binding 
authority. 
Codes and  Except as found 
session laws unconstitutional,all 
branches of government.
Court decision reporters, Binding upon lower courts 
case digests,and Words  of the same jurisdiction 
and Phrases and other branches of 
government.
Codified regulations or  Binding upon agency 
administrative codes and  issuing the regulation 
administrative registers until repealed.
Administrative agency  Generally binding upon 
opinions and rulings  the agency. Sometimes,
may only be binding upon 
the agency with respect 
to the parties in question.
Secondary Encyclopedias,treatises  Not binding. Subject,statistical,and 
and hornbooks,law  special experience 
reviews and bar journals, searches where you need 
form books to understand the issues 
and background of an 
area of law or problem.
Also use to confirm your 
interpretation of a primary 
source.
Combined Loose-leaf and newsletter  Only primary sources  Use when ease is 
services,American Law  have any binding  important. Such sources 
Reports authority. combine statutes,regula-
tions,commentary,and 
case law annotations in a 
topical arrangement with 
a good table of contents 
and indexing system.40 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
Kind of Law and Arrangement
¶70As discussed earlier124 and illustrated in table 1, the Wrens are credited with
creating a framework to connect the various kinds of law with a student’s basic
understanding of high school civics. Table 1 also illustrates that law is always
arranged in two ways—topically and chronologically. A notable omission from the
table is “constitutional law,” which is usually only found in a single, chronologi-
cal arrangement.
Matching Sources to the Problem
¶71 By representing legal research in a three-dimensional model, as in figure 2, it
becomes possible to synthesize several of the previous frameworks into a single
construct for legal research strategy as well as to explore a new variable (the rela-
tive strengths of electronic full-text versus print legal sources). The new variable
reflects my experience that,as a general rule,known item searches work better in elec-
tronic databases with full-text searching of primary legal sources. On the other hand,I
have found that subject searches work best in traditional print secondary sources that
typically have excellent controlled vocabulary indexing systems.125 Figure 2 divides
legal research into three-dimensional quadrants—making octants. By attempting to rep-
resent the matching of kinds of research problems with legal resources in three-
dimensional space, the construct illustrates the distinctiveness of the realms of
known item and subject searches. True,there may be exceptions,but the idea is to
give students a framework that they can use to solve most problems and that they
can later modify into a more complex structure. Items not falling within the shaded
cubes are generally not used during the initial phase of a search.
¶72 An attempt at a more comprehensive “octant” model (although still not
covering agency, statistical, special expertise, or news problems) is illustrated in
figure 3. With increasing detail and comprehensiveness the octant model becomes
more difficult to represent in a single form. Indeed, presenting such a complex
model may actually inhibit the learning process. Rather than being spoon-fed,stu-
dents should be encouraged to work out their own models after being introduced
to the basic elements of a framework.126
Being Thorough
¶73 Being thorough requires that the student not only conduct citation analysis of
legal authority (e.g.,Shepardizing a case,statute,or regulation) and check for cur-
rency (e.g., using List of Sections Affected, etc.) but also find all cases, statutes,
regulations, rulings, documents, etc. of a similar kind, based upon a subject clas-
124. See supra ¶ 12.
125. See infra¶¶ 75–76 (discussing controlled vocabulary and natural language systems).
126. For a possible model covering other information problem types—agency, statistical, special, and
news—see PAUL D. CALLISTER, Putting It All Together to Find a Relevant Document, in SOLVING
LEGALRESEARCHPROBLEMS,athttp://www.law.uiuc.edu/callistr/survival/tab5.html (last visited Oct.
30,2002).2003-01] Beyond Training 41
Figure 2. The Octants of Legal Research: First-Order Octants
m
n Ite
w
o
n
K
(cid:1)  Full-Text Databases (Terms 
     and Connector Searching)
(cid:1)  Case Reporters
(cid:1)  Code Books, Session Reports
     and Legislative History
(cid:1)  Administrative Codes and
     registers
Electronic
Primary Secondary
Print
(cid:1)  Encyclopedias
(cid:1)  ALR
(cid:1)  Looseleafs
(cid:1)  Law Reviews and 
     Journals
(cid:1)  Treatises bject
u
S
Figure 3. The Octants of Legal Research:A More Comprehensive Model
m
n Ite
w
o
n
K
Full-Text Databases (Terms   Full-Text Databases (Terms 
and Connector Searches) and Connector Searching)
  (cid:1)  Law Reviews and      (cid:1)  Case Reporters
    Journals    (cid:1)  Code Books and  
  (cid:1)  Encyclopedias      Session Reports
Tables of Cases     (cid:1)(cid:1)    ALoLoRseleafs (cid:1)  Case Reporters  (cid:1)  Congressional Universe
SREtneagctyuuctlealosti pooenrd s i ains ,    (cid:1)(cid:1)       CASeodsdmseiio nBnios Rtorekaptsi ovarent ed r s  Electronic
ALR or Looseleafs
   Codes and Registers
Secondary (cid:1)  CIS Abstracts. Primary
Full-Text Databases
Full-Text Searching  
(N  (cid:1)Ua  sJtiuonrugarl nS Laelagsn magneudna tg se o)r   Print         (cid:1)(cid:1)       WSKeeegysmSt e eanrtc/ hing
    Law Reviews      Restricted  
  (cid:1)  ALR   (cid:1)  Caselaw        Field Searching
    Database    Digests    (cid:1)  Natural  
  (cid:1)  Indexmaster  (cid:1)  ALR      Language  
(cid:1)  Encyclopedias    (Treatises) (cid:1)  Looseleafs      Searching
(cid:1)  Looseleafs
(cid:1)  ALR
(cid:1)  Law Reviews and 
   Journals bject
u
S42 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
sification system. It is with respect to thoroughness that items in the shaded cubi-
cal octants of figures 2 and 3—case digests,West key numbers,LexisNexis “more
like”search algorithms,Shepards,KeyCite,etc.—play a principal role (compared
to their secondary role in matching resources to problem types as mentioned ear-
lier).
¶74Consider,for instance,the situation of a law student finding a relevant trea-
tise on a particular legal subject and wanting to know whether there are any more
on the same subject. The student wants to find all of the relevant treatises in the
library catalog. The solution is simple. Pull the full bibliographic record from the
online catalog,examine the subject entries,and pick the most relevant ones to use
in further searches. The catalog search itself becomes a schema or script for other
types of research tools and resources. The subject catalog technique can be used
with anything—case law,journal articles,statutes,etc.—if the student understands
the dynamic underlying the process. This is illustrated in table 6.
Table 6
“Subject Catalog” Framework
Classification 
Relevant Document System Search Feature Method
Case Case Digest or  West key number Controlled vocabulary
Westlaw Case Database
LexisNexis Case  “More like”search  Natural language
Database algorithm
ALR  Cross-referencing/ Controlled vocabulary
digest
Statute LexisNexis Statute  “More like”search  Natural language
Database algorithm
West ULA Uniform  Uniform Acts Controlled vocabulary
and Model Acts
Regulation LexisNexis  “More like”search  Natural language
Regulation  algorithm
Database
Law Review or  Info/Legal Trac Subject headings Controlled vocabulary
Journal Article
LexisNexis Law  “More like”search  Natural language
Review Database algorithm
Treatise Online Catalog Subject heading LC controlled vocabu-
lary
All Other Secondary LexisNexis “More like”search Natural language
Sources Database algorithm
¶75Besides teaching students to utilize the “subject catalog technique”with a
variety of systems, it is important that students also recognize the distinction
between natural language and controlled vocabulary systems is noteworthy because2003-01] Beyond Training 43
each system tends to have its strengths.127 Controlled vocabulary systems involve
human indexers (e.g.,West editors or cataloging librarians) and tend to work well
for traditional subjects with well-established taxonomies when there is a manage-
able set of entries or items classified under a particular subject term. On the
Internet,Yahoo! is an example of a controlled vocabulary system. Yahoo! employs
information workers who evaluate proposed links to their site and decide where
they fit within the Yahoo! taxonomy. In fact, the name Yahoo! stands for “Yet
Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle.”128 
¶76Notwithstanding their many advantages,controlled vocabulary indexes do
not work as well when the subject is new or rapidly evolving and when a particu-
lar subject heading has either too few or too many items classified under a partic-
ular heading.129 Natural language systems use computer algorithms to select
important terms as a function of the term’s rarity in relation to the presence of the
term in the database or library as a whole. In contrast to Yahoo!, Google is a nat-
ural language search system. Search results are usually presented with the best
scoring items  (i.e., documents with the most prevalent and proximate use of the
rarest search terms) displayed first in descending order.  Students who understand
the distinctions between the two systems can more readily select the most appro-
priate tool for their research by associating new tools with resources with which
they are already familiar.
¶77 Finally, besides finding similar documents, the skills of citation analysis
and updating for currency are essential aspects of thoroughness in legal research.
An attempt to develop a comprehensive model for thoroughness (including cita-
tion analysis and “list of sections affected”) is found at my Web site.130
Final Thoughts on Frameworks
¶78 Since the real utility of frameworks only comes when they are incorporated
into the student’s construct of reality and then built upon and developed to meet
his or her needs and understanding, frameworks should be introduced only in the
simplest form possible (such as figure 2). Opportunities to build,apply,test,mod-
ify, and expand frameworks should be built into the instructional curriculum. For
instance,after introducing the framework represented by figure 2,students may be
127. The respective strengths of controlled vocabulary and natural language systems have been extensively
explored in other disciplines, such as information science. See, e.g., Manikya Rao Muddamalle,
Natural Language versus Controlled Vocabulary in Information Retrieval: A Case Study in Soil
Mechanics,49 J. AM. SOC’YINFO. SCI.881,883 (1998) (comparing controlled vocabulary and natu-
ral language indexing in a soil mechanics database); Jian Qin, Semantic Similarities Between a
Keyword Database and a Controlled Vocabulary Database: An Investigation in the Antibiotic
Resistance Literature,51 J. AM. SOC’YINFO. SCI.166 (2000).
128. Yahoo! Media Relations,FAQ,athttp://docs.yahoo.com/info/pr/faq.html (2001).
129. See Callister,supranote 121,at 33–34 (discussing the relative strengths of controlled vocabulary and
natural language systems in the context of subject searches of state tax research on the Web).
130. PAUL D. CALLISTER, Being Thorough (Completing the Cycle), in SOLVING LEGAL RESEARCH
PROBLEMS,athttp://www.law.uiuc.edu/callistr/survival/tab6.html (last visited Oct. 30,2002).44 Law Library Journal [Vol. 95:1
required to categorize an array of materials and then summarize the common char-
acteristics of each classification and their appropriate uses. In essence, each stu-
dent should be encouraged to develop his or her own “figure 3.” Since the
framework presented in figure 2 only matches resources in two categories of legal
information problems—known item and subject—students should be required to
develop their own models for the remaining categories—agency,statistical,special
expertise, and news. Students can be stimulated to refine their own models after
introduction of some basic frameworks through the Socratic method (as illustrated
in the example of Socrates and the slave boy). This type of testing should accom-
pany ample research exercises in which students are asked to apply and then eval-
uate (in group discussion) the use of their own models.
¶79As a final reminder, tables and three-dimensional graphics should not be
confused with the frameworks themselves but as attempts to represent them by
illustrating relationships and associations in two- or three-dimensional space.
Other forms of presentation can be used such as demonstrations (e.g., using a
library catalog or illustrating the difference between Yahoo! and Google with
analogies subsequently drawn to other legal resources and services). Furthermore,
incorporation of any framework into one’s mental construct necessitates exercise
and evaluation by techniques such as the Socratic method,research problems,and
group discussion.
A Consistent Methodology
¶80The previous three sections have discussed the requisite elements from which
a pedagogical methodology for legal research can be built. The key to a success-
ful methodology is that it must be consistent with its objectives and underlying
metaphysical assumptions. If it is decided that the purpose of legal research
courses at a school like Harvard is to produce legal academics and judges, that
Berring’s concerns about the impact of the scale of legal materials are correct,and
that students learn best through frameworks, then Harvard’s methodology for
teaching legal research is best constructed accordingly. If,on the other hand,a law
school in a small U.S. protectorate in the Carribean decides that it is mainly pro-
ducing trial attorneys, that such individuals learn best using a specific framework
that has been tailored to be compatible with their indigenous culture, and that
Berring’s nightmare of classification system failure has not yet affected their tiny
legal system (and will not for many years to come), then a different methodology
must ensue. 
¶81 In essence, each law school needs to tailor the methodology for teaching
legal research to its own circumstances. Consequently,this article leaves prospec-
tive legal research instructors with the “pedagogically correct” task of construct-
ing their own legal research pedagogy, perhaps with the elements suggested here.2003-01] Beyond Training 45
Conclusion
¶82In closing,the lofty aim of this article is to facilitate dialogue that will elevate
legal research training to legal research education. As implied in the introductory
quote, there is a subtle difference between training and education. Education
requires  thinking, meaning  self-initiated  effort  to  build  mental  constructs  or
frameworks that allow one to contemplate, understand, and solve a problem.
Training is designed to produce a formulated response based upon what some
expert has determined is the “best” answer to a forecasted, “typical” problem.
Training presents solutions and tools rather than forcing one to examine one’s abil-
ity to face a new, yet unexperienced problem. 
¶83The sheer amount of legal material,and its continued exponential growth,
suggests that the legal profession is leaving the terrain of “typical problems”which
can be easily classified,researched,and digested. Advocacy of the future requires
that legal research educatorsthink about how attorneys solve problems effectively
and what makes a good search or successful research outcome. Furthermore,legal
research educators must attempt to facilitate efforts of their students to build
frameworks that address the problems they will soon face. More than in any other
aspect of legal education, legal research instructors can help students exercise the
cognitive skill of building frameworks for understanding and solving problems in a
chaotic world. Consequently, the duty to perform the task is a sober one, and the
need for the profession to take a studied look at pedagogy has become an imperative.