MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO WITH
BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST
MAx HUFFMAN*
Antitrust economics has the potential to accomplish what are fundamentally
political ends, and the ebbs and flows in antitrust enforcement over the more
than twelve  decades  since  antitrust doctrine was  reduced to federal  statute
frequently have been justified in economic terms.' The most prominent school
of antitrust economics in the past half-century, the Chicago School, has exper-
ienced its share of criticism for advancing neutral-seeming policies for politi-
cal  ends.2  Whether  the criticism  is  warranted,  it is  clear  that the  Chicago
School's reductionist enforcement philosophy has acquired tremendous sway
over public opinion, legislators, enforcers,  and, most notably, courts.3
* Associate Professor of Law and Dean's Fellow, Indiana University Robert H. McKinney
School of Law. Ideas in this paper were discussed at the Fourth Antitrust Marathon, Fall 2009;
the NYU Next Generation of Antitrust Scholars Workshop, January 2010; and the Loyola Uni-
versity Chicago Institute for Consumer Antitrust Spring Colloquium, 2010. Thanks to partici-
pants at those conferences, as well as Mark Anderson, Dan Cole, Roy Englert, Letha Flint, Ken
Heyer, Sam Huffman, Kendall Millard, Antony Page, Spencer Waller, and Joshua Wright for
insights, and to Catherine Lemmer of the Robert H. McKinney School library faculty for re-
search assistance. Editing by Marc Winerman improved this article tremendously. Many thanks
to Bill Page for including me in this Symposium.
I See Darren Bush, Too Big to Bail: The Role of Antitrust in Distressed Industries, 77 ANTI-
TRUST L.J. 277, 281-96 (2010) [hereinafter Too Big to Bail] (describing the progression of anti-
trust economics through the 20th century).
2 See id. at 291-96.
3S ee, e.g., Joshua D. Wright, The Roberts Court and the Chicago School of Antitrust: The
2006 Term and Beyond, COMPETITION  PoL'Y INT'L, Autumn 2007, at 25,  25 [hereinafter The
Roberts Court and the Chicago School]. Although debates rage over the actual source of theories
underlying modem legal rules, Chicago's non-interventionist  posture  certainly deserves  some
credit for laissez-faire attitudes reflected in legislation, such as the Foreign Trade Antitrust Im-
provements Act, 15 U.S.C.  ยง 6a (see Max Huffman, A Retrospective on Twenty-Five Years of the
Foreign Trade Antitrust Improvements Act, 44 Hous. L. REV. 285 (2007)); reduced federal en-
forcement both at the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission beginning in
1981 (see Daniel A. Crane, Chicago, Post-Chicago,a nd Neo-Chicago, 76 U. CHI. L. REV.  1911,
1912 (2009)) [hereinafter Chicago, Post-Chicago, and Neo-Chicago] (reviewing How CHICAGO
OVERSHOT THE MARK: THE EFFacT OF CONSERVATIVE ECONOMIC ANALYSIS  ON U.S. ANTITRUST
POLICY (Robert Pitofsky ed.,  2008)  [hereinafter How CHICAGO  OVERSHOT  THE MARK]);  and
eighteen years of pro-defendant results in Supreme Court antitrust decisions, bookended by East-
105106 ANTITRUST LAW  JOURNAL [Vol. 78
The lesson of the power of economic arguments to achieve political ends
has not been lost on members of the antitrust community seeking an alterna-
tive to  the  Chicago  School.  The  Post-Chicago  response  in  the  1980s and
1990s reflected both an academic debate over the robustness of the theories
advanced by Chicago School thinkers and an effort to regain the enforcement
ground that had been lost in the courts and in the agencies. The difference in
the antitrust debate since Chicago is not that it has become more or less politi-
cally charged than it was before the 1970s.4 The difference is that this quintes-
sentially  political  debate  has  in  recent  decades  been  conducted  almost
exclusively in economic terms.'
Behavioral Antitrust is a new  area of scholarly inquiry  that has garnered
some attention in very recent years.6 The earliest article explicitly proposing a
behavioral approach to antitrust was written in 2002.1 Proponents  encourage
courts and policymakers to import the study of behavioral  law and economics
into antitrust analysis, using empirical study better to understand the conduct
of individuals  in  market settings. Like foregoing  antitrust economics move-
ments, Behavioral  Antitrust  is on its face result-neutral,  but as it  has been
discussed to date, it has a political slant. Until very recently, all of the writing
advocating Behavioral Antitrust favored increased antitrust enforcement. FTC
Commissioner Thomas Rosch has characterized the views of detractors as be-
ing  that  behavioral  economics  is  "liberalism  masquerading  as  economic
thinking."'
Neo-Chicago Antitrust is the topic of this Symposium. Its adherents charac-
terize it as a return to Chicago principles,  informed by the developments  in
economic  thinking  over the  past thirty-or-so  years-notably,  insights  from
man Kodak Co. v. Image Technical Services, Inc., 504 U.S. 451 (1992),  and American Needle,
Inc. v. National Football League, 130 S. Ct. 2201 (2010).
4 The Chicago School gained ascendency in the late 1970s with the publication of Richard
Posner's Antitrust Law (1976),  Robert Bork's The Antitrust Paradox (1978),  and several Su-
preme Court decisions  in 1977, though the school has its roots in earlier work. See generally
Richard  Posner,  The Chicago School of Antitrust Analysis, 127 U.  PA. L. REV. 925,  925-26
(1979)  [hereinafter Chicago School Analysis].
5 See Robert Pitofsky, The Political Content of Antitrust, 127 U.  PA. L. REV.  1051,  1051
(1979)  [hereinafter Political Content] ("There probably has never been a period comparable to
the last decade, however, when antitrust economists and lawyers have had such success in per-
suading the courts to adopt an exclusively economic approach to antitrust questions."); see also
Bush, Too Big to Bail, supra note 1, at 283-96 (discussing pre-Chicago attention to non-eco-
nomic goals and the failure of the Post-Chicago School to refocus on such goals).
6 See generally Amanda P. Reeves & Maurice E. Stucke, Behavioral Antitrust, 86 IND. L.J.
1527 (2011)  [hereinafter Behavioral Antitrust] (canvassing the literature).
7 See Avishalom Tor, The Fable of Entry: Bounded Rationality, Market Discipline, and Legal
Policy, 101 MICH.  L. REV. 482 (2002) [hereinafter The Fable of Entry].
8 J. Thomas Rosch, Comm'r, Fed. Trade Comm'n, Behavioral Economics: Observations Re-
garding Issues that Lie Ahead, Remarks Before the Vienna Competition Conference 12 (June 9,
2010), available at http://www.ftc.gov/speeches/rosch/100609viennaremarks.pdf.2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 107
both the Chicago and Post-Chicago schools.'  Its most visible contribution is a
formal  adoption  of the  error-cost  framework  from  then-Professor  Easter-
brook's  influential  1984  article,  The  Limits of Antitrust.0'  The  error-cost
framework is viewed by many as a politically charged rule of decision, which
almost  always  includes  a  deregulatory  preference  for false  negative  error
(equating to less enforcement than the optimal level) over false positive error
(equating to an excess of enforcement)."
But there  is more  to Neo-Chicago  than the mere formal adoption of the
error-cost  framework. Daniel Crane has criticized  both the Chicago  School
and the leading reaction, Post-Chicago, for their disinclination to engage seri-
ously  in empirical  work.'2 Crane argues that Neo-Chicago  antitrust can suc-
ceed, in part, by "providing empirical support for Chicago School theories." 3
David  Evans and Jorge Padilla's 2005  foundational  article  on Neo-Chicago
concludes with the suggestion that empirical study would be a welcome con-
tribution  to a literature on Neo-Chicago antitrust.14  If devotion to empirical
study  is  seen as  a fundamental part of Neo-Chicago,  it is consistent  with,
rather than hostile to, Behavioral  Antitrust.
Neo-Chicago  and Behavioral Antitrust came along at about the same time,
and a marriage  of the two might temper any respective tendencies  of either
toward predetermined political ends. The combination might produce a more
result-neutral  enterprise  of "economically  informed antitrust."  Neo-Chicago
promises an improvement over Chicago's simplification of facts in pursuit of
9S ee David S. Evans & A. Jorge Padilla, Designing Antitrust Rules for Assessing Unilateral
Practices: A Neo-Chicago Approach, 72 U. CHI. L. REV. 73, 74-75 (2005) [hereinafter A Neo-
Chicago Approach].
t0 Frank H. Easterbrook, 63 TEX. L. REV.  1 (1984) [hereinafter Limits]; see Thomas A. Lam-
bert & Joshua  D. Wright, Antitrust (Over-?) Confidence, 20 Loy.  CONSUMER  L. REV.  219,
225-26 (2008) [hereinafter (Over?) Confidence] (error-cost framework is the basis of responsi-
ble enforcement policy).  Many who do not formally  associate  themselves with Neo-Chicago
regularly employ the error-cost framework in antitrust analysis. See, e.g., Mark Anderson & Max
Huffman,  Iqbal, Twombly, and the Expected Cost of False Positive Error, 20 CORNELL J.L. &
PUB.  PoL'Y I (2010); Ken Heyer, A World of Uncertainty: Economics and the Globalization of
Antitrust, 72 ANTITRUST L.J.  375 (2005); Michael  L. Katz  & Howard A.  Shelanski, Merger
Analysis and the Treatment of Uncertainty: Should We Expect Better?, 74 ANTITRUST L.J. 537
(2007).
1 The justification for this preference is that firms, once stung by regulatory interference, are
unlikely to return to what may be efficient conduct. Easterbrook, Limits, supra note 10, at 15;
Evans & Padilla, A Neo-Chicago Approach, supra note 9, at 84 ("[M]arket forces play little
corrective role for procompetitive business practices deemed anticompetitive.").
12 Crane, Chicago, Post-Chicago,a nd Neo-Chicago, supra note 3, at 193 1. Not all agree. See
Joshua Wright, Overshot the Mark? A Simple Explanation of the Chicago School's Influence on
Antitrust, COMPETITION Po.'Y INT'L, Spring 2009, at 1, 10-11 [hereinafter Overshot the Mark?]
(noting "the centrality of empiricism to the research agenda of Chicago antitrust analysis") (re-
viewing How CHICAGo  OVERSHOT THE MARK, supra note 3).
13C rane, supra note 3, at 1929.
14 Evans & Padilla, A Neo-Chicago Approach, supra note 9, at 98.108 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
tractability, which Chicago's advocates applaud but critics argue has gone so
far as to produce  false understandings of marketplace  conduct and effects."
That suggests adherents might be receptive to efforts of Behavioral Antitrust
scholars in critiquing antitrust rules in the light of empirical studies of individ-
ual economic  actors. Behavioral Antitrust, in turn, has the goal of informing
the assumptions  underlying  established  economic  theory  through  empirical
study of the behavior of individual economic actors. That goal  might be ad-
vanced by looking to Neo-Chicago's combination of theories from the Chi-
cago and Post-Chicago  Schools  for a comprehensive  theoretical  framework
for analysis.
I suggest here a possible  synthesis of Neo-Chicago  with Behavioral Anti-
trust into an enterprise  of "economically  informed antitrust."  Because Neo-
Chicago is at bottom about overcoming the shortcomings of Chicago School
antitrust, which built theories on deliberately simplified assumptions, Behav-
ioral Antitrust naturally complements the theoretical framework by providing
an understanding of the realities of individual market actors.6 This article thus
proposes that Behavioral Antitrust informs intuitions about the conduct of in-
dividual  economic  actors.  When  incorporated  into  a developed  theoretical
framework those intuitions may  support results that theory would otherwise
reject. I apply my arguments specifically to the leading Post-Chicago author-
ity, Eastman Kodak Co. v. Image Technical Services, Inc.,"  and suggest that
lessons from empirical  study support the result in a way some have argued
theory does not.
I.  A BRIEF TAXONOMY OF ANTITRUST ECONOMICS
Serious debate ended long ago whether U.S.  antitrust policy should be in-
formed by economics-scholars  of otherwise massively divergent views ap-
pear to agree  on  that proposition.'"  There  is also broad agreement  that the
5 For a Chicago advocate, see Posner, Chicago School Analysis, supra note 4, at 931  (con-
trasting the Chicago School  with the Harvard  School by reference to the latter's rejection  of
simplifying assumptions "in favor of microscopic examination of the idiosyncrasies of particular
markets"). For criticisms, see, for example, Thomas E. Kauper, Influence of Conservative Eco-
nomic Analysis on the Development of the Law of Antitrust, in How CHICAGO OVERSHOT THE
MARK, supra note 3, at 42 (oversimplification is a "familiar" criticism of Chicago).
16 Cf. Evans & Padilla, A Neo-Chicago Approach, supra note 9, at 75 (error costs should be
analyzed in the light of "current economic knowledge and experience").
1  504 U.S. 451 (1992).
I8 See ROBERT A.  BORK,  THE ANTITRUST  PARADOX  (2d ed.  1993)  [hereinafter PARADOX];
Pitofsky, Political Content, supra note 5; see also HERBERT HOVENKAMP,  THE ANTITRUST EN-
TERPRISE: PRINCIPLE AND EXECUTION  10 (2005) [hereinafter ANTITRUST ENTERPRISE] ("Antitrust
is an economic, not a moral, enterprise."). Some argue that non-economic considerations should
be part of antitrust policy. See, e.g., Bush, Too Big to Bail, supra note 1, at 281-85; Maurice E.
Stucke & Allen P. Grunes, Toward a Better Competition Policy for the Media: The Challenge of
Developing Antitrust Policies that Support the Media Sector's Unique Role in Our Democracy,2012]  MARRYING NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 109
purpose of antitrust is to protect consumers.19 The modem debate in antitrust
economics centers  on  how economics  is  best deployed  to  accomplish that
purpose.
A.  THE LAST FOUR DECADES
In a genre of antitrust scholarship perhaps traceable to then-Professor Rich-
ard Posner's article, The Chicago School of Antitrust Analysis,20 scholars have
analyzed the changing nature of antitrust economics over decades of enforce-
ment. Darren Bush's recent article in this Journal  detailed the  treatments of
firm size across schools of antitrust economics from Brandeis to Behavioral
Antitrust.2  Then-Commissioner William Kovacic's broadly cited Double He-
lix article focused on the Chicago, Post-Chicago, and Harvard  Schools with
regard to the development of modem standards for dominant firm conduct.22
Joshua Wright and Einer Elhauge debated in the pages of the journal Competi-
tion Policy International whether the Chicago School or Harvard School has
had  a  more  profound  impact  on  the  Supreme  Court's  recent  antitrust
jurisprudence.23
It is  a popular exercise to  label  commentators,  enforcers,  and judges  as
adherents to one or another school of thought. Like political party affiliations,
brands given to a particular ideology operate as shorthand for a line of think-
ing that may, or may not, be cohesive. It is more convenient to apply the label
than it is formally to adopt all the arguments that the label encompasses. This
labeling may create a tendency to accept wholesale or to reject wholesale a
type of antitrust analysis because one thinker is associated with that brand, or
to accept or to reject the views of a thinker because of the brand with which
she or he is associated.24 It threatens stagnation of thought as adherents to one
ideology reject good ideas from another.
42 CONN. L. REV.  103, 103 (2009) (noting the media-specific non-economic concern regarding
public access to varied sources of information and viewpoints).
19S ee Max Huffman,  Bridging the Divide? Theories for Integrating Competition Law and
Consumer Protection, 6 EUR. COMPETITION  J. 7, 7 (2010) [hereinafter Bridging the Divide].
20 Posner, Chicago School Analysis, supra note 4.
21 Bush, Too Big to Bail, supra note 1, at 281-96.
22W  illiam E. Kovacic, The Intellectual DNA  of Modern U.S. Competition Law for Dominant
Firm Conduct: The Chicago/HarvardD ouble Helix, 2007 COLUM. Bus. L. REV.  I [hereinafter
Intellectual DNA].
23 See Wright, The Roberts Court and the Chicago School, supra note 3, at 25, 39-54; Einer
Elhauge, Harvard, Not Chicago: Which Antitrust School Drives Recent U.S.  Supreme Court
Decisions?, COMPETITION  PoL'Y INT'L, Autumn 2007, at 59.
24 Labels sometimes seem to proliferate like submarkets, and perhaps as unjustifiably. It is
unclear, for example, whether Justice Breyer would consider himself a "New-Harvard Schooler,"
but he recently has been so labeled. See Lambert & Wright, (Over?) Confidence, supra note 10,
at 221.110 ANTITRUST  LAW  JOURNAL [Vol. 78
Further, labels can  obscure the extent to  which individual adherents  to a
school  can deviate  from that school's  orthodoxy (as Richard  Posner  some-
times deviates from Chicago "orthodoxy"),25  or to which the views of impor-
tant  antitrust  thinker  like  Donald  Turner  evolve  over  time.26  Also,  well-
informed  commentators  may  adopt their  own shorthand  that deviates  from
accepted  definitions  of the  schools  of  antitrust  thought.  Alan  Devlin  and
Michael Jacobs recently defined "Chicago" to include "Chicago and post-Chi-
cago"-an approach that threatens to give purists of either school fits, but is
readily defensible in light of both schools'  reliance on price theory and recog-
nition of the centrality  of economic efficiency.27 Neo-Chicago,  the topic of
this Symposium, has yet to acquire epithet status and thus seems to be easier
to define. Behavioral Antitrust may be the most charged and least well under-
stood. For some, it is a seven-syllable epithet meaning  liberal antitrust. For
others, it may be a panacea for decades of under-enforcement.28
It  is  equally  hard  to  define  the  ideologies  in  relation  to  one  another.
Hovenkamp has described a loose continuum with the Chicago School at one
end and the Harvard-labeled  Structure-Conduct-Performance  paradigm at the
other, with Post-Chicago, Neo-Harvard,  and now Neo-Chicago lying in some
order of intervention-mindedness  between  them.29 (Behavioral  Antitrust,  to
those who fear it, might lie somewhere outside of that range.) FTC Commis-
sioner William Kovacic has described the relationship among antitrust ideolo-
gies with regard to dominant firm conduct as a double helix, a more nuanced
25 Though Posner's name is synonymous to some with "conservative"-i.e., non-intervention-
ist-antitrust, that understanding  elides the realities of his views on predatory  pricing (more
interventionist than the modern rule) and oligopoly conduct (more interventionist than the mod-
ern rule, which was established  in  1954 and survived the  Warren Court).  Predatory pricing:
Compare Brooke Grp. Ltd. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 509 U.S.  209, 223 & n.L,
224 (1992)  (holding that prices must be below some appropriate "measure of cost," and citing
Phillip Areeda & Donald F. Turner, PredatoryP ricing and Related Practices Under Section 2 of
the Sherman Act, 88 HARV. L. REV. 697 (1975) (proposing a below-average-variable-cost rule)),
with RICHARD A. POSNER, ANTITRUST LAW 217-19 (2d ed. 2001)  [hereinafter ANTITRUST LAW]
(criticizing the below-average-variable-cost  rule as under-enforcing).  Oligopoly conduct: Com-
pare Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S.  544 (2007) (holding interdependent pricing does not
satisfy the agreement element of Section 1), with Richard A. Posner, Oligopoly and the Antitrust
Laws: A Suggested Approach, 21 STAN.  L. REV.  1562,  1562 (1969)  [hereinafter Oligopoly] (in-
terdependent pricing is synonymous with agreement and can be challenged under Sherman Act
Section 1).
26 See Herbert Hovenkamp, Harvard, Chicago, and Transaction Cost Economics in Antitrust
Analysis, 55 ANTITRUST BULL. 613, 618 (2010) [hereinafter Transaction Cost Economics].
27 Alan Devlin & Michael Jacobs, Antitrust Divergence and the Limits of Economics, 104 Nw.
U. L. REV. 253, 266 (2010).
28 Cf J. Thomas Rosch, Comm'r, Fed. Trade Comm'n, Remarks at the NERA 2010 Antitrust
& Trade Regulation Seminar: The Next Challenges for Antitrust Economists  17 (July 8, 2010),
available at http://ftc.gov/speeches/rosch/100708neraspeech.pdf  (noting and  responding to the
belief that Behavioral Antitrust necessarily favored interventionist regulation).
29 Herbert Hovenkamp, Antitrust and the Costs of Movement, supra this issue, 78 ANTITRUST
L.J. 67 (2012) [hereinafter Costs of Movement].2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH  BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 111
assessment.30 He sees a spiraling of economic thinking, presumably oriented
upward,  which  gathers  elements  from  different  ideologies  as  it  climbs.
Kovacic's double helix is ecumenical in nature: if Neo-Chicago or Behavioral
Antitrust has valuable insights, those should be drawn into the helix as well.
1. Chicago
There appears to be a loose consensus that Chicago School antitrust flows
from the work of Judges Bork, Posner, and Easterbrook.31 Adopting that con-
sensus view,  I note that it is difficult to articulate a unitary philosophy  that
describes those thinkers'  views. Certainly all three share preferences for eco-
nomic goals over other justifications for antitrust enforcement, for simplicity
over complexity in economic analysis, and for less antitrust intervention than
was  favored in the decades  before they  made their primary  contributions.32
But there are areas of profound non-uniformity as well.33
2.  Post-Chicago
If Chicagoans are Catholics, Post-Chicagoans are Lutherans. This ideology
represents a reaction to excesses of under-enforcement,  primarily due to sim-
plifying assumptions that, while intended to make economics easier to apply,
30 See Kovacic, Intellectual DNA,  supra note 22; cf Kauper, supra note 15,  at 42 (modem
dominant ideology is "a collective" of Chicago, Harvard, and others "whose views are not easily
pigeonholed").
3' See Andrew  I. Gavil, A First Look at the Powell Papers: Sylvania and the Process of
Change in the Supreme Court, ANTITRUST,  Fall 2002, at 8,  11  (discussing Bork and Posner);
Kovacic,  Intellectual DNA,  supra note 22, at 34 (discussing Bork, Posner, and Easterbrook);
Robert Pitofsky, Introduction, in How CHICAGo  OVERSHOT THE  MARK, supra note 3, at 3, 4
(discussing  Bork and Posner). The intellectual  underpinnings of the Chicago  School  are of
course both deeper and broader than simply the work of those three.  See generally Spencer
Weber Waller, The Law and Economics Virus, 31 CARDOzo L. REV. 367, 379-81 (2009) [herein-
after Virus].
32 See BORK, PARADOX, supra note 18, at 7, 405-07; POSNER, ANTITRUST LAW, supra note 25,
at 2; Easterbrook, Limits, supra note 10, at 15-16.
33T hese include disagreement on the appropriate  treatment of unilateral predatory conduct
(compare BORK,  PARADOX,  supra note  18,  at 144-55 (discussion of predatory  pricing theory
concluding "attempts to outlaw it are likely to harm consumers more than would abandoning the
effort"); Frank H. Easterbrook, Predatory Strategies and Counterstrategies,4 8 U. CHI. L. REV.
263, 337 (1981)  ("The antitrust offense of predation should be forgotten."), with POSNER,  ANTI-
TRUST LAW, supra note 25, at 211 (proposing a theory under which predation is rational and may
explain  pricing strategies by Standard Oil prior to 1911));  and vertical agreements (compare
Easterbrook, Limits, supra note 10, at 13-14 (expressing doubt that legal remedies are appropri-
ate for reductions in intrabrand competition); Frank H. Easterbrook, Vertical Arrangements and
the Rule of Reason, 53 ANTITRUST  L.J.  135, 135 (1984)  ("No practice a manufacturer uses to
distribute its  products should be a subject of serious antitrust attention."), with POSNER,  ANTI-
TRUST  LAW, supra note 25, at 172 ("Economics suggests several reasons why manufacturers
nonetheless often restrict competition in the distribution of their goods when the law permit them
to do so.")). Posner's economic realities approach to oligopoly conduct, favoring more interven-
tion, appears to be unique among the three. See Richard A. Posner, Oligopoly, supra note 24; see
also supra note 25.112 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
also bring about wrong results. Bruce Abramson defines Post-Chicago  anti-
trust generally as "advocat[ing]  delving into case-specific facts and then refin-
ing  theories  as  necessary."34 That  definition  captures  well  the  view  that
various simplifying assumptions to which the leading Chicagoans subscribed
produced a false understanding of market realities.35 A strong cohort of Post-
Chicagoans would go further and argue that the false understanding of market
realities led to dramatic under-enforcement  of the antitrust laws.
Robert Lande's colorfully  titled comment,  Chicago Takes It on the Chin,
published in this Journal  shortly after the Supreme Court's decision in East-
man Kodak Corp. v. Image Technical Services, Inc. ,36 defined the Post-Chi-
cago  line  of thinking  as  distinct from  the  Chicago  School  based on  "the
degree to which information is believed to be imperfect."37 The study of infor-
mation  economics,  the basis  for the 2001  Nobel  Prize  awarded  to George
Akerloff, Michael  Spence, and Joseph Stiglitz,5  indeed  throws a wrench in
the gears of a system built implicitly on the assumption that all market actors
are equally prepared to optimize their choices in bargaining.39
34 Bruce Abramson, Intellectual Property and the Alleged Collapsing of Aftermarkets, 38
RUTGERS  L.J. 399, 465 (2007).
35H OVENKAMP,  ANTITRUST ENTERPRISE,  supra note 25, at 38.
36 504 U.S. 451  (1992). Kodak is often cited as the leading example of Post-Chicago finding
purchase in the courts. See, e.g.,  Abramson, supra note 34, at 465.
37R obert H. Lande, Chicago Takes It on the Chin: Imperfect Information Could Play a Cru-
cial Role in the Post-Kodak World, 62 ANTITRUST L.J. 193, 193 (1993). In hindsight, Lande was
premature in celebrating the death of the Chicago School, as Kodak was followed by a line of
pro-defendant decisions from the Supreme Court that lasted for seventeen cases over eighteen
years, based on conservative economic, if not technically Chicago School, ideology.
38S ee Press Release, The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (Oct.  10, 2001) (announcing
the recipients of the 2001 Nobel Prize for Economics as Akerloff, Spence, and Stiglitz), http://
nobelprize.org/nobel-prizes/economics/laureates/2001/press.html;  see also George A. Akerloff,
The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism, 84 Q.J. ECON.  488
(1970); Michael  Spence, Job Market Signaling, 87 Q.J. EcoN. 355 (1973);  Joseph E. Stiglitz,
The Theory of "Screening," Education, and the Distributiono f Income, 65 AM. ECON. REv. 283
(1975).
39I t is perhaps surprising that the Chicago School orthodoxy was not better refined with an
appreciation for information asymmetries. Information economics and the theory of the "lemons
equilibrium"  that it produced, explaining why low quality products predominate  in a market
characterized by asymmetric information, were well established by the late 1970s. See George
Stigler, The Economics of Information, 69 J. POL. EcON. 213 (1961); see also Michael R. Darby
& Edi Karni, Free Competition and the Optimal Amount of Fraud, 16 J.L. & EcoN. 67 (1973)
(demonstrating the capacity of informed sellers to defeat uninformed purchasers in competitions
for surplus welfare). This reality has been further explored  and is  well understood. See, e.g.,
JAMES M. LACKO, PRODUCT QUALITY AND INFORMATION IN THE USED CAR MARKET (FTC Bu-
reau of Econ.  Staff Report, Apr. 1986) (analyzing information asymmetry and the consequent
"lemons equilibrium"),  available at http://www.ftc.gov/be/econrpt/231975.pdf.  Posner himself
wrote a monograph discussing the market distortions caused by information asymmetries. RICH-
ARD A.  POSNER, REGULATION OF ADVERTISING BY THE FTC (1973)  [hereinafter REGULATION].
The Chicago  School's ignoring those lessons is evidence  of a preference  for simplicity  over
realism,  though  Richard  Posner's involvement  in  this  conversation  may  explain  his  more
nuanced  appreciation of ideas like the role of reputation in predation. Lande recognized this,2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 113
Its detractors  have characterized  the Post-Chicago  reaction as encompass-
ing a series of so-called possibility theorems that challenge Chicago tenets by
showing stylized  circumstances  in  which they  do not hold, rather  than an-
nouncing  its own general  theory.40 That criticism  is overstated.  If a theory
justifies policy prescriptions on the basis of assertions about market phenom-
ena, disproving those assertions by showing even one set of circumstances in
which they fail is a start. Few complain about a vigorous  enforcement pro-
gram  aimed  at price-fixing  cartels,  although  many have  argued cartels  are
fragile and  will disintegrate on their own.41  And general  theories  find their
support in individual theorems.42 Indeed,  Posner recognized  in the introduc-
tion to his  1979 article on the Chicago  School that:
[T]he key ideas of the [Chicago] school ....did not ...  emerge from a full-
blown philosophy of antitrust. Rather, they were the product of pondering
specific questions raised by antitrust cases, and only in retrospect did it be-
come clear that they constituted the basis of a general theory of the proper
scope of antitrust policy.43
Reduced to its core, the dominant criticism of Post-Chicago  is that it has not
yet produced a sufficiently large set of individual theorems to support a gen-
eral  theory."  That same  criticism is now  being leveled at those  seeking to
import behavioralist insights into antitrust analysis.
3.  Harvard
There is disagreement about who defines the Harvard School, and what the
school stands for is less clear than in the case of Chicago. Kovacic  sees its
leading thinkers as being Donald Turner, Phillip Areeda, and Justice (formerly
Professor) Breyer.45  Others  refer  to  a  "Neo-Harvard  School"  as  including
arguing that Chicagoans are not naive about the role of imperfect information, but do not spin out
its consequences to their logical conclusions. See Lande, supra note 37, at 193.
40 See Gregory T. Gundlach & Joan M. Phillips, Contributions and Challenges of Marketing
to Antitrust, 47 N.Y.L. SCH. L. REV. 51,  65 (2003).
41 See POSNER, ANTITRUST LAW, supra note 25, at 67-68 & nn.26-27 (explaining the theory
of cartel fragility and citing sources); see also, e.g., Julia Schiller et al., Toward Convergence:
The Volume of "Affected" Commerce Under the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines and "Impact" Anal-
ysis Under the Clayton Act, 18 GEO. MASON L. REV. 987, 998-99 & nn.98-99 (2011) (citing 2B
PHILLIP E. AREEDA  ET AL.,  ANTITRUST  LAW 405b2, at 29 (3d  ed. 2007);  id. at 405b; United
States v. Hayter Oil Co., 51 F.3d 1265,  1267 (6th Cir. 1995)).
42 Albert Einstein published his special  theory of relativity  in  1905. The general  theory of
relativity had to wait a decade. See Biography: Albert Einstein, NOBELPRIZE.ORG, http:/www.
nobelprize.org/nobel-prizes/physics/laureates/192  1/einstein.html.
43 Posner, Chicago School Analysis, supra note 4, at 926.
44 It may be that not every observer accepts the view that Post-Chicago is lacking a theory. See
Crane, Chicago, Post-Chicago,a nd Neo-Chicago, supra note 3, at 1927 ("[P]ost-Chicago offers
a countermodel  that is just as elegant ....").
45 Kovacic, Intellectual DNA,  supra note 22, at 34.114 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
Hovenkamp and Breyer.46 Casual analysis tends to view Harvard as the intel-
lectual counterweight  to Chicago. Posner once  described  Harvard  and Chi-
cago in an essay targeted to non-antitrust-specialists as "warring camps" with
Harvard "prone to find monopolistic practices"  and Chicago "believ[ing]  the
same practices to be for the most part procompetitive."47  Hovenkamp "over-
simplif[ied]"  the comparison  thusly:  "while  the Chicago  School emphasized
the ways  that firms  would  continue  to compete  notwithstanding  imperfect
structures, the Harvard  School emphasized  the ways  that firms could avoid
competing."48  On  further  reading  Hovenkamp  shows  that  this  simplified
description  relies  on  an  archaic  definition  of Harvard,  what  is  commonly
called the structure-conduct-performance  paradigm, which due to the involve-
ment of thinkers like Donald Turner and Joe Bain frequently has been associ-
ated with Harvard.49
4.  Neo-Chicago
Neo-Chicago  is easier  to  peg, perhaps  because  it has only  recently  been
self-defined. Neo-Chicago  was first discussed in a 2005 article by Evans and
Padilla proposing  an  approach  to the  law  of product tying.50 They  defined
their approach as improving on the Chicago School theories by incorporating
the error-cost framework  drawn from  Easterbrook's  Limits of Antitrust and
emphasizing  empirical  study  to  support  the  theory 51  Other  commentators
have aligned themselves with this camp as well.52
46 See, e.g., Daniel A. Crane, Antitrust Modesty, 105 U. MiCH. L. REV.  1193,  1194 (2007)
(reviewing HOVENKAMP,  ANTITRUST ENTERPRISE, supra note  18).
47 Richard  A. Posner, Will the Federal Court of Appeals Survive Until 1984? An Essay on
Delegation and Specialization of the Judicial Function, 56 S. CAL. L. REV. 761,  781  (1983).
4  HOVENKAMP, ANTITRUST ENTERPRISE, supra note 18, at 35. Consistent with the oversimpli-
fied view,  as a law student in the 1990s  I was taught that antitrust policy reflected a tension
between Chicago and the "Ivy League."
49 Hovenkamp would draw a distinction between structure-conduct-performance and the mod-
ern Harvard School.  Hovenkamp, Costs of Movement, supra note 29, at 74-76; HOVENKAMP,
ANTITRUST  ENTERPRISE,  supra note  18,  at 36-37  (relating the Harvard  School's "significant
transformation"  in the late 1970s); see also Spencer Weber Waller, The Language of Law and
the Language of Business, 52 CASE W. RES. L. REV. 283, 297 & n.65 (2001)  (listing leading
works in the structure-conduct-performance  paradigm).
50 See Evans & Padilla, A Neo-Chicago Approach, supra note 9, at 75.
51 Id. at 74-75 (citing Easterbrook, Limits, supra note 10, at 9-14); id. at 80, 98 (criticizing
Post-Chicago for its lack of reliance on data and expressing a need for empirical study of the cost
of errors in enforcement).
52 See Lambert & Wright, (Over?) Confidence, supra note 10, at 225-26. Wright suggests in a
2009 blog  post that  Neo-Chicago is  not new. Joshua  Wright, Neo-Chicago Meets Evidence-
Based Antitrust, TRUTH ON THE MARKET (May 12, 2009, 1:37 PM), truthonthemarket.com/2009/
05/12/neo-chicago-meets-evidence-based-antitrust.  This position is consistent with Wright's def-
initions elsewhere of Chicago School antitrust as being defined by three features, including "the
centrality of empiricism"  and "adoption  of the error-cost framework."  Wright,  Overshot the
Mark?, supra note 12, at 10-12.2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO WITH  BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 115
What, at bottom, is Neo-Chicago then doing? Daniel Crane describes Neo-
Chicago as an  alternative  to Chicago  and Post-Chicago  ideologies."  In his
view  Neo-Chicago  "accepts  Chicago's  basic  premises  as  refined  by  the
emerging body of criticism," and its success will turn on, among other things,
its "providing  empirical  support for Chicago  School theories."54 In part, he
sees this as a contest between Chicago and Post-Chicago  ideologies:
Sooner or later, post-Chicago will have to supply the empirical evidence that
is assumed in, but largely absent from, its attacks on Chicago. For the rea-
sons previously  identified, post-Chicago will continue to make only minor
dents in Chicagoan dogma so long as it continues to engage Chicago in a
theoretical  tit-for-tat. When post-Chicago  begins to put  more muscle into
an empirical attack, Chicago will need to respond in kind.5
Crane's  description  suggests  that  the  progress  of Neo-Chicago  will  be
through empirical testing of theories from both the Chicago and Post-Chicago
Schools. Theories that cannot be supported empirically will fall by the way-
side, while those that can be will survive. Under this view there is a natural
place for the empirical methods of behavioral economists to be imported into
antitrust law through the burgeoning field of Behavioral  Antitrust.
B.  BEHAVIORAL EcONOMICS
Behavioral  economics  is  a  parallel  branch  of  economic  thought  that
presents a challenge to neo-classical theories. 6 Combining the study of psy-
chology with economic  tools,  "behavioralists"  have challenged  the assump-
tions  about  individual -conduct  that  underlie  the  economic  proofs of neo-
classical economics,  themselves  justifications for legal rules of decision. In
1998 three  legal scholars demonstrated  that "'real  people'  differ from homo
economicus" by  displaying  "three  important  'bounds'  on human  behavior,
bounds that draw into question the central ideas of utility maximization, stable
preferences, rational expectations, and optimal processing of information" un-
derlying neo-classical economics."  Behavioral law and economics is the ap-
plication of the principles  of behavioral  economics  to legal analysis.  It has
become mainstream  over the past ten years."
53S ee Crane, Chicago, Post-Chicago,a nd Neo-Chicago, supra note 3, at 1930-32.
54 Id. at 1931.
55 Id.
56 See Richard A. Epstein, The Neoclassical Economics of Consumer Contracts, 92 MINN. L.
REV. 803, 803 (2008) ("There is little doubt that the major new theoretical approach to law and
economics in the past two decades ..  .comes from the adjacent discipline of cognitive psychol-
ogy, which has now morphed into behavioral economics.").
51 Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein & Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and
Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV.  1471,  1476 (1998).
58 The economic theories that underlie the modern behavioral law and economics movement
are decades old. See, e.g.,  Herbert A.  Simon, A BehavioralM  odel of Rational Choice, 69 Q.J.
EcoN. 99 (1955).116 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
At bottom, behavioral economics  is about sequencing  the human psycho-
logical genome. When imported into legal analysis, it can assist in guiding the
development of legal rules by  recognizing the realities of individual  human
behavior, as opposed to an idealized state (which neo-classical economics as-
sumes) that lacks any bounds on rationality, self-interest and willpower. The
intentions  of that enterprise are difficult to criticize.  We are accustomed  to
regulation accounting  for real physical traits.  Building  codes  are  based on
actual physical proportions, rather than the proportions of some definition of
the ideal human body. Economic regulation is rooted in contracting conduct,
which is a product of psychological, not physical, human characteristics. The
law should likewise  account for real psychological traits.
Behavioral economics begins with the unremarkable recognition that, con-
trary to the core assumptions of neo-classical economics, individuals are lim-
ited in their abilities to reason, to resist temptation,  and to act in their own
self-interest. Taken together, those bounds render it likely that individuals will
not optimize  their own  economic  self-interest  in  contracting.  That may be
because they are actually incapable of reaching the optimal decision under the
circumstances  (bounded  rationality),  or  because  they  are  prevented  from
reaching the optimal decision because of a fleeting short-term fancy (bounded
willpower) or an altruistic bent (bounded self-interest).  People are known to
rely on  "decisionmaking heuristics"  to short-cut complex  reasoning"  and to
act pursuant to "cognitive  biases" that favor, among other things, short-term
over long-term benefits and salient over inconspicuous  information.w
In their book Nudge, Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler offer the example
of retirement savings.6' Rational choice theory suggests that an individual will
calculate  how  much  he  or  she  needs  in  retirement,  save  that  much,  and
thereby optimize present and future savings versus expenditures. Because that
does not happen across  a large swath of the populace, we know that some
combination of factors may be at play, such as inability to calculate retirement
needs  in advance,  disinclination  to forgo  short-term pleasure  for long-term
benefit, and perhaps desire to share their wealth with others.62
5  Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman labels the heuristic "System  I" and the complex reason-
ing "System 2." System I processes occur "automatically and quickly, with little or no effort,"
while System 2 processes "require attention and are disrupted when attention is drawn away."
DANIEL  KAHNEMAN,  THINKING,  FAST AND SLOW 20-22 (201 1).
6  See generally Reeves & Stucke, BehavioralA  ntitrust, supra note 6, at 1532-38 (discussing
empirically demonstrated cognitive biases and citing authorities).
61 RICHARD H. THALER & CAsS R. SUNSTEIN,  NUDGE,  ch. 6 (2008).
62 Id. (discussing bounds on rationality and willpower as explanations);  see Anuj C. Desai,
Libertarian Paternalism, Externalities, and the "Spirit of Liberty": How Thaler and Sunstein
Are Nudging Us Toward an Overlapping Consensus, 36 LAW & Soc. INQUIRY 263, 268 (2011)
(reviewing THALER & SUNSTEIN,  NUDGE,  supra note 60) (citing THALER & SUNSTEIN,  NUDGE,2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL ANTITRUST 117
Behavioral economics  seeks rigorously to explain the deviations from the
theoretical  assumptions.63  That process is critically  important.  A  conclusion
that conduct  is truly  irrational would  undermine  any efforts  at meaningful
policy analysis or the development  of generally applicable rules  of law tai-
lored to that conduct. One might conclude instead that a legal rule designed
with one instance of conduct in mind will be misguided when applied to any
other instance of conduct."  And tailoring regulation  to a model built on ra-
tional choice assumptions will be no less legitimate than will tailoring regula-
tion to any other, equally non-descriptive  model.65
Recognizing instead that deviations from rational  choice theory  are  non-
random and thus predictable,  the supposed limitation on the value of behav-
ioral insights disappears.  Non-random deviations permit  the drawing of ex-
pectations  about  human  behavior  that  more  accurately  model  real  human
conduct than do the rational choice assumptions.66 With those more accurate
expectations in place, scholars, policymakers, legislators, and courts can study
and implement rules  of law based on those expectations.67  And rules of law
supra note 60, at 104; Albert Ando & Franco Modigliani, The "Life Cycle" Hypothesis of Sav-
ing: Aggregate Implications and Tests, 45 AM. EcON. REV. 55 (1963)).
63 See Richard A. Epstein, BehavioralE conomics: Human Errorsa nd Market Corrections,7 3
U.  CHI. L. REV.  111,  111  (2006); Cass R.  Sunstein, Introduction, in BEHAVIORAL LAW AND
EcoNoMics  1, 1-7 (Cass R. Sunstein ed.,  2000) [hereinafter Introduction].
6 See Joshua D.  Wright & Judd E. Stone II, Misbehavioral Economics: The Case Against
Behavioral Antitrust, 33 CARDOzo L. REV.  1517,  1523, 1534 (2012).
65 Critics of behavioralist arguments may object primarily to the terminology, inferring from
the word "irrational"  that conduct is either unpredictable or contrary to natural norms. In fact,
there is nothing rational about conduct that is inconsistent with demonstrable norms of behavior,
or irrational about conduct that hews to those norms. "Rational choice," then, is simply a brand
that scholars have applied to idealized conduct. Definitions of rationality incorporate a prefer-
ence for self-interested, profit-maximizing conduct that appears systematically to be inconsistent
with real-life human behavior. Only by first accepting that normative preference  can we apply
the pejorative sobriquet "irrational"  to conduct in which nearly all persons actually engage. See
Maurice E. Stucke, BehavioralE conomists at the Gate: Antitrust in the Twenty-First Century, 38
Loy. U. CHI. L.J. 513, 522 (2007) [hereinafter Behavioral Economists at the Gate]; Claire Hill,
The Promise of Behavioral Law and Economics, TRUTH  ON THE  MARKET (Dec. 7, 2010, 5:00
AM) ("'mistake'" may mean "'weakness  of the will' ...since a person really does want both
cake  and good  health"), http://truthonthemarket.com/2010/12/07/claire-hill-on-the-promise-of-
behavioral-law-and-economics/.  Many scholars  understandably prefer to speak of "boundedly
rational"  conduct. Tor, The Fable of Entry, supra note 7, at 484.
66 Cf DAN ARIELY, PREDICTABLY IRRATIONAL: THE HIDDEN FORCES THAT SHAPE OUR DECI-
SIONs, at xx (2008) (cite to introduction) ("Whether we are acting as consumers, businesspeople,
or policymakers, understanding how we are predictably  irrational  provides a starting point for
improving our decisionmaking and changing the way we live for the better.").
67 Complaints that behavioral law and economics is targeted toward the conduct of a handful
of individuals whose true behavior has been demonstrated empirically ignore that the empirical
studies serve to demonstrate true norms of behavior. Just as regulation based  on the norm of
rational choice was only intended  to be a perfect fit for the average, regulation  based on an
empirically established norm that deviates from rational choice will only be a perfect fit for the
average. The difference is that the empirically established norm actually represents the average,
while regulating for the rational choice assumption is regulating on the basis of an outlier.118 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
built on assumptions of conduct following rational choice theory will be fun-
damentally flawed.
Behavioral  economics  operates  by  collecting  data,  whether from  experi-
ments conducted in the laboratory or from the real world, and testing the axi-
oms of economics against  that data.68 Laboratory  experiments  have become
increasingly  sophisticated  and present  increasingly  useful  proxies  for real-
world conduct.69 Frequently the data demonstrates  that axioms on which the
Chicago School relies are wrong.  Individual economic  actors respond differ-
ently to stimuli than leading theories had predicted they would respond. Em-
pirical data provides new intuition, or confirms old intuition, regarding human
behavior. With that new or confirmed intuition, economic models may be re-
built to produce empirically supportable results. Behavioral law and econom-
ics then reexamines legal standards and rules of decision in the light of those
results.70
Behavioral  economics  is a close  cousin of the study  of information  eco-
nomics,  perhaps for which  reason George  Akerloff, Nobel Laureate  for his
work in  information economics,  turned  to behavioralism  to explain  human
conduct in his book Animal Spirits, co-written with Robert Schiller.71 Accord-
ing to  Oren Bar-Gill, "The behavioral  market failure, with its emphasis  on
misperception  and  bias,  is  a direct extension  of the  imperfect  information
problem."72
68 See Avishalom Tor, A Behavioural Approach to Antitrust Law and Economics, 14 CON-
SUMER POL'Y REv. 18, 18-19 (2004) [hereinafter A BehaviouralApproach]( behavioral econom-
ics is "grounded in empirical observations of human behaviour" and "based on scientific findings
regarding actual human behaviour, which can often provide better descriptions of market dynam-
ics and thus more effective prescriptions for competition policy"); cf Maurice E. Stucke, Money,
Is That What I Want?: Competition Policy and the Role of Behavioral Economics, 50 SANTA
CLARA L. REv. 893, 918 (2010) (experiments began on university students and migrated to "field
experiments and data from actual market transactions").
69 See, e.g., Mark Armstrong & Steffen Huck, Behavioral Economics as Applied to Firms:A 
Primer,C OMPETITION POL'Y INT'L, Spring 2010, at 3, 9-10 (describing laboratory experiments
designed to test assumptions regarding cartel behavior).
70 See generally Douglas H. Ginsburg & Derek W. Moore, The Future of BehavioralE conom-
ics in Antitrust Jurisprudence,C OMPETITION POL'Y INT'L, Spring 2010, at 89, 92-95 (discussing
the development of behavioral  economics and behavioral  law and economics).
71 GEORGE A. AKERLOF & ROBERT J. SCHILLER, ANIMAL SPIRITS: How HUMAN PSYCHOLOGY
DRIvES THE ECONOMY,  AND WHY IT MATTERS FOR GLOBAL CAPITALISM 5 (2009) (noting prior
work in rational choice economics and the need to break from that tradition to explain economic
activity).
72 Oren Bar-Gill, Competition and Consumer Protection:A  BehavioralE conomics Account, in
SWEDISH  COMPETITION AUTHORITY,  THE PROS AND  CONS OF CONSUMER  PROTECTION 1, 4-5
(forthcoming)  [hereinafter Competition and Consumer Protection], available at http://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstractid=1974499.  Others have observed this as well,  not all of
them champions of Behavioral Antitrust. See, e.g., Michael A. Salinger, Behavioral Economics,
Consumer Protection, and Antitrust, COMPETITION POL'Y INT'L,  Spring 2010,  at 65,  69-70
(2010) (comparing information asymmetries with deviations from rational choice).2012]  MARRYING NEO-CHICAGO  WITH  BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 119
Thus, marketers  might rely on information  asymmetries through non-dis-
closure  of certain  costs  (subject to  limits  imposed by fraud  and deception
claims), or  they might  accomplish  the  same end  through  the technique  of
"drip pricing." Drip pricing is a well-studied technique of exploiting individu-
als'  empirically  demonstrated  tendencies to make  soft (psychological)  com-
mitments on the basis of "salient"-prominent-up-front  prices before they
learn of other expenses that might fundamentally alter the nature of the trans-
action."  AirTran Airways, Inc. recently settled Department of Transportation
charges with regard to fare advertising that excluded taxes and fees from the
advertised ticket price, making information about those taxes and fees availa-
ble but not readily apparent.74 The practice at issue might be considered either
to rely on information asymmetries,  if consumers were not meaningfully in-
formed about the actual  price, or to rely on drip pricing, if consumers were
merely  committed before being informed.
For another example  of the relationship between  information  economics
and behavioral economics,  information economics is credited  with carrying
the day in Eastman Kodak Corp. v. Image Technical Services, Inc., where the
Court recognized that purchasers  unable realistically to engage  in life-cycle
pricing of photocopiers could become locked in to a particular brand, giving
monopoly power in parts and services aftermarkets  to defendant Kodak."  As
73 See Reeves & Stucke, Behavioral Antitrust, supra note 6, at 1541 (defining drip pricing); cf
ROBERT B.  CIALDINI, INFLUENCE:  SCIENCE  & PRACTICE  59-66 (5th ed. 2009) [hereinafter Sc-
ENCE  & PRACTICE]  (describing larger impacts  of inducing commitment  with regard to small
initial decisions). The UK Office of Fair Trading has concluded that drip pricing is one of the
two most pernicious pricing practices from the perspective of causing purchasers to spend more
than they wished  (in the absence of the pricing  practice) to spend. See UK OFFICE  OF FAIR
TRADING, ADVERTISING OF PRICES (OFT  1291)  (2010), available at http://www.oft.gov.uk/OFT
work/markets-work/advertising-prices/.
74 The Department of Transportation recently fined Airtran Airways, Inc., for "deceptive price
advertising" in violation of DOT rule 14 C.F.R. ยง 399.84 (2011), governing the manner in which
fees and taxes may be separated from airfare advertisements. According to the consent agree-
ment between Airtran and DOT:
AirTran  displayed an  advertisement  on various third-party  websites stating  "Select
destination on SALE Starting at $59 one way." The advertisement contained two aster-
isks, one following the fare and the other below the fare next to a statement reading,
without further elaboration, "Additional taxes, fees, exclusions apply." Nowhere in the
advertisement were the nature and amount of the additional taxes stated. Rather, once
the consumer clicked on the advertisement, he or she was taken to a landing page on
AirTran's website, where a list of routes and prices were displayed and consumers
were not advised of the details of the additional taxes and fees, stated in fine print,
unless they scrolled to the bottom of the page.
AirTran Airways,  Inc., DOT Docket No. OST-2012-0002,  at 2 (Jan. 4, 2012) (consent order).
Such a marketing practice might be said to rely for its success on asymmetric information with
regard to the amount of fees and taxes being charged (although disclosure would occur before the
consumer made payment). The practice is an example of behavioral exploitation through drip
pricing, encouraging consumers to commit psychologically  before learning the additional ex-
pense to which they will be subjected.
7  Eastman Kodak Corp. v. Image Tech. Servs. Inc., 504 U.S. 451 (1992).120 ANTITRUST LAW  JOURNAL [Vol. 78
explained in  greater  detail below, behavioral  economics would bolster that
explanation  with lessons about the marketing  technique of drip pricing  and
proven  cognitive  biases  such as  "hyperbolic  discounting"  of future  events,
whereby  perceived  short-term  benefits  overwhelm  medium-  and  long-term
consequences  of decisions.76
II.  BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST
Cass Sunstein recommended in 2000 that scholars and policymakers devote
their energies to applications of behavioral economics in legal policymaking,7
though a few legal scholars had already been working in that direction. The
enterprise  took off early in fields  including litigation economics,'  criminal
law,79 corporate  governance,s0 and consumer protection.8'  It has been  slower
to be applied to antitrust, although since 2002 scholars have been doing so.
A.  EARLY  APPLICATIONS  To ANTITRUST
1. Studying Conduct by  Firms
Avishalom Tor was the earliest student of behavioralist teachings  in anti-
trust. Tor's writings in the area began with The Fable of Entry: Bounded Ra-
tionality, Market Discipline and Legal Policy.82 He  stated  a more  general
76 According to Professor Bar-Gill:
[A] hyperbolic discounter heavily discounts costs and benefits that will materialize in
the near future, at t+1, but assigns only a smaller additional discount for costs (and
benefits) that will materialize in the more distant future, at t+2. This systematic dispar-
ity between  people's short-term  and long-term  discount rates has been consistently
demonstrated both in the laboratory and in real-world settings.
Oren  Bar-Gill,  Seduction by  Plastic, 98  Nw.  U.  L.  REv.  1373,  1396  (2004)  [hereinafter
Seduction].
77S ee Sunstein, Introduction, supra note 63.
78 See, e.g., Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, Gains, Losses, and the Psychology of Litigation, 70 S. CAL.
L. REV.  113,  144 (1996).
79 See, e.g., David S. Lee & Justin McCrary, Crime, Punishment, and Myopia 2 (Nat'1 Bureau
of Econ.  Research,  Working  Paper No.  11491,  2005)  (finding that high  discount rates  for
criminals undermines a rational-choice-based expected cost analysis), available at http://www.
nber.org/papers/wl 1491.
so See, e.g., Antony Page, Unconscious Bias and the Limits of Director Independence, 2009 U.
ILL. L. REV. 237.
st The Federal Trade Commission has long regulated conduct on the basis of a sophisticated
understanding of limitations  in purchasers'  abilities to maximize their economic self-interest.
See, e.g.,  16 C.F.R. pt. 429 (2011) (door-to-door sales rule imposing a cooling-off period and
requiring notice of a three-day  right of rescission). The Commission also has published guides
that may influence behavior to similar ends. See 16 C.F.R. pt. 238 (bait-and-switch sales tech-
niques); 16 C.F.R. pt. 251 (guide concerning use of the word "free" and similar representations).
The Chicago Law Review held a symposium on behavioral economics in the law of consumer
protection. See generally Symposium, Homo Economicus, Homo Myopicus, and the Law and
Economics of Consumer Choice, 73 U. Ci. L. REV.  1 (2006).
82 Tor, The Fable of Entry, supra note 7.2012] 
MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH  BEHAVIORAL ANTITRUST 121
theory in A BehavioralA  pproach to Antitrust Law and Economics,3"  and, with
William Rinner,  discussed the application  of Behavioral  Antitrust to resale
price maintenance  in Behavioral Antitrust: A New Approach to the Rule of
Reason After Leegin.84  Oren Bar-Gill  demonstrated in 2005 that the bounds
behavioralists recognize on consumer decisionmaking may have policy impli-
cations  for antitrust rules  governing  tying and bundling."  Maurice  Stucke
more recently has argued-in articles, including Morality and Antitrust,16 Be-
havioral Economists at the Gate," and Behavioral Antitrust (with Amanda
Reeves)8-about  the inevitability  of courts'  rethinking antitrust law in light
of knowledge  of human conduct in the economic marketplace.
Central axioms of antitrust economics posit that the economic marketplace
can be modeled  with perfect utility maximization on the parts of both sellers
and purchasers-as Michael  Salinger puts it, "sacrific[ing]  realism for tracta-
bility."89  In  contrast,  recent  scholarship has challenged  the assumption  that
sellers conduct themselves in ways that maximize their utility.90 The conclu-
sions of that research undermine established rules of decision  in antitrust."
In addition to those first movers in the application of behavioral economics
to antitrust, other scholars, judges, and practitioners recently have joined the
conversation. Deven Desai and Spencer Waller discussed concepts in antitrust
that  turn  on  the  realities  of human  cognition,  although  without  explicitly
couching  their analysis  as one  of Behavioral  Antitrust.92 Christopher Leslie
wrote that courts'  understanding of the economic rationality of firm conduct
was  ill-informed,  producing  erroneous  rules of decision.93  Leslie  also  dealt
with the phenomenon  of cognitively biased courts.94 Firmly in the mold of
Behavioral Antitrust scholarship, Leslie criticized conclusions that conduct by
firms  made "no  economic  sense,"  and  therefore  could be  presumed not to
have taken place at all, when, in fact, the evidence was strong or irrefutable
83 Tor, A Behavioural Approach, supra note 68.
84A vishalom Tor & William J. Rinner, Behavioral Antitrust: A New Approach to the Rule of
Reason after Leegin, 2011  U. ILL. L. REV.  805.
85 Oren Bar-Gill, Bundling and Consumer Misperception, 73 U. CHI. L. REV. 33, 53 (2006)
[hereinafter Bundling and Consumer Misperception].
86 Maurice E. Stucke, Morality and Antitrust, 2006 COLUM.  Bus. L. REV.  443.
87 Stucke, Behavioral Economists at the Gate, supra note 65.
88 Reeves & Stucke, BehavioralA  ntitrust, supra note 6.
89S alinger, supra note 72, at 66.
9 See, e.g., Stucke, Behavioral Economists at the Gate, supra note 65; Tor & Rinner, supra
note 84.
91S ee infra notes 125-135 and accompanying  text.
92 See Deven R. Desai & Spencer Waller, Brands, Competition, and the Law, 2010 BYU L.
REV.  1425.
93 See Christopher  R.  Leslie, Rationality Analysis in Antitrust, 158  U.  PA.  L. REV.  261,
285-308 (2010).
94Id. at 308-18.122 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
that the conduct  did in fact occur.95 Mark Armstrong  and Steffen Huck "fo-
cus[ed] . .. on non-standard approaches to firm behavior," keeping consumers
"in the background."96  They show the usefulness of laboratory  studies better
to understand collusion, oligopoly conduct short of collusion, and unilateral
conduct.97
In important ways Behavioral Antitrust may be the strongest application of
behavioral  law  and economics.  First, law and  economics  generally has  in-
formed antitrust rules of decision more completely than any other substantive
field.98  Second, the most voluble complaints about the application  of behav-
ioral economics to legal policy relate to "first-order regulation," in which gov-
ernment  supplants  private  ordering.  For  example,  David  Friedman  noted
problems  with  application  of behavioral  economics in  such  areas as airline
security.  Regulators'  tendencies to "overestimate  the importance of striking
low probability events" (such as terrorist attacks) has led to intrusive security,
which reduces airline traffic and thus increases road traffic fatalities, perhaps
even out of proportion  to the initial threat to be avoided.99 Such challenges,
including concerns for cognitively biased or politically motivated regulators'"
and slippery slopes toward over-regulation,'01  do not apply  to "second-order
regulation"  that  seeks  to  maintain  free  markets  by  correcting  for failures
brought  on  by  private  ordering,  rather  than  to  regulate  those  markets
directly.102
2.  Critics
Others are  less willing to  accept the importance of Behavioral  Antitrust.
The Chicago-leaning publication  Competition Policy Internationalp ublished
in Winter 2010 a symposium edition on behavioral economics in antitrust and
consumer  protection,  containing  articles  by  noted commentators,  including
95 Id.  at 318-38.
96 Armstrong & Huck, supra note 69, at 4.
97 See id. at 6-7.
91 See Waller, Virus, supra note 31, at 381-87.
9 David D. Friedman, Intriguing Research Project, with Reservations, TRUTH ON THE MAR-
KET (Dec.  6, 2010, 8:15  AM),  http://truthonthemarket.com/2010/12/06/david-friedman-on-be-
havioral-economics-intriguing-research-project-with-reservations/.
1ooS ee Richard Thaler, Rejoinder to the TOTM Free to Choose Symposium, TRUTH ON THE
MARKET (Dec.  13,  2010, 7:25 AM) [hereinafter Rejoinder] ("Professor Warren would be well
advised to assume that there will eventually be a nitwit heading [the CFPA] for a while."), http://
truthonthemarket.com/2010/12/13/richard-thalers-rejoinder-to-the-totm-free-to-choose-sympo-
sium/.
'  Larry Ribstein, Free to Lose?, TRUTH ON THE MARKET (Dec. 6, 2010, 8:18 AM), http://truth
onthemarket.com/2010/12/06/larry-ribstein-on-free-to-losel.
102 Cf HOVENKAMP,  ANTITRUST ENTERPRISE,  supra note 18, at 14-15  (distinguishing "reac-
tive"  antitrust  enforcement  from  "positive"  administrative  enterprises  like  electricity  rate
regulation).2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 123
Judge Douglas Ginsburg'03  and Michael Salinger.'" Both Ginsburg and Salin-
ger dispute the relevance  of behavioral economics  to antitrust. Salinger de-
scribes differing reactions to behavioral economics in political terms. "In both
consumer protection and antitrust, the use of standard economic analysis has
generally been to limit the scope of government intervention. The interest in
behavioral economics (and some of the resistance to it) stems from the belief
that it justifies intervention  that conventional  economic analysis  suggests is
unwarranted." 05
A recent article by Joshua Wright and Judd Stone takes broader aim at the
study of Behavioral Antitrust, articulating an  "irrelevance theorem" that they
argue demonstrates "behavioral economics . . . fails to offer any clear policy
implications for antitrust law." 06 Wright and Stone challenge the work of Tor,
Stucke,  and Leslie  in  arguing  that Behavioral  Antitrust currently  offers  no
policy prescriptions that can be implemented.07  Even then-Deputy Assistant
Attorney General Carl Shapiro declined to endorse behavioral economics'  rel-
evance to the antitrust analysis of firm conduct.08
Critics question the capacity of behavioral insights to inform antitrust rules
of decision. Judge Ginsburg and Derek Moore argue that Behavioral Antitrust
is too great a deviation from the economic theory that has held sway in anti-
trust decisionmaking.'09 They believe it opens the door to undisciplined analy-
sis  and  "whimsical"  goals  in  antitrust jurisprudence  and increases  courts'
freedom to pursue "idiosyncratic"  goals."0 However, Ginsburg and Moore do
not provide any evidence supporting that concern. That is a general comment
on the critics of Behavioral Antitrust. Wright and Stone speak of a "burden of
proof' on the proponents of Behaviorat Antitrust,  although they give no rea-
son why any one particular approach  should be the default."'
103G insburg & Moore, supra note 70.
"01 Salinger, supra note 72.
os Id. at 66.
"o6 Wright & Stone, supra note 64, at 1527,  1526.
107S ee id. at 1521-22, 1533-34 (commenting on recent work by Stucke, Tor, and Leslie).
108C  arl Shapiro, Deputy Ass't Att'y Gen. for Econ., U.S.  Dep't of Justice,  Remarks to the
ABA Antitrust Symposium: Competition as Public Policy 3 (May 13, 2009), available at http://
www.justice.gov/atr/public/speeches/245857.pdf.  Although Shapiro backtracked from that state-
ment with regard to predicting consumer behavior, his view of the use of behavioral economics
in predicting organizational behavior did not appear to change. See Roundtable Interview with
Joseph Farrell and Carl Shapiro, ANTITRUST SOURCE, Feb. 2010, at 8 [hereinafter Roundtable
Interview], http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/publishinglantitrust_source/Feb10_Farr
ShapRT2.25f.authcheckdam.pdf.
109G insburg & Moore, supra note 70.
IWd.  t  t 
' Wright & Stone, supra note 64, at 1522.124 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
Wright and Stone's recent examination of Behavioral Antitrust concentrates
on the question of non-utility-maximizing  behavior by firms. Their article dis-
penses quickly with the question of consumers'  deviations from the rational
choice model, arguing that demand elasticity analyses take into account any
consumer decisionmaking  biases.112 If a consumer's reservation price is deter-
mined to be X, any biases are built into that reservation  price, and what those
biases are may not be important for antitrust analysis."3 That point is correct
for purposes of determining market power, a process that currently  requires
modeling  hypothetical  consumer behavior  in response  to price  increases.114
But it does  not undermine the value of understanding  consumer behavior in
antitrust policymaking.  Conduct  by  firms  that relates  to  the structure  of a
transaction with their consumers,  such as marketing, pricing, tying, and bun-
dling, presents the danger of adverse welfare effects that may be exacerbated
by limitations on individual consumers' cognitive abilities."'  I propose below
an antitrust application of the theory of behavioral exploitation through which
firms may be structuring their conduct specifically to take advantage of those
limitations, with attendant welfare effects that bring it within the heartland of
conduct antitrust policy should encompass."'
One also might question whether critics of Behavioral Antitrust would ac-
cept the conclusions that empirical studies of consumer behavior  might pro-
duce.  For example,  criticisms  of FTC  v.  Whole  Foods Market, Inc.,  which
supported  a  narrowly  drawn  product  market  on  the  basis  of consumers'
demonstrated preferences,"7 invoke theoretical arguments about the unprofit-
ability of a price hike due to price-sensitive marginal consumers."  Professors
Desai and Waller provide an explanation for many commentators'  aversion to
drawing product markets narrowly even where evidence of consumer behav-
112 Id. at 1523.
113 For this reason, the concern for conflicting cognitive biases is overstated. See Thom Lam-
bert, Behavioral Law and Economics and the Conflicting Quirks Problem: A "Realist" Critique,
TRUTH ON THE MARKET (Dec. 6, 2010, 10:35 AM), http://truthonthemarket.com/2010/12/06/real-
ism-and-behavioral-law-and-economics/.  A test of consumer behavior  in a real market setting
necessarily will incorporate the range of biases that laboratory experiments have teased out. It
may not always be possible to intuit the result in terms of the operative bias, but the empirical
result (if robust) will provide a basis for antitrust analysis and possibly intervention.
114 See U.S. Dep't of Justice & Fed. Trade Comm'n, Horizontal Merger Guidelines ยง 4 (2010)
[hereinafter 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines], available at http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/
guidelines/hmg-2010.pdf.
"s  Cf Bar-Gill, Bundling and Consumer Misperception, supra note 85, at 54 (discussing bun-
dling "as a strategic response to consumer misperception").
116 Behavioral exploitation as a form of conduct appears to have been first defined in 2008. See
Matthew A. Edwards, The FTC and New Paternalism,6 0 ADMIN.  L. REV. 323, 325 (2008).
117 FTC v.  Whole Foods Mkt.,  Inc., 548  F.3d 1028,  1043-45  (D.C.  Cir. 2008)  (Tatel, J.,
concurring).
118 See, e.g., Kevin Arquit, Keynote Address: ILI 2009 Symposium, 43 CORNELL INT'L L.J. 1,
23 (2010).2012]  MARRYING NEO-CHICAGO  WITH  BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 125
ior supports the result. They demonstrate in their article, Brands, Competition,
and the Law, that antitrust law fails sufficiently to recognize  the impacts of
brands on  consumer  decisionmaking,  with  consequences  for, among  other
things, product market definition."9 Desai and Waller thus encourage  an ap-
proach that relies on consumers'  demonstrated preferences (for, in their argu-
ment, well-developed brands), if proof can be made of the competitive impact
of those preferences.
Some critics of Behavioral Antitrust appear at bottom  to contend that the
complications behavioral  economics introduces  into antitrust analysis render
the enterprise  too cumbersome for use.120 The "too complex" complaint is an
old one. It explains the limited inroads of information economics in antitrust
economics. Michael Rothschild and Joseph Stiglitz's  1976 demonstration that
simplifying assumptions in economic analysis render that analysis inapplica-
ble to the real world carries equal weight in the Behavioral Antitrust debate.'2'
If the argument is that reality makes  economics unworkable,  the conclusion
might be that it is economics that should go, not reality.
3. Result Neutrality
Behavioral Antitrust is result-neutral.'22  Wright and Stone correctly argue
that Behavioral  Antitrust "does  not systematically  support a more  interven-
tionist competition policy."'23 Reeves and Stucke agree: "Behavioral econom-
ics  does  not  necessarily  call  for less  or more  antitrust  regulation." 24  This
recognition provides  the strongest hope  that a Neo-Chicago  antitrust policy
119D esai & Waller, supra note 92, at  1475-76.
120 See,  e.g.,  Geoffrey  A.  Manne,  Interesting Doesn't Necessarily  Mean Policy Relevant,
TRUTH ON THE MARKET (Dec. 6, 2010, 10:25 AM) (noting the challenges of understanding the
aggregate  impacts  of sometimes  conflicting  biases),  http://truthonthemarket.com/2010/12/06/
geoffrey-manne-on-interesting-doesnt-necessarily-mean-policy-relevant/;  Lambert,  supra note
113 (making the same argument).
121 See Michael Rothschild & Joseph Stiglitz, Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information, 90 Q.J. EcoN. 629 (1976).  Rothschild and
Stiglitz argue:
Economic theorists traditionally banish discussions of information to footnotes. Seri-
ous  consideration  of costs  of communication,  imperfect  knowledge,  and  the  like
would, it is believed, complicate without informing. This paper, which analyzes com-
petitive markets in which the characteristics of the commodities  exchanged are not
fully known to at least one of the parties to the transaction, suggests that this comfort-
ing myth is false. Some of the most important conclusions of economic theory are not
robust to considerations of imperfect information.
Id. at 629.
122 Cf  Thaler, Rejoinder, supra note  100  (denying  any  political  agenda  for  behavioral
economics).
123W  right & Stone, supra note 64, at 1526.
124R  eeves & Stucke, BehavioralA  ntitrust, supra note 6, at 1543.126 ANTITRUST  LAW  JOURNAL [Vol. 78
will find common ground with advocates of Behavioral Antitrust in service of
a less ideological enterprise of economically  informed antitrust.
If behavioral economics teaches  that individuals  are  not perfect expected
utility maximizers-in fact, individuals predictably deviate from that assump-
tion toward, among other traits, altruism-antitrust doctrine might recognize
the existence of such unicorns as the benevolent monopolist, who can be re-
lied on not to use monopoly power to the detriment of consumers.'25  Other
examples  of altruistic  market players wielding  monopoly power  (including
joint power in the case of conspiracy) might include educational institutions,
which have in the past been the subject of antitrust scrutiny for their conduct
in both sports and educational marketplaces;'26 and members of learned pro-
fessions, over whose conduct a deep body of doctrine also has developed.'27 If
empirical evidence were to demonstrate that non-economic  motivations over-
came (with sufficient frequency not to be de minimis) profit motives for those
or other actors, Behavioral  Antitrust might support less regulatory interven-
tion than has been the norm. That might take the form of adopting a rule of
reason approach, under which the effects of the conduct could be tested em-
pirically on a case-by-case  basis, to conduct that in other markets would be
subject to per se condemnation. The lessons from empirical study might also
inform a quick look or rule of reason approach with proof of non-economic
justifications for conduct.'28
Of course, Behavioral  Antitrust also raises the possibility of enforcement
where it has in recent decades not been considered appropriate. Evidence of
predatory conspiracies  in Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. v.  Zenith Radio
Corp.'29 and Brooke Group Ltd. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp.310
125 See White & White, Inc. v. Am. Hosp. Supply Corp., 540 F. Supp. 951,  1007 n.20 (W.D.
Mich. 1982) (finding that low prices by a "benevolent  monopolist" are not a basis for avoiding
antitrust liability), rev'd on other grounds, 723 F.2d 495 (6th Cir. 1983).
126S ee NCAA  v.  Bd. of Regents  of the Univ. of Okla.,  468 U.S.  85 (1984)  (evaluating a
conspiracy to restrict output in collegiate football); United States v. Brown Univ., 5 F.3d 658 (3d
Cir. 1993)  (applying a rule of reason analysis  to agreements  among elite  universities not to
compete for a certain student population).
127 See Cal. Dental Ass'n v. FrC, 526 U.S. 756 (1999)  (evaluating an advertising restriction
imposed by professional regulatory body); Arizona v. Maricopa Cty. Med. Soc'y, 457 U.S.  332
(1982)  (evaluating maximum price fixing by private association of medical doctors); Nat'l Soc'y
of Prof'1 Eng'rs v. United States, 435 U.S. 679 (1978)  (evaluating an agreement restricting com-
petitive bidding among engineers); Goldfarb v. Va. State Bar, 421  U.S. 773 (1975)  (evaluating a
fee schedule by a state bar association).
128 For example, in NCAA the defendant schools unsuccessfully argued the preservation of the
product of college football and the college game day warranted output restrictions. See NCAA,
468 U.S. at 115-17. In Brown University, the defendants successfully argued in favor of a rule of
reason approach on the basis of the non-economic benefits of enhancing the educational experi-
ence. Brown University, 5 F.3d at 677-78.
129 75 U.S.  574 (1986).
1305 09 U.S.  209 (1992).2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO WITH  BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 127
failed to prevent judgment as a matter of law  because the Court relied on
theoretical arguments that the alleged conspiracies could not survive and harm
consumers if the conspirators acted rationally. Accepting  the possibility that
defendants in either case were not profit maximizers-perhaps motivated by a
desire  for market  dominance  or national  glory-could  lead  to  a  different
result.131
Likewise, dismissal  was appropriate in Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twomblyl32
because economic theory predicted that under the particular circumstances of
the industry, profit-maximizing firms could be expected unilaterally to engage
in parallel  or interdependent  conduct, which is not illegal. 3  Allegations of
parallel or interdependent  conduct  thus did not plausibly demonstrate a con-
spiracy.134  But if empirical study were to demonstrate that the observed paral-
lel-conduct equilibrium could not be reached without conspiracy, because, for
example, firms favored competitive success as defined by market share above
profits,  allegations  of parallel conduct  would  plausibly  support a claim  of
conspiracy.'35
B.  BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION
It is axiomatic that the goal of modem antitrust is to maximize  consumer
welfare. That seems an impossible task if we do not understand the consumer.
Behavioral economics promises to help fill that knowledge gap.'36
Notably,  scholars  who have  explored Behavioral  Antitrust have  concen-
trated almost exclusively on the behavior of firms, arguing that collections of
individuals will be affected by the biases that affect those individuals (even if
the impact of those biases is muted or more difficult to comprehend).'37 Their
work has been subject to challenge in part because of the difficulty of demon-
31S ee Leslie, supra note 93, at 293-95 (noting goals other than profit maximization facing
some business firms); id. at 319-24 (discussing courts' refusal or inability to accept direct evi-
dence that contravenes theory); Avishalom Tor, Illustrating a Behaviorally Informed Approach
to Antitrust Law: The Case of PredatoryP  ricing,A NTITRUST, Fall 2003, at 52, 55-56 (discussing
"risk-seeking predatory behavior").
132 550 U.S.  544 (2007).
133 Id. at 553-54.
134 Id.; see Max Huffman, The Necessity of PleadingE lements in Private Antitrust Conspiracy
Claims, 10 U. PA. J. Bus. & EMP. L. 627, 652 (2008) (neutral facts not sufficient to survive a
motion to dismiss on the question of conspiracy).
135C f Stucke, BehavioralE conomists at the Gate, supra note 65, at 532-36 (arguing that firms
may not be profit maximizers).
136 Cf Roundtable Interview, supra note  108, at 7-8  (noting the value of "attent[ion]  to the
evidence regarding consumer behavior").
137 See supra notes 82-88 and accompanying text (citing work by Stucke, Tor, Rinner, Leslie,
Armstrong, and Huck).128 ANTITRUST LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
strating the aggregate  effect of cognitive biases across the conduct of entire
firms.138
I concentrate instead on the effect of consumers'  inability to maximize their
utility.  Former  Deputy  Assistant  Attorney General  Carl  Shapiro,  a leading
commentator and enforcer who had expressed skepticism of the contributions
of Behavioral Antitrust, nonetheless recognized the value of Behavioral Anti-
trust for better understanding consumer behavior. Shapiro noted:
Any time we are trying to understand and predict consumer responses we
need to be attentive to the evidence regarding consumer behavior. That may
well involve various behavioral issues.
For example, consumers react to surcharges and discounts differently, and
in some cases that can be part of the analysis. We also have to look at things
like advertising competition, which relates to consumer behavior. We often
have issues of reputation or branding that relate to consumers and their re-
sponse to those images and those brands. So we are regularly dealing with
consumer  responses  to a firm's  strategies,  which  get  us into  behavioral
economics.39
And academic critics of Behavioral Antitrust appear to accept the relevance of
the  behavioralist  critique  with  regard  to  consumer  (as  opposed  to  firm)
behavior.140
1. Exploiting Decisionmaking Biases
Behavioral exploitation  is  intentionally  exploiting known  biases  in  deci-
sionmaking by consumers.141  Merchant sellers employing sophisticated mar-
keting practices are known to engage in such conduct in the ordinary course
of their business.142  Courts and regulators  have  for decades  recognized  the
reality of behavioral exploitation in the commercial  marketplace.143 And aca-
138 See Wright & Stone, supra note 64, at 1524 ("[I]t does not follow that firms necessarily
behave with similar, or similarly predictable, consequences.").
139 Roundtable Interview, supra note 108,  at 7-8. Joseph  Farrell, Director of the Bureau of
Economics at the Federal Trade Commission, agrees Id. at 8. ("1 think that's right.").
140 Wright & Stone, supra note 64, at 1523,  1549.
141 Huffman, Bridging the Divide, supra note 19, at 22; cf Bar-Gill, Bundling and Consumer
Misperception, supra note 85, at 47 (referring to sellers'  "exploiting consumer misperception").
Behavioral exploitation can occur in the opposite direction as well, where a sophisticated pur-
chaser exploits decisionmaking biases held by the seller.
142 See generally ROBERT B. CIALDINI, INFLUENCE: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PERSUASION (revised
ed. 2007) [hereinafter PSYCHOLOGY].
143 See Charles of the Ritz Distribs. Corp. v. FTC, 143 F.2d 676 (2d Cir. 1944) (interpreting the
deception standard under FTC Act ยง 5,  15  U.S.C.  ยง 45,  broadly to  protect "the  ignorant, the
unthinking and the credulous"); Vokes v. Arthur Murray, Inc., 212 So. 2d 906, 907 (Fla. Dist. Ct.
App.  1968)  (finding  cause of action for common law misrepresentation  where dance  studio
"blandish[ed] and cajole[d]"  naive consumer, conduct that is closer to behavioral exploitation
than to the traditional view of deception). The FTC's 1983 policy statement on deception is not
to the contrary, although it may contravene the broadest reading of Charles of the Ritz. Accord-2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO WITH  BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 129
demic commentators  recognize  the ability of sophisticated sellers to profit at
the expense of less-sophisticated purchasers in zero-sum competitions for sur-
plus welfare.1"  Nor is it new that  commercial conduct targeting consumers,
rather than competitors, can be anticompetitive.145
Behavioral  economics describes decisionmaking  heuristics  that operate  to
interfere with individual consumers'  abilities to maximize their utility in bar-
gaining. The heuristics  are sometimes discussed interchangeably  with strate-
gies that can be employed to exploit them. One heuristic, discussed above, is
hyperbolic discounting; drip pricing is a technique for exploiting it.146 Another
relevant heuristic is "anchoring," which describes the tendency to see a partic-
ular value in relation to a possibly unrelated reference point.147 A savvy seller
can  "frame"  the  consumer's  decision  in  a  way  to  take  advantage  of the
ing to the FTC in 1983, "When representations or sales practices are targeted to a specific audi-
ence, the Commission  determines  the effect of the practice on a reasonable member of that
group. In evaluating a particular practice, the Commission considers the totality of the practice in
determining how reasonable consumers are likely to respond." Letter from James C. Miller III,
Chairman,  Fed. Trade Comm'n, to the Hon. John D. Dingell, Chairman, House Comm. on En-
ergy and Commerce (Oct. 14, 1983) (later labeled by the FTC as its "Policy Statement on Decep-
tion"), available at http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/policystmtlad-decept.htm.  The policy statement also
gives an example-"[d]epending on the circumstances, accurate information in the text may not
remedy a false headline because reasonable consumers may glance only at the headline"-that
closely tracks the Department of Transportation's charge against AirTran Airways for price ad-
vertising in violation of DOT regulations, which I use above as an example of drip pricing. See
discussion supra at note 74; see also Cavendish Elithorn, Remarks at the Fourth Antitrust Mara-
thon, 6 EUR. COMPETITION J. 1, 28-30 (2010) (appended to Huffman, Bridging the Divide, supra
note 19); UK OFFICE OF FAIR TRADING,  JOINING UP COMPETITION AND CONSUMER POLICY: THE
OFT's APPROACH TO BUILDING  AN INTEGRATED AGENCY  3.9 (OFT 1151)  (2009), available at
www.oft.gov.uk/shared-oft/speeches/2009/spe- 1209.pdf.
14 See, e.g., Oren Bar-Gill & Elizabeth Warren, Making Credit Safer, 157 U. PA. L. REV.  1, 69
(2008); Edward J. Janger & Susan Block-Lieb, Consumer Credit and Competition: The Puzzle of
Competitive Credit Markets, 6 EUR. COMPETITION J. 68, 70 (2010) (discussing lenders' abilities
to compete with opaque transaction terms that undermine consumers' abilities to protect their
interests); Russell Korobkin, Behavioral Economics, Contract Formation, and Contract Law, in
BEHAVIORAL LAW AND EcoNoMics,  supra note 63, at 137-38 (noting that the effect of decision-
making biases on contracting may be to undermine optimal resource allocation through private
transactions); cf LACKO, supra note 39 (analyzing information asymmetry  and the consequent
"lemons equilibrium" where low quality products predominate in a market). See generally Salin-
ger, supra note 72, at 76 (citing Steven Salop & Joseph Stiglitz, Bargains and Ripoffs: A Model
of Monopolistically Competitive Price Dispersion, 44 REV. ECON.  STUD.  493 (1977),  and ac-
knowledging the ability of merchants  to exploit uninformed purchasers  even in markets with
informed  purchasers,  with  specific  recognition  of pricing  practices  that exploit  bounds on
cognition).
145 See Desai & Waller, supra note 92; William S. Comanor & Thomas A. Wilson, The Effect
of Advertising on Competition: A Survey, 17 J. EcON.  LITERATURE 453 (1979).
146 See supra note 73 and accompanying  text.
147 See Geoffrey  C. Rapp, Gouging: Terrorist Attacks, Hurricanes, and the Legal and Eco-
nomic Aspects of Post-DisasterP rice Regulation, 94 Ky. L.J. 535, (2006) ("Anchoring describes
the process by which an individual attaches a particular value to an item because the value is
'available'  or 'strongly present in the mind.'").130 ANTITRUST LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
anchoring heuristic.148  A common  example is that of televisions in  an elec-
tronics store. Although a consumer may not seriously consider purchasing the
$5000 model, its very presence increases the consumer's reservation price.149
A third is the "ownership bias" or "endowment effect,"  whereby  "an indi-
vidual's  valuation  of an entitlement  depends  on whether  the  individual  is
given initial  ownership of that entitlement."s0  The classic demonstration  of
the  endowment  effect  is  the  coffee  mug  experiment  reported  by  Daniel
Kahneman, Jack Knetsch,  and Richard Thaler in  1991; students "endowed"
with coffee mugs  consistently value them more highly  than do students  en-
dowed with money, when the two groups are told to  bargain for voluntary
exchanges."'  Tendencies  toward over-optimism  have  also been empirically
demonstrated.152 The optimism bias likely underlies consumer credit decisions
such as agreeing to short-term teaser rates that lead to increased payments in
the future, on the basis of probabilistically unwarranted optimism with regard
to the likelihood of the consumer carrying a balance after the rate increases.15
2.  Behavioral Exploitation and Antitrust
The antitrust implications of firms' well-known practices of exploiting pur-
chasers'  cognitive biases  have  not been  analyzed sufficiently.  The antitrust
theory of behavioral  exploitation  explores the competitive consequences  of
the  realities  of the relationship between  merchants-sophisticated  sellers-
'4  See generally ARIELY,  supra note 66, at 1-8 (giving examples). Many treat the "framing
effect" as a separate heuristic. See, e.g., Christine Jolls & Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing Through
Law, 35 J. LEGAL STUD.  199, 206 (2006).
149S ee, e.g., Sherry F. Colb, Prison, Death, and Anchoring, 847 PLI/Lit 235, 237-38 (2010).
Robert Cialdini describes this as the "retail store sales practice of 'talking the top of the line,'"
and gives a real-world example of an experiment run in a retail store by pool table manufacturer
Brunswick Corporation:  during one week customers were first introduced to the low end of the
line, and during the second week they were first introduced  to the top end of the line.  The
average sale in the first week was $550 and the average sale in the second week exceeded $1000.
See CIALDINI,  PSYCHOLOGY, supra note 142, at 47 (quoting sources).
1s0J olls & Sunstein, supra note  148, at 205.
''  See Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch & Richard H. Thaler, Anomalies: The Endowment
Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias, 5 J. EcON. PERSP., Winter 1991, at 193. Although the
coffee mug experiment has been criticized as being overly stylized, subsequent experiments do a
better job of approximating real-world contracting situations. See Jon D. Hanson & Douglas A.
Kysar, Taking Behavioralism Seriously: The Problem of Market Manipulation, 74 N.Y.U.  L.
REv. 630, 673-74 (1999)  (canvassing the literature and giving examples).
152S ee Bar-Gill, Seduction, supra note 76, at 1395-401.
'53 See id.; Oren Bar-Gill, The Law, Economics, and Psychology of Subprime Mortgage Con-
tracts, 94 CORNELL L. REV. 1073,  1120-21  (2009) [hereinafter Subprime Mortgage Contracts].
As with many cognitive biases that have been empirically proved in recent decades, the phenom-
enon of excessive  optimism has been understood for centuries. See Armstrong & Huck, supra
note 69, at 26 & n.91  (citing Nava Ashraf et al., Adam Smith, Behavioral Economist, J. ECON.
PERSP., Summer 2005, at 131)  (discussing Adam Smith).2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 131
and consumers, who  are relatively  nafve.154 Where a merchant's intentional
behavioral exploitation crosses the line  separating mere persuasion (advertis-
ing) from compulsion  (behavioral  exploitation), the  exploitation  is conduct
that, when  combined  with other elements  of an antitrust claim, may  bring
about antitrust harm.'55
Consumer  marketplaces  are  comprised  of myriad  individual transactions
between consumers and merchants, each contributing to the aggregate of eco-
nomic activity. In individual transactions parties engage in zero-sum bargain-
ing  over  surplus  welfare.156  The  outcome  of  the  transaction  impacts  the
parties, who are bound to the transaction terms reached.'51 It also impacts the
parties'  immediate competitors, who are excluded from the particular transac-
tion once it concludes.'15  Only when an individual transaction is large enough
will it impact the market more broadly, producing what is called an effect on
competition.'59 An effect on competition also will occur when a sufficiently
large set of de minimis transactions are in the aggregate  substantial relative to
the size of the market.
The dominant characteristic  of transactions in markets in which individual
end-user purchasers  deal directly with merchants in consumer goods transac-
tions is the disparity in sophistication between the parties to the transaction.
"Merchants"  are by common definition repeat players who are educated in the
products and services they sell and in the legal rules and market norms gov-
154 It might be possible to articulate a variation on Wright and Stone's "irrelevance theorem" in
response to the theory of behavioral exploitation, if, for example, both firms and consumers were
cognitively biased and those biases interacted either unpredictably or in a nullifying manner. See
supra note 106 and accompanying  text. I argue that the relative lack of sophistication renders
consumers more susceptible to cognitive biases than firms. See generally Armstrong & Huck,
supra note 69, at 4-5 (articulating "a number of reasons why one might expect firms to be better
decision makers than consumers").
155 Both of the primary antitrust standards-concerted  conduct and dominant firm conduct-
require proof of conduct in combination with other elements, depending on whether the claim is
brought under Section 1 or 2 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C.  ยงยง  1-2. See Anderson & Huffman,
supra note 10, at 29-51.
156S urplus welfare  is the amount the purchaser is willing to spend in excess of the cost of
production for the seller. KEITH N. HYLTON,  ANTIRUST LAW: ECONOMic THEORY AND COMMON
LAW EVOLUTION 3 (2003). The bargaining in an individual transaction is zero-sum because it is
static in nature and does not have the capacity to shift the supply or demand curves in a way that
increases aggregate welfare.
157T he binding occurs both contractually and extra-contractually through  transaction costs.
158T his sort of exclusion is in itself not  an antitrust harm. See Barry  Wright Corp. v. ITT
Grinnell Corp., 724 F.2d 227, 236 (1st Cir. 1983) (finding that "virtually every contract to buy
'forecloses'  or 'excludes'  alternative sellers from some portion of the market"). But antitrust law
is implicated if the exclusion is on the basis of something other than the merits of the prevailing
merchant's offerings.
159 This might occur if the transaction is a long term supply contract, see, for example, Nic-
Sand, Inc. v. 3M Co., 507 F.3d 442, 452-53 (6th Cir. 2007) (evaluating allegations by plaintiff
that defendant monopolized the market by entering into long-term contracts with retailers), or a
particularly large government bid.132 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
erning the transaction.160 "Consumers,"  although the term is not by dictionary
definition so limited, normally connotes relatively  naYve individual end user
consumers.16'
The disparity in sophistication  offers two clear avenues through  which a
merchant can take advantage of, and harm, the purchaser. The first is simple
deception, where through material false statements (or sometimes omissions)
the merchant deliberately  misleads the purchaser.162  It has long been under-
stood that the profit-maximizing  approach for a merchant is to engage in some
optimal level of deceptive  conduct.163 What that optimal level is depends on
(1) whether the deception can be discovered after the fact, preventing repeat
business (and perhaps even leading to law enforcement'6),  and (2)  whether
the merchant hopes for repeat business from the purchaser in the first place.
The first of those conditions, which is a function of information asymmetry, is
met in the context of the typical merchant-consumer transaction. Sophisticated
merchants can often hide their deception from less sophisticated purchasers.165
The second condition is met where the merchant enjoys monopoly power as
well  as-counter-intuitively-where  the merchant participates  in  a market-
place characterized by perfect competition. As Michael Darby and Edi Karni
noted, players  in perfectly competitive markets anticipate  zero present value
of future profits from any one customer due to market characteristics  such as
an infinity of sellers and buyers and costless switching.166
Behavioral exploitation presents concerns similar to deception. The theoret-
ical argument for there being an optimal amount of deception applies equally
to behavioral exploitation: so long as it is difficult to discover after the fact,
limiting concerns  for loss  of business  or law enforcement,  or the merchant
does not rely on the purchaser's repeat business, behavioral exploitation is a
160Se e U.C.C.  ยง 2-104(1) (2007) (definition of "merchant").
161 Huffman, Bridging the Divide, supra note 19, at 9. But see infra notes 205-207 and accom-
panying text (describing behavioral exploitation against purchasers of durable office supplies).
162 See Int'l Harvester Co.,  104 F.T.C. 949 (1984)  (finding that deception requires material
misrepresentation, practice, or omission); MICHAEL M. GREENFIELD, CONSUMER TRANSACTIONS
6-7 (5th ed. 2009).
163 POSNER, REGULATION, supra note 39; Darby & Karni, supra note 39, at 86-87 (summariz-
ing their assumptions and conclusions); LACKO, supra note 39, at 1 (noting "[tlhe inability of
consumers to observe quality prior to purchase creates incentives for sellers to attempt to earn
profits through misrepresentation and cheating on quality" and that "[slellers also face incentives
pushing them in the opposite direction" in the presence of asymmetric information).
164 See 15 U.S.C. ยง 45 (FTC Act ยง 5) (outlawing "deceptive acts or practices"); see, e.g., ARK.
CODE ANN.  ยง 4-88-107  (West 2011)  (covering  "[d]eceptive  and  unconscionable  trade  prac-
tices"); Jones v. West Side Buick, 93 S.W.2d  1083 (Mo. Ct. App. 1936) (common-law fraud).
165 Darby  & Karni, supra note 39,  at 69 (giving the example of auto mechanic  services);
LACKO,  supra note  39,  at  1 (finding  that  asymmetric  information  produces  incentives  to
mislead).
166 Darby & Karni, supra note 39, at 75. See generally W. Kip VISCUSI ET AL., ECONOMICS  OF
REGULATION AND ANTITRUST  3 (4th ed. 2005) (defining perfect competition).2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 133
rational business strategy. The first criterion's satisfaction is almost tautologi-
cal  in the case of behavioral  exploitation,  which is by definition  subtle (or
hidden).  Concerns for legal  sanction  are  less  substantial for behavioral  ex-
ploitation than they are for deception.  The regulation of behavioral exploita-
tion  that  does  exist  is  much  more  marginal,  and  targeted,  than  that  of
deception,167  though  examples  do exist  of successful  challenges  to conduct
that meets the definition I rely on here.168 The second criterion frequently will
be met, for example, in the circumstance of durable goods transactions, where
the incidence  of repeat business is low  relative to the size of any individual
transaction.
The potential competitive  concerns underlying  behavioral exploitation  are
threefold. First, efficient resource allocation is disturbed as consumers are in-
duced to enter transactions they would eschew but for the conduct. Resources
flow to consumers'  ostensible, rather than actual, preferences. Aggregate wel-
fare is thereby diminished.169 It is important to distinguish this effect from the
demand-curve  shifting  that  underlies  dynamic  competition.  Behavioral  ex-
ploitation is not a question of introducing and marketing new products, chang-
ing  consumers'  utility  functions  permanently  (or until  the next  innovation
comes along). Behavioral exploitation is a question of a short-term shift in the
demand curve, altering consumers'  views of their own utility functions long
enough  to induce  a hard (contractual) commitment to the transaction.
Second,  behavioral  exploitation  might facilitate  a merchant's  gaining  or
preserving a competitive advantage over a rival, raising concerns for monopo-
lization under Section 2 of the Sherman Act or unilateral  effects in a merger
reviewed under Clayton Act Section 7. 70 A possible example of a firm's reli-
ance on behavioral exploitation in seeking market dominance comes from the
market for home mortgage lending in the years leading to the financial crisis.
According to the Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, Countrywide Financial, Inc.
achieved a leading position in its market through a course of marketing sub-
167S ee, e.g.,  16 C.F.R. pt. 429 (2011)  (door-to-door sales rule imposing a cooling-off period
and requiring  notice of a three-day right of rescission);  14 C.F.R. pt. 399 (airfare advertising
regulation); see also discussion supra at note 74 (discussing the DOT consent order with AirTran
Airways).
168 See examples supra at notes 74 (AirTran Airways fine), 143, and accompanying text (citing
common-law decisions).
16 Cf Bar-Gill, Competition and Consumer Protection, supra note 72, at 4 (noting that "per-
ceived benefits" of a transaction may deviate from "actual benefits"); Bar-Gill, Subprime Mort-
gage Contracts, supra note  153,  at  1130  (noting  "welfare  cost  in  the  form  of allocation
inefficiency: borrowers are not matched with the most efficient lender.").
170 15 U.S.C. ยงยง 2, 18; see also 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines, supra note 114, ยง 6 (uni-
lateral effects).134 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
prime home loans to consumers who failed to appreciate the long-term conse-
quences of their borrowing decisions."'
Third, it is possible to articulate theories  of harm based on concerted  ex-
ploitation by more than one firm. Concerted conduct may occur pursuant to an
agreement in  violation of Section  1 of the  Sherman  Act,72  or through  the
process  of conscious  parallelism.  A  likely example  of consciously  parallel
behavioral  exploitation  is  the  nearly  industry-wide  policy  of unbundling
charges for checked bags in airline travel."' Unbundled baggage fees permit a
consumer to make a purchase decision on the basis of a salient, low up-front
price. When the obligation to pay the fee becomes apparent, some coinbina-
tion  of lock-in  effect  in  the  form  of non-refundable  tickets  or  immutable
schedules  likely renders  the consumer unable  to avoid the baggage  charge.
Consciously parallel  conduct does not provide a basis for Section  1 liability
under the current state of the law,'74 but the potential for conscious parallelism
is relevant to merger review under Clayton Act Section 7,175  and there have
71 NATIONAL COMMISSION  ON THE CAUSES  OF THE FINANCIAL & ECONOMIC  CRISIS IN THE
UNITED STATES, THE FINANCIAL CRISIS INQUIRY  REPORT  105 (2011), available at http://www.
gpoaccess.gov/fcic/fcic.pdf.  Testimony in  1998  by then-FTC Bureau  Director Jodie Bernstein
before the U.S. Senate describes subprime transactions in terms that invoke strategies of exploit-
ing borrowers'  decisionmaking heuristics, including drip pricing and framing. See Home Equity
Lending Abuses in the Subprime Mortgage Industry, Prepared Statement of the Federal Trade
Commission, U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging (Mar. 16, 1998), available at http://www.
ftc.gov/os/1998/03/grass5.htm.
172 15 U.S.C. ยง 1.
173 See, e.g.,  Baggage Allowance, AMERICAN  AIRLINES,  http://www.aa.com/il8n/travellnfor-
mation/baggage/baggageAllowance.jsp?anchorEvent=false&from=Nav;  Checked Baggage,
DELTA  AIR  LINES,  http://www.delta.com/travelingcheckin/baggage/checked/index.jsp;  Bag-
gage, UNITED  AIR LINES,  http://www.united.com/page/middlepage/0,6823,1031,00.html;
Checked Baggage, ALASKA AIR GROUP, http://www.alaskaair.com/content/travel-info/policies/
baggage-checked.aspx; Optional Service Fees & Government Taxes, U.S. AIRWAYS, http://www.
usairways.com/en-US/traveltools/specialneeds/ticketingpolicies/taxesfees.html?c=hp  txt_01120.
Southwest Airlines is a notable exception, and Frontier Airlines' baggage fees are less than its
larger competitors. See Baggage Allowance, SOUTHWEST  AIRLINES, http://www.southwest.com/
html/customer-servicelbaggage/checked-bags-pol.html;  Optional Service Fees, FRONTIER  AIR-
LINES, http://www.frontierairlines.com/optional-service-fees.
As of January 2012 the Department of Transportation prohibits the related practice of disclos-
ing taxes and fees separately from the base ticket price. See 14 C.F.R. ยง 399.84(a) (2011). Com-
ments made by the Air Transport Association (a trade group representing airlines) in response to
the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking demonstrate the perceived competitive benefit from advertis-
ing fares independently of taxes and fees, complaining that an airline may "be disadvantaged if it
is required to include those taxes and fees in the advertised price." See Enhancing Airline Pas-
senger Protections, 76 Fed. Reg. 23,110, 23,142 (Apr. 25, 2011) (to be codified at 14 C.F.R. pts.
244, 250, 253, 259, 399).
174 See Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544 (2007) (holding that tacit collusion is not
illegal).
175 See 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines, supra note 114, ยง 7, at 24 ("Coordinated interac-
tion  alternatively  can  involve  parallel  accommodating  conduct  not  pursuant  to  a  prior
understanding.").2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 135
been  calls  for  FTC  Act  Section  5  enforcement  against  conscious
parallelism. 176
C.  BEHAVIORAL  EXPLOITATION  EXPLAINS  MISUNDERSTOOD  AUTHORITIES
Antitrust does not lack for its share of poorly understood authorities. Cases
including  Kodak and Whole Foods demonstrate  courts'  appreciation  of the
realities  of contracting  and purchasing behavior  and the relevance  of those
realities for antitrust rules of decision.  Some holdings  find scant support in
rational  choice economic  theory but are easy  to understand using behavioral
insights.
The story of Eastman Kodak Corp. v. Image Technical Services, Inc. is well
known to students of antitrust law."' Kodak sold durable goods in the form of
expensive copiers for business and government use. Once purchased, custom-
ers lived with them for many years."'  Repair and replacement  of defective
parts was the dominant strategy for anybody who already owned the machine,
creating a lock-in effect after purchases were consummated.
The reality of such lock-in effects  is common  in modem  consumer con-
tracting. Sometimes, as in Kodak, the product itself may be so expensive vis-
A-vis any post-purchase maintenance or updating costs that purchasers are cer-
tain to bear those after-the-fact costs rather than to replace the product, unless
some private remedy (warranty)  or public law (e.g.,  lemon laws) undoes the
lock-in effect. Automobiles and major home appliances may offer one or both
of those protections.' 9  Second, the product itself, whether  or not expensive,
may realistically be available only with a long-term service commitment. That
has been the case with some consumer electronics like cellular telephones.'80
176S ee, e.g.,  Reza Dibadj, Conscious Parallelism Revisited, 47 SAN DIEGo L. REV. 589, 606
(2010) (arguing that FTC Act Section 5 enforcement against conscious parallelism may be possi-
ble). Notably, Donald Turner proposed a similar approach to conscious parallelism in 1962. See
Donald F. Turner, The Definition ofAgreement Under the Sherman Act: Conscious Parallelism
and Refusals to Deal, 75 HARV.  L. REV.  655, 682 (1962)  (arguing that FTC Act Section 5
enforcement  is possible against tacit collusion). Federal courts have not been receptive to this
interpretation of Section 5. See E.I du Pont de Nemours & Co. v. FTC, 729 F.2d 128 (2d Cir.
1984); Boise Cascade Corp. v. FTC, 637 F.2d 573 (9th Cir. 1980).
77 504 U.S.  451 (1992).
'78 Id. at 456-57.
17 See, e.g.,  CAL. CIV. CODE ยงยง  1790-1795.8 (West 2012) (California's lemon law).
80F or example, although Apple's popular iPhone is available for sale "unlocked and contract
free" through Apple, see Select an iPhone, APPLE, http://store.apple.com/us/browse/home/shop-
iphone/family/iphone/iphone4s,  the phone is discounted by $450 if purchased with a two-year
service contract from a carrier, such as AT&T Wireless, Verizon, or Sprint. See id. Earlier ver-
sions of the iPhone were only available with two-year contracts from AT&T. See In re Apple and
AT&TM Antitrust Litig., No. C 07-05132, 2011 WL 6018401,  at *1 (N.D.  Cal. Dec. 1, 2011)
(noting agreement over the reality of a required two-year service contract for the iPhone).136 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
The precise issue presented by Kodak related to claims for unlawful tying
under Sections  1 and 2 of the Sherman Act. Kodak was alleged to have tied
the  service of copier repair, a competitive marketplace,  to the provision  of
parts for Kodak copiers, a market protected by Kodak's intellectual property.
For the tying claim to succeed, the plaintiff needed to prove market power in
the tying (parts) market. That in turn depended on the lock-in effect created by
the  sale  of the  copy  machines."'  The  interesting  question  in  Kodak was
whether lock-in effects created market power for Kodak.
For those customers who already have made irrevocable purchase decisions
(or, if the lock-in effect derives from a contractual  commitment like a two-
year service plan for cellular telephone or cable service, have sealed the con-
tract), the demand for parts and services is inelastic.'82 The Kodak Court ap-
preciated that fact when holding that Kodak could have market power in the
parts market, which it controlled through its intellectual  property.83
For the customers who have not yet committed to a purchase decision or
long-term contract, the demand is elastic. In Kodak, it was acknowledged that
the market for copiers was highly competitive. Competitors  in the market for
these  durable  office  products  included  IBM  and  Xerox,  among  several
others.184 Analogous consumer goods marketplaces, such  as automobiles and
cellular telephones, are also highly competitive. The issue for finding market
power on the basis of lock-in effects is whether the elastic demand of uncom-
mitted purchasers constrains the sellers' pricing to the committed purchasers.
The answer is that it does if two conditions hold: (1) the pricing to commit-
ted purchasers is sufficiently transparent (defined by the cost of obtaining the
necessary information, including the cost of becoming aware of what informa-
tion is necessary) to become part of the purchasing decisions by the uncom-
181K odak, 504 U.S.  at 461-62.
182T he committed/uncommitted  purchaser distinction can be analogized to the inframarginall
marginal purchaser distinction. See FTC v. Whole Foods Mkt., Inc., 548 F.3d 1028,  1039-41
(D.C. Cir. 2008) (distinguishing between  "core" and "marginal"  purchasers); HYLTON,  supra
note 156, at 3. Marginal purchasers  have highly price-elastic demand, which is represented by
their residing close to the equilibrium point on the supply-demand curve. Uncommitted purchas-
ers also are easily lost to competitors. By contrast, the inframarginal purchaser-the committed
purchaser in the Kodak story-has highly inelastic demand.
183K odak, 504 U.S. at 476. Kodak came to the Supreme Court on a challenge to summary
judgment for defendant on the question of market power. The Court affirmed the Ninth Circuit's
reversal of summary judgment. At trial on remand  the jury found monopoly power, and that
finding was upheld on appeal to the Ninth Circuit, partly on the basis of Kodak's waiver of its
objection to a jury instruction. Image Technical Servs., Inc. v. Kodak Co.,  125 F.3d 1195, 1206
(9th Cir. 1997).
84 Image Technical Servs., Inc. v. Eastman  Kodak Co.,  1989-1 Trade Cas. (CCH) 1 68,402
(N.D. Cal. 1988) ("Plaintiffs do not contend Kodak possesses monopoly power in the new equip-
ment market in which it competes with Xerox, IBM, Bell and Howell, 3M, and various Japanese
manufacturers and holds no significant share.").2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO WITH  BEHAVIORAL ANTITRUST 137
mitted,  and  (2)  the  uncommitted  purchasers  are  capable  under  the
circumstances of using the available information in reaching their decisions.
The Kodak dissent believed, correctly, that informed purchasers able to maxi-
mize their expected utility would constrain Kodak's exercise of market power
post-purchase.85 The market povier question is whether that constraint is suf-
ficient  to  prevent  the  seller's acting  as  a monopolist  with  regard  to unin-
formed, or locked-in, purchasers.
1. The Informationist Justification
The Kodak Court found market power in the parts aftermarket (supporting
the parts-services tying claim) on the failure of the first condition. The Court
recognized  the reality of information  asymmetries-Kodak knew  more than
its customers-in the equipment marketplace. Kodak was well positioned to
know  the expected repair and replacement costs for each copier it sold, but
had no incentive  to disclose that information to its customers. Its customers
(presumably  with  the exception  of the largest  and most sophisticated,  who
could compile their own data on copier performance) did not have that knowl-
edge, and lacked a low-cost method of acquiring it.1'  The information asym-
metries permitted Kodak to succeed in the highly price-elastic portion of the
market in which it contracted with uncommitted purchasers.
The  same applies to the consumer marketplaces that are analogous to the
one in Kodak. Information on the costs incurred in the aftermarkets can  be
difficult to acquire. Regular product innovation may defeat attempts by publi-
cations  like Consumer Reports to compile reliable data on the cost  to own
durable goods. For some products like cellular telephones, the costs associated
with service include, in addition to the monthly charge, the inconveniences of
service disruptions or equipment malfunction. The information on those costs
that is  available  to purchasers  tends to  be anecdotal,  and  service providers
lack incentive to disclose the data that they possess.'17 A significant part of the
consumer cost in  service markets  is the efficiency of the seller response  to
purchaser needs. Sellers can hide those costs from purchasers through a vari-
ant on price discrimination-responding  differently to uncommitted purchas-
18S5e e Kodak, 504 U.S. at 490-91 (Scalia, J., dissenting). This would be true in the absence of
fraud (dissemination of material misinformation) by Kodak.
186I t is questionable whether committed purchasers have incentives to disclose this information
to uncommitted purchasers or third-party aggregators. Certainly a committed purchaser has an
incentive to see that its competitors bear at least the same costs that it bears.
'5  Cf Bar-Gill, Bundling and Consumer Misperception, supra note 85, at 33 n.1  ("The con-
cem that sellers will often lack the incentive to educate consumers is reinforced by the public-
good nature of such educational efforts. If a seller succeeds in correcting consumers' mispercep-
tions, competitors will be quick to adapt their products to the changed demand. And the seller,
who brought about this desirable change in demand, will not be able to recoup her investment in
educating consumers.").138 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
ers than to committed purchasers,18  which would explain shorter hold times if
a caller selected the "start new service" option when calling a cellular service
provider.'89 For these reasons, an informationist defense of Kodak would ar-
gue that uncommitted purchasers are often uninformed about the real state of
the relationship post-commitment,  and thus' they are unable to constrain the
aftermarket pricing or conduct of the seller employing a lock-in  strategy.'"
A critic might respond that purchasers save on up-front information costs,
and the market power created by the lock-in is only as great as the benefit to
the purchaser of avoiding those costs. At least in the absence  of consciously
parallel conduct, where competitors find it profitable to imitate the strategy of
exploiting  the  information  asymmetry,  competitors  in  competitive  market-
places could be expected to provide the missing information. Also, any sub-
stantial disparity between the expectation  of the uncommitted  purchaser and
the actual costs will present an arbitrage opportunity to third-party aggregators
of information.191  That is especially so with the increasing access to informa-
tion through third-party aggregators, including online search engines and on-
line consumer product reviews. For example, long before the Department of
Transportation  required  airlines  to  include fees  and  taxes in  fare advertise-
ments, comparison shopping websites offered that service.192
The profit opportunities  for third-party sellers  of information  may  them-
selves  represent  an inefficient  allocation  of resources  that  antitrust  policy
should condemn.193 Further, the above critique may overstate the strength of
the competitive response. In oligopoly markets firms may find it profitable to
18 Cf A.  Michael Spence, Monopoly, Quality, and Regulation, 6 BELL J.  EcoN. 417, 419
(1975) (arguing that the ability to price discriminate is necessary to provide lesser quality to the
average consumer while retaining marginal consumer).
189I n an article on which the Court relied in Kodak, Richard Craswell showed that information
asymmetries  can serve as a substitute to market power. See Richard Craswell, Tying Require-
ments in Competitive Markets: The Consumer Protection Issues, 62 B.U.  L. REv. 661,  671
(1982).  Craswell also noted the efficiency loss resulting from this exercise of power. Id. at 672.
190Se e id. at 672-73 ("In principle, all of these [aftermarket] costs can be reduced to a single
expected present value, but the calculation often will be a difficult one.").
19'S ee Howard Beales, Richard Craswell & Steven C. Salop, The Efficient Regulation of Con-
sumer Information, 24 J.L. & EcoN. 491, 501-02 (1981)  (discussing the market for information).
192S ee, e.g.,  ORarrz (Feb. 29, 2012), http://www.orbitz.com  (demonstrating that airfare and
rental car fares are quoted as including taxes and fees).
93T he.information costs, including the expenses associated with information aggregators, rep-
resent an allocative inefficiency caused by the business model of relying on supracompetitive
profits in an  aftermarket to subsidize normal  profits in the upfront marketplace. An antitrust
policy concerned with economic efficiency should not applaud this result. Also, if the seller has
the best and cheapest information (as is likely) and does not find it competitively advantageous
to disseminate that information to buyers, leaving on the table the profit opportunities from such
dissemination, we can assume the information disseminated by third parties does not cure the
information asymmetry sufficiently to erode profits available to the seller from exploiting the
asymmetry.2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 139
act in parallel in taking advantage of information asymmetries.194 Not all mar-
kets are as readily susceptible to comparison shopping as are markets for air-
line  travel, and not all information  asymmetries are as easily eliminated by
third-party disclosure as are hidden taxes and fees.'"9  The critique also ignores
the second criterion for the seller's acquiring market power in the aftermarket
by employing a lock-in strategy: the purchasers'  inability-under the circum-
stances-to  use  available  information  in  reaching  decisions  that  maximize
their expected utility.
2.  The Behavioralist Justification
According  to Bar-Gill, writing about credit card teaser rates:
Even if consumers anticipate  lock-in,  they still underestimate  the  cost of
lock-in, since they do not expect to borrow (or to borrow as much) in the
future. Hyperbolic discounting reinforces this revised version of the switch-
ing cost argument. Naive hyperbolic discounters may wrongly anticipate that
they would switch to a new card, but in fact will not switch when the intro-
ductory period ends.'96
This is a behavioralist response. It presents an alternative justification for the
result in Kodak that is complementary  to, and perhaps more robust than, the
informationist justification.
Empirical study directed to understanding individuals'  deviations from util-
ity-maximizing  behavior has uncovered a number of decisionmaking heuris-
tics that are relevant to the realities of consumers'  decisions in markets with
lock-in  effects  and  aftermarket  costs.  The  phenomenon  of hyperbolic  dis-
counting, whereby medium- and long-run consequences of a decision are con-
sidered too  uncertain  to  be  included  in  the  up-front decision,  is the  most
readily applicable. Hyperbolic  discounting can be blamed for myriad ill-ad-
vised purchase decisions;  for example, the phenomenon  is well discussed in
the literature  on failures  in the mortgage  lending markets.'97  The consumer
'  In markets susceptible to oligopoly conduct, competitors will find it profitable to imitate the
strategy of exploiting the information asymmetry. Cf POSNER, REGULATION,  supra note 39, at 7
(recognizing  that competitors  who benefit from the information  asymmetry lack incentives  to
expose it, citing the example of cigarette markets). An example of this reality is a local market
for rental cars, in which every company hides the charges imposed to cover costs of taxes behind
low nominal rental rates (even when those post-commitment charges were large in relation to the
nominal rental rate). Before third-party websites like Orbitz bundled the costs into the up-front
advertised price, purchasers could form either a hard or a soft commitment to the purchase before
being made aware of the full costs.
9-C ontinuing with the airfare example, Orbitz or a competitor airline would find it difficult to
bundle into a single salient number matters such as airlines' safety record; seat sizes; quality of
cabin service; baggage fees; and ticket-change fees, among other relevant facets of competition.
19B6a r-Gill, Seduction, supra note 76, at 1407.
19 See, e.g., Bar-Gill & Warren, supra note 144, at 136. I note above that this might be seen to
present antitrust problems. See supra note 171 and accompanying  text.140 ANTITRUST  LAW  JOURNAL [Vol. 78
purchaser  of an automobile  may conduct her or his cost-benefit  analysis in
terms of the immediate purchase decision  and not  in terms of the expected
costs, and expected benefits, five years later.'98 Purchasers of goods on credit
compare  immediate  up-front gratification against highly  discounted  costs of
long-term  repayment.'99 This effect is readily exploited by savvy sellers who
advertise costs in terms of monthly payments rather than total purchase price.
The anchoring heuristic also has been well discussed in the behavioral eco-
nomics literature.200 Dan  Ariely employed the more  accessible term "relativ-
ity."201 BY articulating costs in relation to a much larger cost, the smaller costs
become overwhelmed  by the larger. Sales of optional equipment or services
on automobiles may succeed due to a seller's framing the decision strategi-
cally; the $1000 cold-weather package or $3000 extended warranty is small in
relation to the $25,000 cost of the automobile. Even at $25 or more, checked-
bag charges at airport ticket counters are small in relation to the ticket price,
and the same goes for insurance charges and the GPS option at the rental car
counter.  Other exploitable decisionmaking  heuristics  include  the ownership
bias202 and the optimism bias.203 Having made a soft or hard commitment to a
purchase,  the value  of the  item increases  in  the mind  of the purchaser.  A
purchaser who is later told there is an additional, undisclosed  charge will be
more  inclined to  pay that charge than one  who learns of the charge  before
becoming  committed  to  the  purchase.204  And  an  over-optimistic  consumer
might be blind to downstream costs that are  statistically likely to occur.
Applying this to Kodak, a purchaser of equipment in the competitive fore-
market reaches a purchase decision on the basis of a competitive advertised
price.205 That purchaser is initially unaware of aftermarket costs. Even if he or
she is made aware of those costs prior to purchase, decisionmaking heuristics
can minimize the impact of that knowledge  on the purchase decision. Those
heuristics include hyperbolic  discounting of aftermarket costs, anchoring ef-
198C f Jason J. Kilbom, Behavioral Economics, Overindebtedness & Comparative Consumer
Bankruptcy: Searching for Causes and Evaluating Solutions, 22 EMORY BANKR. DEV. J. 13, 22
(2005) (discussing hyperbolic discounting in consumer credit transactions). The long-term cost-
benefit analysis of an automobile purchase is not limited to the obligation to make payments on a
loan, but also includes, for example, value depreciation, insurance expenses, and opportunity
costs
'  See id. at 22.
200 See supra notes  147-149 and accompanying  text.
201A RIELY, supra note 66, at 1.
202 See supra notes 150-151 and accompanying  text.
203S ee supra notes  152-153 and accompanying  text.
204C  ialdini reports of practices including permitting consumers to drive cars before "discover-
ing an error" in the quoted price. The psychologically committed consumer tends to accept the
upwardly revised price. CIALDINI, PSYCHOLOGY, supra note 142, at 98-99.
205 Recall that the equipment market in Kodak was competitive. See supra note 184 and accom-
panying text.2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 141
fects with the impact of minimizing the aftermarket costs relative to the up-
front price, ownership bias coming into play after commitment (even before
actual  ownership),  raising  the  purchaser's  reservation  price,  and  optimism
bias undervaluing the likelihood of aftermarket costs.
Tellingly,  Kodak  argued to  the Court  that its  marketing strategy  was  to
make its profit in the parts and services aftermarket rather than in the equip-
ment fore-market.206 It was in essence selling the package-machines,  parts,
and  services-and  was  doing so  largely on credit.  And it had  deliberately
structured the transaction in a way that maximized the likelihood of purchas-
ers becoming  psychologically or actually locked in without full consideration
of the costs of the overall package. This harmed consumers directly; it had the
potential to harm competitors who did not engage in the same sort of conduct;
and it presented concerns for allocative efficiency that properly concerned the
Supreme Court.207
3.  Antitrust Harms
Hovenkamp recently criticized Kodak on the basis of his study of "Coasean
markets,"  which,  Hovenkamp  teaches,  are  the markets  in  which individual
buyers and sellers transact business.208 In the case of Kodak, the Coasean mar-
ket  is  the  relationship  between  the  locked-in  purchaser  and  the  seller.
Hovenkamp argues the monopoly power the seller has in a Coasean market,
like the relationship  between  Kodak and its locked-in  purchasers  (or a cell
phone customer and service provider) is irrelevant to the question whether the
seller has market power in a properly defined antitrust market. He sees Kodak
as reflecting  confusion  on the Court's part between  the Coasean market and
the antitrust market, sending "antitrust policy off in the wrong direction."209
Hovenkamp's critique of Kodak applies both to the informationist justifica-
tion  and to the behavioralist justification  that I articulate here.  Whether the
lock-in occurs because of an information asymmetry  or a marketing strategy
that exploits cognitive biases, the harm  is still transaction-level  harm rather
than market-wide harm. But Hovenkamp's critique is flawed. While one in-
stance of behavioral exploitation will harm only the one purchaser but have a
206 See Eastman Kodak Corp. v. Image Technical  Servs., Inc., 504 U.S.  451, 478 (1992).
207T he resource misallocation arises in the overspending on the package due to the actual or
psychological lock-in. But for the marketing practices, competition should have reduced Kodak's
profits on the package to the competitive level. See supra notes 186-190 and accompanying text.
208S ee Hovenkamp, Transaction Cost Economics, supra note 26, at 626. Because the parties
are forced to bargain with one another, every Coasean market represents a bilateral monopoly.
See id. at 627.  Hovenkamp's term is derived from Ronald Coase's description  of bargaining
between two parties over a legal entitlement, resulting in an efficient allocation of rights. See R.
H. Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, 3 J.L. & EcoN.  1 (1960).
209 See Hovenkamp, Transaction Cost Economics, supra note 26, at 628.142 ANTITRUST  LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 78
de minimis impact on competition  generally, a  marketing strategy  built on
behavioral exploitation threatens market-wide impacts across the aggregate of
individual  transactions.  The successful  exploiter  of decisionmaking  biases
will be able to gain or maintain market share over a large number of transac-
tions. Where conduct is deceptive,  a robust anti-fraud enforcement program at
the federal or state level (or both) can protect against market harm. Partly for
that reason Hovenkamp,  at least, does not see deception as an antitrust con-
cern.210 That same argument has limited application to behavioral exploitation.
Only a limited consumer protection backstop exists to prevent the inefficient
resource allocation behavioral exploitation causes.211
It is possible, of course, for Congress to pass new laws, courts to interpret
the laws  that do exist, or  the  Federal  Trade  Commission to  act  under its
broader Section 5 power (including its power to challenge both unfair meth-
ods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices), to address prac-
tices that exploit known decisionmaking biases, as the Commission did in its
narrow  rule, issued under its  "unfair acts"  authority,  targeting door-to-door
sales.212  But the line between  procompetitive  advertising  and marketing be-
havior and behavioral exploitation is narrow. As has long been recognized in
the case of predatory pricing, outlawing one risks inappropriately chilling the
other.213 It is also difficult in the individual case to distinguish harm caused by
behavioral  exploitation  from simple  buyer's remorse  occurring  without the
fault of the seller. For those reasons, adopting an enforcement scheme target-
ing behavioral exploitation  on a transaction-by-transaction  basis may be im-
210 See 3B PHILLIP E. AREEDA  & HERBERT  HoVENKAMP,  ANTITRUST  LAw  782d (3d ed.
2008).
211 Even where redundant prohibitions exist, the de minimis argument for deference to con-
sumer protection regulation is a curious one. Many antitrust harms are felt in isolated transac-
tions, and relevant economic impacts only exist if enough isolated transactions are aggregated.
For example, a direct purchaser complaining of price fixing complains only of the harm he or she
suffers, but is not required to rely on a fraud claim (which would be difficult to make in any
event, unless omitting to tell a consumer the fact of price fixing is a material omission).
212 See supra notes 81,  167, and accompanying text. The rule created a three-day cooling-off
period during which the purchaser could reconsider the sale.
213 See Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 594 (1986); cf JOHN
E. CALFEE, FEAR  OF PERSUASION:  A NEW  PERSPECTIVE ON ADVERTISING  AND  REGULATION
102-03 (1997)  (discussing why "[a]dvertising  [b]ans [aire [a]nti-[c]onsumer").
The chilling-effect concern might be mitigated if behavioral exploitation were to be outlawed
by FTC rule or Section 5 enforcement rather than by interpretation of the Sherman or Clayton
Acts,  because the FTC Act and rules promulgated  under its authority are not enforceable  by
private right of action. See Thomas B. Leary, A Suggestion for the Revival of Section 5, ANTi-
TRUST SOURCE, Feb. 2009, at 1, 1-3 (proposing a use of Section 5 in "frontier" cases that are not
easily pursued under the Sherman or Clayton Acts), http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/
abalpublishinglantitrust  source/Feb09  Leary2_26f.authcheckdam.pdf.  But see  William  E.
Kovacic & Marc Winerman, Competition Policy and the Application of Section 5 of the Federal
Trade Commission Act, 76 ANTITRUST  L.J. 929, 939 & n.54, 948 & n.84 (2010) (noting that
Section 5 standards may be used to interpret state laws that do allow for private enforcement, and
that Section 5 holdings may serve as precedent in later private litigation).2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST 143
possible.  But  treating behavioral  exploitation  as  an  antitrust harm  permits
aggregation of the effects and allows enforcement on the basis of market ef-
fects, rather than individual consumer harm that may be difficult to attribute
to overreaching  by a merchant seller.
Behavioral exploitation  as a theory of antitrust liability relies on proof of
(1) general intent on the part of the merchant seller, and (2)  an effect on the
market. In one form, some courts disfavor reliance on intent evidence in anti-
trust enforcement because of the danger of its abuse-serving as evidence of
harm where  it does not exist214-but  the showing of general intent I would
require has the effect of limiting,  not expanding,  enforcement.  A  merchant
might be held to have had sufficient intent to exploit a particular decisionmak-
ing heuristic if it had studied the heuristic or paid for focus groups to learn the
most effective way to  increase consumer  response.215  Proof that a merchant
merely offered an array of products-though it might well nonetheless trigger
the same heuristic and cause a market effect216-would  be insufficient to meet
the requirement of proving intent.
Proof of an effect  on the market is necessary  to  prevent overuse  of the
theory  of behavioral  exploitation  in consumer, competitor,  and government
suits based on antitrust laws.217 The behavioral exploitation theory is not novel
in this requirement;  a market effect requirement is nearly ubiquitous in anti-
trust, with the narrow exception of conduct held to be illegal per se.218  Such
an effect existed in Kodak, where on remand from the Supreme Court's hold-
ing that a lock-in sufficed to demonstrate market power, a jury concluded that
Kodak did have  a monopoly in the parts aftermarket despite the competitive
market for its equipment.219 Proving that the effect flows from the behavioral
exploitation, rather than some other cause, is a more complex problem, but no
more so than the causal demonstration required throughout antitrust litigation
214 See A.A. Poultry Farms, Inc. v. Rose Acre Farms, Inc., 881 F.2d 1396, 1400-01 (7th Cir.
1989)  (citing Barry Wright Corp. v. ITT Grinnell Corp.,  724 F.2d 227, 232 (1st Cir. 1983)
(Breyer, J.)) (discussing variations in how courts have treated evidence of a firm's intent, includ-
ing the Barry Wright treatment).
215 General intent is consistent with other scienter standards in civil antitrust claims. See, e.g.,
United States v. Aluminum Co. of Am.,  148 F.2d 416, 432 (2d Cir. 1945); Ronald A. Cass &
Keith N. Hylton, Antitrust Intent, 74 S.  CAL.  L. REV. 657,  661  (2001). A merchant has this
mental state if it acts deliberately, knowing of the probable  consequences of its actions.
216 See supra notes  148-149 and accompanying text.
217 The danger to be avoided includes, for example, the threat of treble damages liability in a
suit by a purchaser suffering buyer's remorse. See Edwards, supra note 116, at 360 ("Could a
consumer who impulsively purchases a candy bar and a copy of a gossip magazine claim that he
has suffered a cognizable injury under the FTC Act?").
218 See Chicago Bd. of Trade v. United States, 246 U.S.  231, 238 (1918)  (defining the rule of
reason to include examination of "the nature of the restraint and its effect, actual or probable").
219 See Image Technical  Servs., Inc. v. Eastman  Kodak Co.,  125 F.3d  1195,  1201 (9th Cir.
1997).144 ANTITRUST LAW  JOURNAL [Vol. 78
focusing on a defendant's conduct. Private plaintiffs are saddled with a causa-
tion requirement as a matter of the antitrust standing doctrine,220 and all plain-
tiffs, including public enforcers, face functionally the same burden under the
rule of reason.221
D.  NEO-CHICAGO AND  BEHAVIORAL  ANTITRUST
Behavioral Antitrust relies  on lessons from empirical  study  of individual
behavior to  address  theoretical  pronouncements  of the  Chicago  School.  In
cases like Kodak, the application  of Behavioral Antitrust suggests the Post-
Chicago arguments  (favoring the Court's  holding), rather  than those of the
Chicago School approach, more accurately reflect the realities of the market-
place at issue. In other cases Behavioral Antitrust may favor a result the Chi-
cago  School  would  advocate.  Perhaps,  for  example,  modem  consumer
behavior, including Internet researching and purchasing conduct, renders re-
coupment of losses incurred in predation to be as unlikely as some affiliated
with the Chicago School have argued.222 Behavioral Antitrust also offers the
potential for a broader understanding of what conduct might lead to anticom-
petitive effects through a more complete understanding of consumer behavior.
Understanding  the role of Behavioral Antitrust this way, it begins to sound
much like a goal espoused by the proponents of Neo-Chicago  Antitrust:  in-
forming theoretical insights with  empirical study. Both disciplines  serve the
end of refining  antitrust analysis through economic  study  informed by real-
world facts, including a recognition that facts, or our understanding of them,
have changed in the decades  since the  1970s.
III.  CONCLUSION
An analysis of Kodak demonstrates  how  a consumer-targeted  Behavioral
Antitrust analysis can provide a fuller understanding of the opportunities for
sellers to bring about harm to competition in markets where simpler economic
models predict competitive harm will not occur. On its surface it is a difficult
task to reconcile the newest economic theory  in antitrust, Behavioral  Anti-
trust, with Neo-Chicago  antitrust. That is particularly  so because the Chicago
School, which Neo-Chicago celebrates, gained ascendency in the 1970s while
220 See 15 U.S.C. ยง 4 (harm must be "by reason of' a violation of the antitrust laws); Palmyra
Park Hosp., Inc. v. Phoebe Putney Mem'l Hosp., 604 F.3d 1291,  1299 (1Ith Cir. 2010) (holding
that plaintiffs harm must be of the sort that makes the conduct illegal).
221 See, e.g.,  Brooke Grp.,  Inc. v.  Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 509 U.S. 209, 225
(1993)  (requiring a showing of a causal connection between conduct and an increase in prices);
Cal. Dental Ass'n v. FTC, 526 U.S. 756, 774-77 (1999)  (government enforcement action where
Court required proof that the complained  of conduct caused a harmful effect).
222 See Brooke Group, 509 U.S.  at 232; BORK, PARADOX, supra note 18,  at 149-55; Easter-
brook, Limits, supra note 10, at 27.2012]  MARRYING  NEO-CHICAGO  WITH BEHAVIORAL  ArriRuST  145
rejecting the information economics of the same decade. It would be unpleas-
antly symmetrical if Neo-Chicago developed while rejecting behavioral eco-
nomics,  the cousin  of information  economics,  and  its  legal  application  in
Behavioral Antitrust.
But  at bottom, Neo-Chicago  antitrust  and Behavioral  Antitrust  seek the
same goal. They  seek to refine the approach to economically informed anti-
trust, better to ensure  that economic  theories  serve the economic  efficiency
and consumer protection goals of antitrust enforcement. No reason exists why
they cannot work together in doing so.