CHEVRON AT 30:  LOOKING BACK 
AND LOOKING FORWARD 
FOREWORD 
Peter M. Shane* & Christopher J. Walker** 
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of Chevron U.S.A. v. Natural 
Resources Defense Council.1  This seminal U.S. Supreme Court decision 
regarding  the  judicial  deference  owed  to  federal  agency  statutory 
interpretations is the most-cited administrative law decision of all time:  
Chevron  has  been  cited  in  over  68,000  total  sources  available  on 
Westlaw—including in over 13,500 subsequent judicial decisions, in over 
41,000 court filings, and in nearly 12,000 law review articles and secondary 
sources.2  Over the last three decades, courts, litigants, and scholars have 
addressed  numerous  Chevron-related  questions,  such  as  what  Chevron 
deference means, when (or even if) it should apply, and what impact it has 
had on the administrative state—just to name a few.  To borrow a line from 
Justice Scalia in a Chevron-related decision, ―[i]t is indeed a wonderful new 
world that the Court creates, one full of promise for administrative law 
* Jacob E. Davis and Jacob E. Davis II Chair in Law,  The Ohio State University Michael E.
Moritz College of Law.
**  Assistant Professor of Law, The Ohio State University Michael E. Moritz College of
Law.
1. 467 U.S. 837 (1984).
2. To arrive at the conclusion that Chevron is the most cited administrative law
decision of all time, we checked the citations on Westlaw for every Supreme Court decision 
cited in the latest edition of JERRY L. MASHAW, RICHARD A. MERRILL, PETER M. SHANE, M.
ELIZABETH  MAGILL,  MARIANO-FLORENTINO  CUELLAR,  NICHOLAS  R.  PARRILLO,
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW:  THE AMERICAN PUBLIC LAW SYSTEM (7th ed. 2014).  Of the over 550 
cases reviewed, two cases were cited more than Chevron (as of October 1, 2014):  Daubert 
v.Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993), with 105,566 total citations; and
Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 (1982), with 71,840 total citations.  The next two most
cited cases after Chevron were Kumho Tire Co., Ltd. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999),
with 53,289 total citations; and Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 (1992), with
48,608 total citations.  We do not count Daubert (or Kumho) and Harlow as administrative
law cases, as Daubert and Kumho deal primarily with expert-witness qualifications and
Harlow addresses qualified and absolute immunity.  By comparison, as of October 1, 2014,
United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218 (2001), had 9,811 total citations; and Skidmore v.
Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134 (1944), had 11,291 total citations.  The full list with citation
counts is on file with the authors.  Our thanks go to research assistants Justin Nelson and
Molly Werhan for compiling these statistics.
475 476  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
professors in need of tenure articles and, of course, for litigators.‖3  But 
Justice Scalia‘s  statement is  too limited.    Chevron jurisprudence  holds 
promises and puzzles, too, for already tenured faculty, courts, legislators, 
and agency officials. 
Chevron‘s thirtieth anniversary provides a fitting moment to reflect on 
how Chevron and its progeny have shaped and will continue to shape the 
modern administrative state.  To seize this moment, the Fordham Law 
Review convened a symposium at the Fordham University School of Law 
on March 7, 2014.  A dozen scholars from across the country presented 
papers, and many more scholars and students participated in the discussion.  
The live symposium was organized into four panels:  (1) Chevron in the 
Courts, (2) Chevron in Congress, (3) Chevron in the Executive, and (4) 
Chevron at 30:  Big Deal? Good Deal? Bad Deal?4  This issue of the Law 
Review presents the final versions of those papers. 
In this Foreword, we introduce the contributions to the symposium and 
focus on a number of recurring themes that both look back on the first thirty 
years of Chevron and look forward to the next thirty.  The Foreword 
proceeds as follows: 
Part  I  provides  a  brief  sketch  of  the  development  of  the  Chevron 
deference regime over the last three decades and explores the continuing 
uncertainties about Chevron‘s scope and application, especially after the 
Court‘s decision last year in City of Arlington v. FCC.5  The vast majority 
of contributors weighed in on these issues to some extent, with a half dozen 
focusing extensively on them. 
Part  II  introduces  the  various  contributions  that  focus  on  second-
generation  Chevron  issues  by  exploring  empirically  and  theoretically 
Chevron‘s impact outside of the judicial review context—i.e., its effect on 
legislative- and administrative-drafting theory and practice, its influence 
within the regulatory state more generally, and its adoption (or lack thereof) 
in  state  administrative  law.    These  are  undertheorized  and  empirically 
underexplored areas where no doubt much work will continue to be done 
over the next thirty years. 
Part III turns to another growth area:  the intersection of Chevron and 
federalism.  Two contributions focus on the role of federalism in defining 
the scope of Chevron and how courts and Congress should—or should 
not—limit Chevron‘s scope based on the effect such agency action will 
have on the states. 
The Foreword concludes by taking a step back after thirty years and 
grappling  with the  contributors‘  diverse  views (including  our  own)  on 
3. Nat‘l Cable & Telecomms. Ass‘n v. Brand X Internet Servs., 545 U.S. 967, 1019
(2005) (Scalia, J., dissenting). 
4. Video of the symposium panels is available on the  Law Review‘s website at
http://fordhamlawreview.org.  We thank the Fordham University School of Law and the 
Fordham Law Review for hosting this symposium as well as Professors Abner S. Greene, 
Clare Huntington, Joseph Landau, and Olivier Sylvain for moderating the panels. 
5. 133 S. Ct. 1863 (2013).2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  477 
whether Chevron is indeed a big deal and, if so, whether it is a good or bad 
deal for the modern administrative state. 
I. CHEVRON AFTER THIRTY YEARS:  CONTINUED UNCERTAINTY
ABOUT SCOPE AND APPLICATION 
The bulk of scholarship on Chevron has focused on its scope, application, 
and  rationales  with  respect  to  judicial  review  of  agency  statutory 
interpretations.  As the contributions to this symposium nicely illustrate, 
this line of scholarship is alive and well and will no doubt endure for 
decades to come—in large part because the Court continues to tinker with 
the Chevron deference regime. 
When Justice Stevens, writing for the Court in 1984, articulated the 
Chevron two-step approach, at first blush it may have seemed like a fairly 
straightforward rule that would be easily administrable in the lower courts: 
When a court reviews an agency‘s construction of the statute which it 
administers, it is confronted with two questions.  First, always, is the 
question whether Congress has directly spoken to the precise question at 
issue.  If the intent of Congress is clear, that is the end of the matter; for 
the court, as well as the agency, must give effect to the unambiguously 
expressed intent of Congress.  If, however, the court determines Congress 
has not directly addressed the precise question at issue, the court does not 
simply impose its own construction on the statute, as would be necessary 
in the absence of an administrative interpretation.  Rather, if the statute is 
silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue, the question for the 
court  is  whether  the  agency‘s  answer  is  based  on  a  permissible 
construction of the statute.6 
This deference rule, Justice Stevens explained, follows from the fact (or 
perhaps legal fiction) that in such circumstances Congress has explicitly or 
implicitly ―left a gap for the agency to fill . . . by regulation.‖7  Such 
congressional delegation to federal agencies—as opposed to courts—to be 
the primary interpreters of statutes agencies administer was justified on 
grounds of comparative expertise of federal agencies in policymaking and 
reconciling conflicting political interests, and on the comparative political 
accountability of agencies (as opposed to courts).8 
In  the  footnotes accompanying  the  two-step  approach  quoted  above, 
Justice Stevens provided some additional, seemingly basic instructions on 
how  the  steps  should  work.    As  to  the  first  step  regarding  statutory 
ambiguity,  footnote  nine  instructs  that  the  reviewing  court  should 
―[e]mploy[] the traditional tools of statutory construction‖ to determine 
whether ―Congress had an intention on the precise question at issue.‖9  As 
to the second step regarding permissibility of the agency‘s interpretation, 
footnote eleven states that ―[t]he court need not conclude that the agency 
construction was the only one it permissibly could have adopted to uphold 
6. Chevron, 467 U.S. at 842–43 (footnotes omitted).
7. Id. at 843–44.
8. See id. at 844–45, 864–66.
9. Id. at 843 n.9.478  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
the construction, or even the reading the court would have reached if the 
question initially had arisen in a judicial proceeding.‖10  For the agency‘s 
construction of an ambiguous statute to be permissible under Step Two, it 
simply must be ―a reasonable interpretation.‖11 
As the last thirty years have demonstrated, however, these instructions 
turned out to be far from easy to follow.  As to Step One, questions abound 
about the traditional tools of statutory construction that should apply.  For 
instance,  should  more  purposivist  methodologies—such  as  legislative 
history—be used to construe away ambiguities at Step One, or should such 
inquiry be left to the  Step Two reasonableness prong (if anywhere)?12  
What role  should substantive  canons,  such as  constitutional avoidance, 
play?13  Should a prior judicial interpretation of an ambiguous statute play 
no  role  at  Chevron  Step  One  to  limit  a  subsequent  agency  statutory 
interpretation? At least for now, the Court has resolved the last of these 
questions14—a  decision  Abbe  Gluck  notes  in  her  contribution  to  this 
symposium as having ―enormous repercussions for the allocation of power 
between courts and agencies.‖15 
Chevron Step Two is similarly not lacking for debate or confusion.  For 
instance, is the Step Two reasonableness inquiry separate and distinct from 
arbitrary and capricious review under the Administrative Procedure Act16 
(APA)?    In  his  symposium  contribution,  Jack  Beermann  assesses  the 
current state of Step Two, concluding that ―the Roberts Court has failed 
miserably to clarify the boundary between Chevron and other standards of 
review such as [the APA‘s] arbitrary or capricious review.‖17  Indeed, in 
 
  10. Id. at 843 n.11. 
  11. Id. at 844. 
  12. For  a  recent  contribution  to  this  debate,  see  John  F.  Manning,  Chevron  and 
Legislative History, 82 GEO. WASH. L. REV. (forthcoming 2014). 
  13. Compare Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Fla. Gulf Coast Bldg. & Constr. Trades 
Council, 485 U.S. 568, 575 (1988) (constitutional avoidance trumps Chevron), and Cass R. 
Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons, 67 U. CHI. L. REV. 315, 330 (2000) (substantive canons 
trump  Chevron),  with  ADRIAN  VERMEULE,  JUDGING  UNDER  UNCERTAINTY:    AN 
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF LEGAL INTERPRETATION 211 (2006) (Chevron trumps substantive 
canons), and Thomas W. Merrill & Kristin E. Hickman, Chevron’s Domain, 89 GEO. L.J. 
833, 915 (2001) (Chevron trumps constitutional avoidance), and Christopher J. Walker, 
Avoiding Normative Canons in the Review of Administrative Interpretations of Law:  A 
Brand X Doctrine of Constitutional Avoidance, 64 ADMIN. L. REV. 139, 143–44 (2012) 
(same), and with Hernandez-Carrera v. Carlson, 547 F.3d 1237, 1242 (10th Cir. 2008) 
(constitutional avoidance applies at  Chevron Step Two), and Kenneth A. Bamberger, 
Normative Canons in the Review of Administrative Policymaking, 118 YALE L.J. 64, 93–94 
(2008) (substantive canons apply at Chevron Step Two). 
  14. Nat‘l Cable & Telecomms. Ass‘n v. Brand X Internet Servs., 545 U.S. 967, 982–83 
(2005). 
  15. Abbe R. Gluck, What 30 Years of Chevron Teach Us About the Rest of Statutory 
Interpretation, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 607, 625 (2014). 
  16. 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A) (2012). 
  17. Jack M. Beermann, Chevron at the Roberts Court:  Still Failing After All These 
Years, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 731, 732 (2014) [hereinafter Beermann, Chevron at the Roberts 
Court]; accord Jack M. Beermann, End the Failed Chevron Experiment Now:  How Chevron 
Has Failed and Why It Can and Should Be Overruled, 42 CONN. L. REV. 779, 807–08 
(2010). 2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  479 
part because of the apparent overlap between the two steps, there is a 
growing scholarly debate (with Justice Scalia chiming in18) about whether 
Chevron has, or should have, one or two steps.19 
But the aspect of Chevron that has received the most attention—both in 
this symposium and in the literature more generally—is a threshold step not 
expressly articulated in Chevron itself.  This ―Chevron Step Zero‖ inquiry, 
as symposium contributors Thomas Merrill and Kristin Hickman coined it 
years  ago,  concerns  which  agency  actions  even  qualify  for  Chevron 
review.20  The Court addressed this issue head on in 2001—at a time when 
Chevron was a mere teenager—in United States v. Mead Corp.21  The 
Mead Court declared that not all agency action is reviewed under Chevron, 
but instead there must be evidence of congressional delegation.22  The 
Court noted that ―a very good indicator of delegation meriting Chevron 
treatment  [is]  express  congressional  authorizations  to  engage  in  the 
rulemaking or adjudication process that produces the regulations or rulings 
for which deference is claimed.‖23  But the Mead Court further noted that it 
had ―sometimes found reasons for Chevron deference even when no such 
administrative formality was required and none was afforded.‖24  In the 
absence of such evidence of delegation, the Mead Court indicated that the 
less deferential review standard articulated in Skidmore v. Swift & Co. 
controls.25  Under Skidmore, an agency‘s reasonable interpretation of an 
ambiguous statute does not control as it would under Chevron; instead, the 
court gives the agency‘s interpretation ―weight‖ based on ―the thoroughness 
evident in [the agency‘s] consideration, the validity of its reasoning, its 
consistency with earlier and later pronouncements, and all those factors 
which give it power to persuade.‖26 
As Kristin Hickman points out in her contribution to this symposium, the 
elaboration of deference doctrine in the form of ―steps‖ has led the Supreme 
 
  18. United States v. Home Concrete & Supply, LLC, 132 S. Ct. 1836, 1846 n.1 (2012) 
(Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (noting that ―‗Step 1‘ has never 
been an essential part of Chevron analysis‖). 
  19. See, e.g., Kenneth A. Bamberger & Peter L. Strauss, Chevron’s Two Steps, 95 VA. L. 
REV. 611 (2009); Richard M. Re, Should Chevron Have Two Steps?, 89 IND. L.J. 605 (2014); 
Matthew C. Stephenson & Adrian Vermeule, Chevron Has Only One Step, 95 VA. L. REV. 
597 (2009). 
  20. Merrill & Hickman, supra note 13, at 836–37 (2001); see also Cass Sunstein, 
Chevron Step Zero, 92 VA. L. REV. 187, 207–11 (2006). 
  21. 533 U.S. 218 (2001).  As Kristin Hickman further details in her contribution to the 
symposium, ―understanding Mead‘s aftermath requires viewing Mead not in isolation but as 
part of a trilogy of cases consisting of Mead, Christensen v. Harris County, and Barnhart v. 
Walton.‖ Kristin E. Hickman, The Three Phases of Mead, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 527, 531 
(2014). 
  22. Mead, 533 U.S. at 226–27. 
  23. Id. at 229. 
  24. Id. at 231. 
  25. Id. at 226–28 (citing Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134 (1944)). 
  26. Skidmore, 323 U.S. at 140.  Peter Strauss has helpfully reframed these deference 
standards as ―Chevron space‖ and ―Skidmore weight.‖ Peter L. Strauss, “Deference” Is Too 
Confusing—Let’s Call Them “Chevron Space” and “Skidmore Weight,” 112 COLUM. L. 
REV. 1143, 1144–45 (2012). 480  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
Court and lower courts on many occasions to apply the doctrine as if 
following a kind of decision tree.27  Under this approach, courts ask first, à 
la  Mead,  whether  the  agency  issued  its  challenged  interpretation  in  a 
context where Congress has delegated to the agency the authority ―to speak 
with the force of law.‖28  If the answer is positive, then the agency, à la 
Chevron, is entitled to judicial deference to any reasonable interpretation it 
adopts, unless the relevant statute clearly speaks to the issue at hand in a 
way that precludes the agency‘s approach.29  If the answer is negative, then 
the  agency  is  entitled  only  to  Skidmore  deference.30    Conceptualizing 
deference doctrine in this way holds out the seeming promise of fairly 
bright-line guidance.  Courts could categorically identify certain agency 
processes—most obviously, formal adjudication and notice-and-comment 
rulemaking31—as  entitling  the  agency  to  Chevron  deference.    Statutes 
might then be divided into those that clearly affirm or preclude the agency 
reading (Step One cases), on one hand, and legally ambiguous statutes (Step 
Two cases), on the other. 
Uncertainty, however, surrounds every part of this picture.  For example, 
Justice  Scalia  thinks  the  Mead  inquiry  an  unnecessary  and  confusing 
prelude to Chevron.  For Scalia, Chevron applies to any legal interpretation 
that represents the ―authoritative view‖ of the agency; the ―force of law‖ 
inquiry is inappropriately limiting.32  Because Chevron mandates deference, 
however, only when the relevant statute is not susceptible to a legally 
unambiguous reading, this does not—at least in Justice Scalia‘s case—
necessarily augur more frequent deference than if Chevron were limited in 
the way Mead contemplates.  As Professor Hickman notes, that is because, 
in purporting to apply Chevron, Justice Scalia is so frequently confident 
that  he  can  divine  a  statute‘s  clear  legal  meaning  by  applying  his 
understanding of the appropriate traditional tools of construction.33  Step 
Two deference is simply irrelevant in cases where judges stop at Step One. 
For his part, Justice Breyer—another of the administrative law professors 
on the Court—would obliterate nearly all the bright-line-ishness of the 
decision tree.  He presumably agrees that a statute susceptible only to a 
single legally unambiguous reading, based on traditional tools of statutory 
interpretation, ought to be implemented according to that reading.34  In the 
face of ambiguity, however, he would calibrate the weightiness of deference 
to be accorded to the agency based on all relevant contextual factors.35  
 
  27. Hickman, supra note 21, at 537–41. 
  28. Mead, 533 U.S. at 229. 
  29. Id. 
  30. Id. at 234–35. 
  31. In City of Arlington v. FCC, 133 S. Ct. 1863, 1874 (2013), the Court clarified that an 
agency‘s use of congressionally authorized formal procedures is not just ―a very good 
indicator‖ of congressional delegation but a sufficient one. 
  32. Mead, 533 U.S. at 239–40, 258–59 & n.6 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 
  33. Hickman, supra note 21, at 545–47. 
  34. E.g., Nat‘l Cable & Telecomms. Ass‘n v. Brand X Internet Servs., 545 U.S. 967, 
1003–06 (2005) (Breyer, J., concurring). 
  35. Id. 2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  481 
Strong evidence that Congress did or did not intend to delegate binding 
interpretive power to an agency would be one of these factors, but it would 
not necessarily be controlling either way.  As Professor Hickman notes, 
cases exist that appear to track the Breyer approach more than they do any 
decision tree.36 
But even if one follows the decision tree model of deference doctrine, it 
remains uncertain how to handle Chevron Step One—the injunction to the 
courts, that is, of deciding whether Congress has spoken with sufficient 
clarity on the question at issue so as to foreclose the agency‘s interpretation 
as a matter of law.  Courts are told to apply ―traditional tools of statutory 
interpretation‖ to determine if the agency under review has acted within the 
bounds of what is statutorily permissible.37  One puzzle is whether these 
tools include Skidmore deference. 
In his contribution, Peter Strauss argues that, even at Step One, some 
measure of deference is owed to the agency‘s position.38  He concludes that 
Skidmore deference is appropriate at Step One because the rationales for 
giving  weight  to  an  agency‘s  view—namely,  respecting  the  agency‘s 
possible  involvement  in  drafting  the  relevant  statute  and  its  unique 
obligations and perspective regarding often complex statutory schemes—
are apposite even at this stage.  He finds it ominous that such deference 
goes largely unmentioned in City of Arlington v. FCC,39 in which the Court 
held  the  Chevron  framework  applicable  even  to  questions  of  statutory 
interpretation  that  might be  thought  ―jurisdictional.‖    Professor  Strauss 
reads the majority‘s dicta about Step One as implying that only textualist 
statutory analysis is appropriate under Step One, and that such an analysis is 
to be deployed ―rigorously‖40—by implication, de novo—by the court. 
Professor Strauss reads the dissent also as limiting Skidmore.  The dissent 
says:  ―[T]he question whether an agency enjoys [interpretive] authority 
must be decided by a court, without deference to the agency.‖41  Professor 
Strauss reads this as a repudiation of Skidmore deference on a question that 
he  takes  to  be,  in  Chief  Justice  Roberts‘s  view,  a  Chevron  Step  One 
question.42  As Professor Strauss reads nearly two centuries of precedent, 
however, there is no category of judicial review of statutory interpretation 
by government administrators that is entirely deference-free.  If present on 
any Step One question, including a jurisdictional question, the factors that 
give  an  agency‘s  interpretation  the  ―power  to  persuade,  if  [not]  to 
control,‖43 ought still to be given weight. 
 
  36. Hickman, supra note 21, at 542–45. 
  37. Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 843 
n.9 (1984). 
  38. Peter L. Strauss, In Search of Skidmore, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 789 (2014). 
  39. 133 S. Ct. 1863, 1872–73 (2013). 
  40. Id. at 1874. 
  41. Id. at 1878 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). 
  42. Strauss, supra note 38, at 796. 
  43. Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 140 (1944). 482  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
Professor Merrill takes a very different tack in his contribution.44  He 
embraces instead the core thesis of the Roberts dissent in City of Arlington, 
arguing that, before a court owes any agency Chevron deference on any 
question at all, the court must confirm on its own something more than a 
legislative delegation to speak with the force of law in a general sense.  
Rather, the court must find a delegation of interpretive authority over the 
particular statutory provision in question—which is what the parties called 
a jurisdictional issue.  A court cannot pursue this inquiry in quite the way it 
attacks  a  Chevron  Step  One  question  because  factors  other  than  the 
statutory language at issue may appropriately persuade a court that no 
interpretive delegation should be inferred.  What Professor Merrill calls 
―boundary maintenance,‖ an ―important function of judicial review,‖ 
includes . . . important precepts, such as the requirements that agencies 
honor individuals‘ rights, abstain from interfering with authority given to 
other agencies, abide by relevant obligations contained in international 
law,  and  respect  the  traditional  prerogatives  of  state  and  local 
governments.45 
Where the potential exists for crossing institutional boundaries improperly 
with regard to the implementation of a particular statutory provision, courts 
might well conclude that judges are the most qualified umpires to determine 
if  the  agency  has  asserted  its  authority  permissibly.    This  formulation 
implicitly recognizes a class of cases where (1) Congress may not have so 
clearly addressed the issue the agency addresses as to result in a clear 
boundary line that the agency must obey—that is, the statute at issue may 
be ambiguous—but (2) despite the ambiguity of the provision at issue, it is 
unreasonable to treat the agency as enjoying delegated authority to give the 
provision any reasonable interpretation it chooses. 
Professor  Merrill‘s  approach  may  or  may  not  contradict  Professor 
Strauss‘s understanding of how to approach run-of-the-mill Chevron Step 
One questions.  On one hand, the argument that a statute, properly read, 
forecloses an agency interpretation might be re-cast as an argument that the 
statute‘s clear meaning belies any delegation of authority to the agency to 
depart from that clear meaning.  This is why the majority opinion in City of 
Arlington  insists  that  there  is  no  difference  between  jurisdictional 
challenges  to  an  agency‘s  interpretation  of law  and  any  other  kind  of 
challenge.46    If  all  Step  One  issues  are  jurisdictional,  however,  then 
Professor Merrill‘s approach would preclude according agency views any 
Skidmore weight at that stage.  But Professor Merrill seems to say it is the 
focus on jurisdiction that is confusing; what is really at issue is the breadth 
of an implicit delegation.47  If so, then, when the only challenge to an 
agency‘s delegation is an insistence that it misread a clear statute—in other 
words,  a  ―pure  Step  One‖  challenge—Skidmore  deference  is 
 
  44. Thomas W. Merrill, Step Zero After City of Arlington, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 753 
(2014). 
  45. Id. at 753–754. 
  46. See City of Arlington, 133 S. Ct. at 1868. 
  47. See Merrill, supra note 44, at 759. 2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  483 
unobjectionable.  Deference would be anomalous only if there were some 
institutional factor beyond the precise text in dispute to question whether 
Congress would have preferred the agency over a court as the primary 
interpreter of what a challenged provision means. 
Professor  Beermann  has  an  explanation  for  the  persistence  of  such 
confusions as to Chevron‘s correct implementation:  he thinks it incoherent 
or, at least, ―inherently unstable.‖48  He chides the Roberts Court for failing 
still to provide ―clear instructions‖ on ―when [Chevron] applies and when it 
does not.‖49 He bemoans a lack of clarity as to the relationship between 
deferential review under Step Two and the ―hard look‖ approach of APA 
arbitrary  and  capricious  review.50    He  finds  that  decisions  examining 
agency discretion to adopt statutory interpretations that courts had rejected 
pre-Chevron ―do not appear to be constrained by the Chevron framework or 
any other discernible set of interpretive principles.‖51  Challenging the 
theoretical bases for Chevron as ―fictional,‖52 he argues that the chief effect 
of  the  fight  over  deference  principles  is  to  obscure  underlying 
disagreements as to the substantive merits of the actions being reviewed—
disagreements  that  better  explain  various  Justices‘  votes  than  do  the 
Justices‘ disputes over deference doctrine.53 
While taking no position on the theoretical coherence of Chevron, James 
Brudney‘s study of 730 Supreme Court decisions to evaluate the use of 
Chevron and Skidmore in the workplace law context54 lends support to the 
Beermann hypothesis that substance may trump neutral deference doctrine 
in predicting Justices‘ votes in statutory interpretation cases.  The study 
may also suggest that, despite the torrent of citations and law review articles 
unleashed by Chevron, it portended no real change in the Court‘s overall 
treatment of agency deference.  On one hand, looking at the three key 
 
  48. Beermann, Chevron at the Roberts Court, supra note 17, at 750. 
  49. Id. at 742–43. 
  50. Id. at 741–50. 
  51. Id. at 741. 
  52. Id. at 750. 
  53. In his symposium contribution, Peter Shane, while not tackling the precise issue in 
City of Arlington, takes a more sanguine view of Chevron than does Professor Beermann.  
Chevron‘s central premise, he argues, is the distinction that underlies the foundational 
nondelegation  doctrine—a  distinction  between  statutory  boundaries  that  an  agency  is 
required to interpret correctly and an area of statutory discretion within which an agency is 
required only to act reasonably. Peter M. Shane, Chevron Deference, the Rule of Law, and 
Presidential Influence in the Administrative State, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 679, 685–86 (2014).  
He appears untroubled by the Court‘s failure to draw clear lines between Chevron Step Two 
review and APA arbitrary and capricious review because an agency‘s arguments for the 
permissibility of its statutory reading are likely to track closely what would be its arguments 
for the reasonableness of its implementation strategy. Id. at 688–90.  Whether a court uses 
one or the other rubric for its decision is most likely to turn on whether the challenge to 
agency reasonableness is based on an alleged lack of principled connection between agency 
action and the purposes and boundaries set in the relevant statute—which makes the dispute 
look interpretive—or whether the agency is assertedly lacking in its demonstration that the 
connections it posits actually exist on the record, which sounds more like an arbitrary and 
capricious challenge. 
  54. James J. Brudney, Chevron and Skidmore in the Workplace:  Unhappy Together, 83 
FORDHAM L. REV. 497 (2014). 484  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
agencies in making workplace law—the National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB), the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), 
and the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL)—Professor Brudney finds that 
the  Court‘s  formal  post-Chevron-and-Mead  articulation  of  deference 
frameworks  for  each  agency  closely  tracks  the  Court‘s  pre-Chevron 
treatment  of  each  agency.    That  is,  the  NLRB  benefited  from  fairly 
generous judicial deference which then became Chevron deference, the 
EEOC was subject to more searching review prior to getting Skidmore 
deference in Title VII cases, and the DOL has been given more variable 
treatment  (pre-  and  post-Chevron)  depending  on  the  statutory  program 
involved.55 At the same time, however—and in contrast to pre-Chevron 
years—agency  win  rates  are  higher  when  the  agency  position  favors 
employers as opposed to employees.56 
Furthermore, even though the Court‘s approach in workplace law cases 
frequently invokes the kinds of factors entailed in Chevron and Skidmore 
analysis, in cases where the majority or dissent relied on agency deference, 
two in three such cases made no reference to  Chevron or Skidmore.57  
Professor Brudney is careful to point to factors other than the Justices‘ 
economic ideology that may help explain his observations, but it seems 
hard to gainsay the importance of the Justices‘ substantive views in these 
cases.  The possibility, to which Professor Beermann refers, seems realistic 
that the deference frameworks are not really operating to discipline the 
courts (or at least the Supreme Court) and make agency deference a more 
influential factor in judicial review. 
II.   THE IMPACT OF CHEVRON OUTSIDE THE COURT 
A number of symposium contributors focus on second-generation issues 
related to Chevron deference—i.e., the effect Chevron has had on (A) the 
theory  and  practice  of  legislative  drafting  and  statutory  interpretation; 
(B) agency  behavior  within  the  administrative  state;  and  (C) the 
development of state administrative law.  Each will be addressed in turn. 
A.   Chevron in Congress 
As  to  legislative  drafting,  judicial  deference  to  administrative 
interpretations of law is based on Congress‘s express or implied delegation 
of interpretative authority to the agency; until recently, little had been done 
to evaluate Chevron‘s influence on legislative drafting.  Two contributors 
focus on the effect of Chevron within Congress. 
Professor Gluck continues her pathbreaking work on the role of Chevron 
in  legislative  drafting  and  statutory  interpretation—focusing  in  this 
symposium  on  what  Chevron  can  teach  us  about  the  rest  of  statutory 
interpretation.58  But before turning to her contribution, any symposium on 
 
  55. Id. at 498–99. 
  56. Id. at 512 tbl.3. 
  57. Id. at 501. 
  58. Gluck, supra note 15. 2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  485 
Chevron would be incomplete without first noting the key findings from 
Professor Gluck‘s prior empirical study with Lisa Schultz Bressman on 
congressional  drafting,  in  which  they  asked  137  congressional  drafters 
forty-five questions about their knowledge of administrative law and the 
extent to which it influences their drafting.59 
Chevron, it turns out, was the most known, by name, of any interpretive 
tool  in  the  Bressman  and  Gluck  study.    The  overwhelming  majority 
(82 percent)  of  congressional  drafters  surveyed  were  aware  of  this 
background principle.60  Of those interviewed, 58 percent said Chevron 
plays a role when drafting; 31 percent indicated in comments that statutory 
ambiguity results in judicial deference to agency interpretations; and 29 
percent reported that Chevron forces them to think about how precisely to 
draft.61    Nine  in  ten  (91  percent)  stated  that  one  reason  for  statutory 
ambiguity is to delegate decision making to agencies, with lack of time (92 
percent), complexity of issue (93 percent), and need for consensus (99 
percent) being other predominant reasons.62 
Mead and Skidmore are a somewhat different story.  Unlike Chevron‘s 
82 percent name recognition, 20 percent or less knew Skidmore and Mead 
by name; 18 percent knew Skidmore but not Mead; and 8 percent knew 
Mead but not Skidmore.63  Yet, by concept, Professors Gluck and Bressman 
conclude that Mead was a ―big winner,‖ in that 88 percent indicated that the 
delegation  signal  emphasized  in  Mead—congressional  authorization  of 
agency rulemaking—is always or often relevant to whether drafters intend 
for an agency to have interpretative authority.64 
Professors Bressman and Gluck concluded that Chevron itself is not the 
reason  drafters  leave  ambiguities;  instead,  the  reasons  mirror  those 
articulated in Chevron—delegation of decision making, implementation, 
expertise, etc.65  But these findings cast serious doubt on the longstanding 
view that Chevron is merely a legal fiction.  Congress appears to be quite 
familiar with Chevron (or at least the congressional drafters surveyed are)—
either  intentionally  leaving  ambiguities  to  delegate  decision  making  to 
agencies or at least knowingly legislating against this background Chevron 
default.    And  congressional  drafters  understand  the  Mead  factors  and 
believe that they are relevant to deriving congressional intent to delegate. 
 
  59. See Abbe R. Gluck & Lisa Schultz Bressman, Statutory Interpretation from the 
Inside—An Empirical Study of Congressional Drafting, Delegation, and the Canons:  Part I, 
65 STAN. L. REV. 901 (2013) [hereinafter Gluck & Bressman, Part I]; Lisa Schultz Bressman 
&  Abbe  R.  Gluck,  Statutory  Interpretation  from  the  Inside—An  Empirical  Study  of 
Congressional Drafting, Delegation, and the Canons:  Part II, 66 STAN. L. REV. 725 (2014). 
  60. Gluck & Bressman, Part I, supra note 59, at 995. 
  61. Id. at 996. 
  62. Id. at 997. 
  63. Id. at 995 (footnotes omitted).  As Professors Gluck and Bressman note, however, 
these numbers may be lower based on a change in how the questions were asked in the 
survey. See id. at 995 n.337. 
  64. Id. at 999. 
  65. Id. 486  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
As  Kent  Barnett  documents  in  his  symposium  contribution  and 
elsewhere,  not  only  do  congressional  drafters  know  about  these 
administrative law deference doctrines when drafting, but in at least one 
instance  Congress  has actually codified  a judicial review standard less 
deferential than the Chevron default.66  In the Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
Reform and  Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank), Congress  directed 
courts to review under the less deferential Skidmore standard any decision 
to preempt state law made by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
(OCC).67  It should be interesting to see whether Congress continues to 
tinker with these judicially created deference doctrines, and perhaps even 
more interesting to see how the Supreme Court responds.  As Professor 
Gluck  notes  in  her  contribution,  that  ―Congress  could  legislate  some 
different  version  of  Chevron‖  distinguishes  the  administrative  law 
deference doctrines from other traditional tools of statutory interpretation 
where courts have resisted the idea of methodological stare decisis.68 
In her contribution, Professor Gluck builds on her prior empirical study 
on  congressional  drafters—as  well  as  on  her  other  work  on  statutory 
interpretation  more  generally69—to  distinguish  Chevron  (and  related 
administrative law doctrines) from other statutory interpretation tools.70  
She makes six main observations about those differences and what they 
teach us about statutory interpretation:  (1) As noted above, Chevron is a 
precedent, whereas the other tools are usually considered ―rules of thumb‖; 
yet (2) Chevron in essence codifies the rules of thumb by directing that they 
apply at Step One.  (3) Unlike the other interpretive tools, the Court has 
attempted to ground Chevron in actual congressional intent, and (4) by 
focusing on actual legislative intent, the Court has influenced how Congress 
legislates by encouraging Congress to delegate with formal process if it 
intends for Chevron to apply to particular agency statutory interpretations.  
(5) While  the  Court  has  guarded  jealously  its  control  over  statutory 
interpretation from Congress, the Court has expressly ceded such power to 
federal agencies by holding that a subsequent agency interpretation of an 
ambiguous  statute  the  agency  administers  trumps  a  prior  judicial 
 
  66. Kent  Barnett,  Codifying  Chevmore,  89  N.Y.U.  L.  REV.  (forthcoming  2015), 
available  at  http://ssrn.com/abstract=2405016;  Kent  Barnett,  Improving  Agencies’ 
Preemption  Expertise  with  Chevmore  Codification,  83  FORDHAM  L.  REV.  587  (2014) 
[hereinafter Barnett, Preemption and Chevmore]. 
  67. Barnett, Preemption and Chevmore, supra note 66, at 599–600 (citing 12 U.S.C. 
§ 25b(b)(5)(A) (2012)). 
  68. Gluck, supra note 15, at 614–17. 
  69. See Abbe R. Gluck, Intersystemic Statutory Interpretation:  Methodology As “Law” 
and the Erie Doctrine, 120 YALE L.J. 1898, 1910 (2011); Abbe R. Gluck, Intrastatutory 
Federalism and Statutory Interpretation:  State Implementation of Federal Law in Health 
Reform and Beyond, 121 YALE L.J. 534 (2011); Abbe R. Gluck, The Federal Common Law 
of Statutory Interpretation:  Erie for the Age of Statutes, 54 WM. & MARY L. REV. 753 
(2013);  Abbe  R.  Gluck,  The  States  As  Laboratories  of  Statutory  Interpretation:  
Methodological Consensus and the New Modified Textualism, 119 YALE L.J. 1750 (2010) 
[hereinafter Gluck, States As Laboratories of Statutory Interpretation]. 
  70. Gluck, supra note 15, at 609–11. 2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  487 
interpretation.71    (6) Yet,  the  Court‘s  understanding  of  congressional 
drafting is outdated, especially in assuming congressional delegation to one 
federal agency at a time when Congress often delegates to multiple agencies 
and other actors.72   
Following Professor Gluck‘s lead, in the years to come we expect more 
scholars of statutory interpretation to look to Chevron and related doctrines 
for  lessons  about  advancing  the  theory  and  practice  of  statutory 
interpretation.  After all, as Professor Gluck‘s observations underscore, 
Chevron provides a natural experiment of sorts between an interpretive tool 
with precedential force and the rest of the traditional tools that lack such 
force.    And  because  Chevron  is  a  precedent  that  incorporates  non-
precedential rules of thumb at its first step, no doubt the future will see 
many, many more law review articles, legal briefs, and judicial opinions on 
which  tools  of  statutory  interpretation  should  apply  to  determine 
congressional intent at Step One.  Hopefully the realities of the modern-era 
legislative  process  will  play  a  more  prominent  role  in  the  further 
development of the Chevron deference regime. 
B.   Chevron Within the Regulatory State 
Whereas most scholarship on Chevron has focused on Chevron in the 
courts and some on Chevron in Congress, little attention has been paid to 
the impact of Chevron inside the administrative state.  Three contributions 
to this symposium focus extensively on this topic, which will no doubt 
receive much more attention in the years to come.  All three of these 
contributions also assess Chevron as a legitimizing function within the 
modern administrative state. 
First, Christopher Walker explores  how thirty years  of  Chevron  and 
related administrative law doctrines have shaped agency rule drafting and, 
in particular, whether the expectation of Chevron deference (as opposed to 
Skidmore deference or de novo review) encourages federal agencies to be 
more aggressive in their interpretive practices.73  He reports the Chevron-
related findings from a 195-question survey he conducted of 128 federal 
agency rule drafters at seven executive departments and two independent 
agencies.  Of those who responded to the survey, nearly all (94 percent) 
were aware of Chevron by name, and four in five (81 percent) were aware 
 
  71. Nat‘l Cable & Telecomms. Ass‘n v. Brand X Internet Servs., 545 U.S. 967, 982–83 
(2005). 
  72. Gluck, supra note 15, at 609–11.  The Court‘s ―Schoolhouse Rock!‖ understanding 
of lawmaking, arguably, is not limited to the legislative process. Id. at 611.  As Aaron Saiger 
observes in his contribution, Chevron‘s focus on political accountability as a justification for 
Chevron ―troublingly and casually conflates the President, the ‗administration,‘ and the 
agencies.‖ Aaron Saiger, Chevron and Deference in the State Administrative Law, 83 
FORDHAM L. REV. 555, 564 (2014). 
  73. Christopher  J.  Walker,  Chevron  Inside  the  Regulatory  State:    An  Empirical 
Assessment, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 703 (2014) [hereinafter Walker, Chevron Inside the 
Regulatory State].  The full findings from the empirical study are reported in Christopher J. 
Walker, Inside Agency Interpretation, 67 STAN. L. REV. (forthcoming 2015), available at 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2501716. 488  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
of Skidmore.74  Although Mead was not as well known by name (at 61 
percent),  the  rule  drafters  confirmed  that  they  understood  the  basic 
principles  articulated  in  Mead—i.e.,  congressional  authorization  of 
rulemaking or formal adjudication (at 84 percent) and the agency‘s use of it 
(at 80 percent) affect whether an agency‘s interpretation receives Chevron 
deference.75  To put those numbers in perspective, Chevron was the most 
known of more than twenty interpretive tools included in the survey, and 
Mead came in fourth place (behind only Chevron, the whole act rule, and 
the ordinary meaning canon).76  These findings are similar to those of the 
congressional drafters surveyed in the Bressman and Gluck study, discussed 
in Part II.A, and similarly demonstrate how Chevron has become a principal 
tool for drafters and interpreters in federal agencies as well as in Congress. 
Moreover, nine in ten (90 percent) agency rule drafters indicated that 
Chevron plays a role in their rule-drafting decisions.  A similar number 
agreed  or  strongly  agreed  that  they  think  about  judicial  review  when 
drafting statutes (at 87 percent) and that their chances in court are better 
under Chevron than Skidmore or no deference (at 83 percent).  When asked 
if federal agencies are more aggressive in their interpretive efforts if they 
know Chevron applies, two in five (38 percent and 43 percent, depending 
on how the question was phrased) strongly agreed or agreed, and another 
two in five (45 percent and 40 percent) somewhat agreed.77  In other words, 
these findings provide support for the propositions that the judicial review 
standard matters as an ex ante check on agency rule-drafting behavior and 
that an agency may draft differently if a court (or Congress, as further 
discussed in Part III) tells the agency that Chevron or Skidmore applies.  As 
Professor  Walker  concludes,  understanding  how  federal  agencies  draft 
differently under distinct deference regimes is not merely academic but may 
well go to the heart of the regulatory state‘s democratic legitimacy: 
After  all,  Chevron  and  related  doctrines  attempt  to  strike  a  proper 
separation of powers balance between the branches of government by 
patrolling the delegation of authority from the principal (Congress) to its 
unelected agents in the regulatory state.  Whether the deference standards 
help  to  faithfully  control  Fourth  Branch  lawmaking  goes  to  the 
democratic  (and  perhaps  constitutional)  legitimacy  of  the  modern 
administrative state.78 
In her contribution, Emily Hammond further explores Chevron‘s role in 
legitimizing administrative governance.  As Professor Hammond explains, 
―[t]he governing paradigm is that judicial review is a necessary component 
of administrative legitimacy‖ because, among other things, ―[i]t acts as an 
ex ante check on agency behavior by incentivizing agencies to promote 
participation,  engage  in  deliberation,  and  set  forth  their  reasoning 
 
  74. Walker, Chevron Inside the Regulatory State, supra note 73, at 715–17 & fig.1. 
  75. Id. at 717–18 & tbl.1. 
  76. Id. at 717–18. 
  77. Id. at 722–25 & fig.3. 
  78. Id. at 728–29 (footnote omitted). 2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  489 
transparently in the first instance.‖79 Building on her prior work with David 
Markell,80  Professor  Hammond  explores  the  generality  of  Chevron‘s 
legitimizing function—moving the conversation to unreviewable exercises 
of authority to ―pinpoint just what it is courts provide when they undertake 
review.‖81 
To see Chevron as a generality principle rather than a specialized judicial 
review  doctrine  of  agency  statutory  interpretation,  Professor  Hammond 
surveys  a  number  of  second-order  contexts—i.e.,  the  interpretation  of 
contracts,  settlements,  and  land  patents—where  courts  have  invoked 
Chevron.82  Based on the rationales utilized in these contexts, she offers 
three metrics for measuring the legitimacy of agency action that is either 
unreviewable or rarely reviewable:  (1) whether the agency acts within its 
scope  of  statutory  authority,  (2) exercising  its  expertise  to  provide 
uniformity in law (3) with sufficient procedures in place.83 Although based 
on Chevron, these legitimizing metrics sound a lot more like the Skidmore 
factors.  This perhaps should come as no surprise as Skidmore itself is about 
the  agency‘s  ―power  to  persuade‖—or  legitimize—based  on  ―the 
thoroughness evident in [the agency‘s] consideration, the validity of its 
reasoning, its consistency with earlier and later pronouncements,‖ and so 
forth.84  It is also worth noting that the Chevron justification of political 
accountability  ―plays  little  to  no  role  in  the  second-order  Chevron 
decisions.‖85  Professor Hammond observes that, ―[a]s a descriptive matter, 
this omission invites rethinking about the place of presidential control in 
administrative law doctrine.‖86 
Peter  Shane‘s  exploration  of  the  President‘s  role  in  the  Chevron 
deference regime picks up precisely on this point.87  He begins by arguing 
that Chevron fits well with a rule-of-law account of the administrative state 
that emphasizes the duty of courts to implement Congress‘s administrative 
designs.  Far from regarding the delegation-based rationale for Chevron as 
―fictional,‖ he relies on the Bressman and Gluck study noted in Part II.A as 
substantiating that the delegation rationale meshes well with the reality of 
statutory  drafting.    Because  the  Court‘s  post-Chevron  jurisprudence  so 
clearly establishes delegation and not political accountability as the primary 
theoretical underpinning for Chevron, it is important for courts specifically 
to  respect  Congress‘s  decisions  to  vest  administrative  decision  making 
authority in officials other than the President. 
 
  79. Emily Hammond, Chevron’s Generality Principles, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 655, 656 
(2014). 
  80. Emily Hammond & David L. Markell, Administrative Proxies for Judicial Review:  
Building Legitimacy from the Inside-Out, 37 HARV. ENVTL. L. REV. 313 (2013). 
  81. Hammond, supra note 79, at 673–74. 
  82. Id. at 666–73. 
  83. Id. at 673–78. 
  84. Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 140 (1944). 
  85. Hammond, supra note 79, at 677–78. 
  86. Id. 
  87. Shane, supra note 53. 490  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
That is, contrary to ―unitary executive theorists,‖ Professor Shane does 
not think the President enjoys any constitutional authority to direct agency 
action  in  domestic  affairs  beyond  such  license  as  Congress  gives  the 
President.88  As a result, courts need to be careful before according Chevron 
deference  to  agency  interpretations  of  law  that  are  revealed  to  be  the 
product of White House pressure where the record reveals the agency‘s 
earlier preference for a different interpretation that itself would have been 
reasonable enough to warrant Chevron deference.  In such cases, Professor 
Shane would have the reviewing court remand to the agency to choose, 
after further consideration and a supplemented record, between its original 
interpretation and the interpretation on which the White House insisted.89  
The only exception he thinks consistent with a rule-of-law view of Chevron 
would be the presumably rare case in which the White House had required 
an agency to pursue a permissible interpretation that the agency would 
nonetheless  not  have  preferred,  but  which  makes  it  possible  for  other 
agencies to discharge some related administrative responsibilities in a better 
coordinated fashion.  Deferring to White House influence in such a case 
would  respect  a  presidential  power  of  interagency  coordination  that  is 
reasonably traceable to his role as chief executive.90 
C.   Chevron in the States 
Aaron Saiger provides a unique perspective on the impact—or, better 
said,  lack  thereof—of  Chevron  on  state  administrative  law.91    After 
reviewing a number of state-by-state surveys on Chevron and state-level 
administrative law, he concludes:  ―Although a significant number of states 
have adopted deference doctrines that closely approximate Chevron‘s, few 
have endorsed it wholeheartedly.  Only a few have rejected it explicitly 
either, but the majority of the states have deference doctrines meaningfully 
different from Chevron‘s.‖92  He then explores the reasons why states have 
not embraced Chevron in state-level administrative law. 
Professor Saiger ultimately concludes that the differences between the 
structures of federal and state governments make Chevron unsuitable for 
blanket state-level adoption.93  In particular, state judges are not similarly 
situated to federal judges, in that they lack life tenure and thus tend to be 
closer to the political branches.  Most states lack a unitary executive but, 
instead, have a number of state-wide elected executive officials, all of 
which have their distinct administrative functions and intraexecutive checks 
and  conflicts.    And  state  legislatures,  while  most  similar  of  the  three 
 
  88. PETER M. SHANE, MADISON‘S NIGHTMARE:  HOW EXECUTIVE POWER THREATENS 
AMERICAN DEMOCRACY 32–42 (2009). For the contrary view, see STEVEN G. CALABRESI & 
CHRISTOPHER S. YOO, THE UNITARY EXECUTIVE:  PRESIDENTIAL POWER FROM WASHINGTON 
TO BUSH (2008). 
  89. Shane, supra note 53, at 702. 
  90. Id. 
  91. See Saiger, supra note 72. 
  92. Id. at 582. 
  93. See id. at 560–70 (exploring the differences in all three branches). 2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  491 
branches to their federal counterpart, have vastly different approaches to 
nondelegation rules.94 
Despite the lack of adoption at the state level, Professor Saiger argues 
that  states  should  not  ignore  Chevron.    Much  like  Professor  Gluck‘s 
assertion that we can learn a lot from Chevron about the other tools of 
statutory interpretation, Professor Saiger argues that Chevron has a lot to 
teach  states  about  judicial  review  of  agency  statutory  interpretations:  
―Chevron is a model for states not by virtue of its holding but of its multi-
institutional mode of analysis.‖95  Indeed, if modified to the structure of the 
particular state government, he suggests that ―[t]he particular way in which 
Chevron  balances  between  politics,  the  rule  of  law,  and  bureaucratic 
effectiveness is a worthy model for states to consider.‖96 
There  is  little  doubt  that  the  next  thirty  years  will  see  much 
experimentation with Chevron in the laboratories of democracy as states 
attempt to control state-level bureaucracy.  But hopefully the breakthroughs 
(and failures) in these laboratories will also be explored at the federal level.  
For instance, as Professor Saiger notes and Professor Gluck documents 
elsewhere,  many  states  have  embraced  methodological  stare  decisis  in 
statutory interpretation that the federal system has rejected.97  More analysis 
of those experiments—and how they might play out on the federal level 
where the governmental structure differs substantially—is warranted. 
III.   THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN CHEVRON AND FEDERALISM 
With  the  continued  (and  perhaps  renewed)  scholarly  interest  in 
federalism generally, it is no surprise that two contributors also focus on the 
effect of federalism on judicial review of agency statutory interpretations. 
Miriam Seifter tackles the topic head on, arguing that federalism should 
play no role at Chevron Step Zero.98  Building on her prior work on the role 
of states in the federal regulatory process,99 she explains that federalism 
concerns are varied and diverse.  Accordingly, a one-size-fits-all default 
rule  against  Chevron  when  federalism  concerns  are  implicated—thus 
relegating such agency interpretations to either Skidmore deference or de 
novo  review—would  do  more  harm  than  good.    As  she  explains,  the 
question is not whether federalism should be considered in Chevron cases, 
but whether there is any Step Zero test that can direct federalism analysis to 
the most competent institution.  Federalism‘s heterogeneity suggests that 
this endeavor would be fraught, and thus would cause needless harm to the 
 
  94. Professor Saiger also contrasts the various state statutes and judicial standards of 
review of state agency action with their federal counterparts. See id. at 570–79. 
  95. Id. at 583. 
  96. Id. 
  97. Id. at 584 (citing Gluck, States As Laboratories of Statutory Interpretation, supra 
note 69). 
  98. Miriam Seifter, Federalism at Step Zero, 83 FORDHAM L. REV. 633 (2014). 
  99. Miriam Seifter, States, Agencies, and Legitimacy, 67 VAND. L. REV. 443 (2014); 
Miriam Seifter, States As Interest Groups in the Administrative Process, 100 VA. L. REV. 
953 (2014). 492  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
coherence  and  simplicity  that  make  Chevron  useful.    Considering 
federalism in Chevron‘s ordinary two steps (and under APA arbitrary and 
capricious review), Professor Seifter argues, allows courts to police agency 
interpretations effectively and at less cost.100 
Professor  Barnett‘s  contribution  to  this  symposium  provides  an 
interesting contrast.  As he explains, Congress in Dodd-Frank has directed 
courts  to  review  OCC  preemption  decisions  under  the  less  deferential 
Skidmore standard.101  In other words, Congress has instructed that Chevron 
does not apply to these decisions at Step Zero—precisely what Professor 
Seifter asserts courts should not do.  And, as Professor Barnett argues, 
―[a]pplying Skidmore deference to agency preemption recognizes agencies‘ 
technical and administrative expertise while accounting for their lack of 
experience in weighing federalism values in their preemption analysis.‖102  
His argument is not that Chevron should never apply to agency preemption 
decisions, but that Congress should encourage agencies to develop such 
expertise by codifying Skidmore deference where agency inexpertness is 
evident.  As Professor Barnett notes, ―[t]he OCC‘s preemption of state 
consumer-protection laws provides perhaps the most striking example of 
inexpertness, preemption, and a congressional response.‖103  He concludes 
by lauding the value of Chevmore codification: 
Going forward, Congress can improve an agency‘s use of expertise as to 
preemption specifically and other matters generally.  Congress can lead 
agencies to consider how their technical and administrative expertise 
interacts with federalism values by requiring agencies to consider those 
values and consult with affected parties [including states].  Congress can 
also improve agencies‘ use of administrative and technical expertise both 
inside and outside of the preemption context by using Chevron deference 
as a ―carrot‖ [and Skidmore as a ―stick‖] for agencies to develop and 
apply their expertise.104 
It is not clear that Professors Barnett and Seifter actually disagree in any 
fundamental  way.    Chevmore  codification  is  different  from  blanket 
consideration of federalism concerns by courts at Chevron at Step Zero; it is 
a narrow, specific application codified by Congress as to one particular 
agency.  Perhaps they would agree that only the congressional principal—
not the judicial agent—should decide when Chevron does not apply to an 
agency statutory interpretation that implicates federalism concerns (or other 
areas where an agency has demonstrated incompetence).  In all events, it 
will  be  interesting  to  see  whether  Chevmore  codification  becomes 
commonplace—as opposed to a one-off anomaly—and, if so, whether the 
 
  100. Seifter, supra note 98, at 652–54. 
  101. Barnett,  Preemption  and  Chevmore,  supra  note  66,  at  587  (citing  12  U.S.C. 
§ 25b(b)(5)(B) (2012)). 
  102. Id. at 594 (citing Nina A. Mendelson, Chevron and Preemption, 102 MICH. L. REV. 
737, 797 (2008)). 
  103. Barnett, Preemption and Chevmore, supra note 66, at 596. 
  104. Id. at 604. 2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  493 
Court  will  push  back  on  congressional  attempts  to  alter  the  judicially 
created and calibrated Chevron deference regime.105 
CONCLUSION:  CHEVRON:  BIG DEAL? GOOD DEAL? BAD DEAL? 
At the March 2014 symposium, the panel entitled ―Chevron: Big Deal? 
Good  Deal?  Bad  Deal?‖  featured  Professors  Beermann,  Merrill,  and 
Strauss.  Not surprisingly, however, a variety of responses are discernible 
from most, if not all, the contributors. 
Professor Beermann stands out in the group for his unequivocal negative 
assessment of Chevron.  Three decades, in his judgment, have revealed that 
Chevron rests on unstable premises, obscures and distracts from what is 
often  at  stake  in  statutory  interpretation  cases,  and  is  applied  by  the 
Supreme Court so inconsistently as to leave lower courts (and lawyers) 
more perplexed than well guided.106  As discussed in Part I, Professor 
Brudney‘s analysis is arguably consistent with the obscurity point.  Yet his 
observation  that  the  formal  deference  accorded  the  different  agencies 
engaged in making workplace law did not really change from the pre-
Chevron to the post-Chevron period suggests that the judicial impact of 
Chevron  might  well  be  overestimated,  especially  with  regard  to  the 
Supreme Court itself.107 
Professors Strauss and Shane seem to be of the mind that, Justice Scalia‘s 
insistence to the contrary notwithstanding, Chevron was not intended and 
should  not  be  read  as  a  major  displacement  of  prior  administrative 
jurisprudence.  Professor Strauss may worry that a misinterpretation of 
Chevron could undermine judicial respect for a centuries-old doctrine that 
agency interpretations of the statutes they administer ought always to be 
eligible for some weight in the course of judicial review.108  Professor 
Merrill, however, does not see in City of Arlington the same inattention to 
Mead/Skidmore  deference  that  Professor  Strauss  bemoans.    Indeed,  he 
thinks it significant that the majority opinion penned by Justice Scalia 
includes what is arguably an acquiescent nod to Mead.109  Professor Shane, 
as noted above, thinks Chevron simply plays out a logic of judicial review 
already  implicit  in  the  nondelegation  doctrine.    His  main  criticism  of 
105. As Professor Walker explores in his contribution, it is also an open question whether
Chevmore  codification  will  change  agency  interpretive  practices,  especially  in  the 
preemption context. See Walker, Chevron Inside the Regulatory State, supra note 73, at 721 
(reporting that ―over half of the rule drafters surveyed already do not assume Chevron 
deference applies to agency preemption decisions—and, indeed, half apply the presumption 
against preemption when there is an ambiguity—[such that] congressional modification 
from  Chevron  space  to  Skidmore  weight  would  have  no  effect  on  agency  statutory 
interpretation at least with respect to those rule drafters‖). 
106. Beermann, Chevron at the Roberts Court, supra note 17, at 731–33.
107. Brudney, supra note 54, at 498.
108. Strauss, supra note 38.
109. Merrill, supra note 44, at 757.494  FORDHAM LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83 
Chevron, if it be one, is that its deference mandate is expressed in rhetoric 
that makes it sound more frequently consequential than it is likely to be.110 
For  their  part,  Professors  Hickman  and  Merrill  also  appear  to  see 
Chevron as fitting in a useful and not especially disruptive way into the 
jurisprudence of judicial review.  Now that Mead has expressly elaborated 
on Chevron by incorporating the Merrill-Hickman Step Zero inquiry into 
the nature of the authority Congress delegated to the agency under review, 
Professor Hickman finds lower courts turning helpfully to the cases, most 
often in a decision tree mode, but sometimes also (as does the Supreme 
Court) in a manner more reminiscent of Justice Breyer‘s multiple factors 
approach.111  Professor Merrill is chiefly critical of the Court‘s failure to 
take  seriously  enough  the  delegation-based  rationale  for  Chevron,  but 
argues that the emphasis on delegation that was central to Chief Justice 
Roberts‘s dissent in City of Arlington ought to prevail over time.112 
Perhaps the most surprising conclusion implicit or explicit in the various 
symposium contributions, however, is that the ―big deal‖ of Chevron is 
most evident if one looks beyond its impact on the federal courts to its 
impact on the other federal branches and its potential impact on the states.  
The survey-based analyses that Professors Gluck and Walker undertook, 
respectively, regarding the drafting staff in Congress and in the agencies, 
confirms  Chevron‘s  role  as  a  widely  understood  default  principle  that 
affects how statutes and regulations are drafted.113  Professor Walker‘s 
finding that rule makers  may draft more  aggressively in contexts they 
recognize  as  Chevron-eligible114  resonates  with  Professor  Hammond‘s 
observation  that  deference  doctrine  affects  the  legitimacy  of  agency 
decision  making  by  intensifying  or  relaxing  ex  ante  incentives  for 
conscientious agency behavior.115  Because courts now apply Chevron Step 
Two  analysis  with  the  rigor  of  ―hard  look‖  review  under  the  APA‘s 
arbitrary and capricious standard, it seems likely that agency lawyers worry 
less,  post-Chevron,  about  showing  that  their  interpretations  are  legally 
compelled and more about showing that their justifications find grounding 
in the record.  As Professor Barnett argues, Chevron and Mead together 
  110. Peter  M.  Shane,  Ambiguity  and  Policy  Making:    A  Cognitive  Approach  to 
Reconciling Chevron and Mead, 16 VILL. ENVTL. L.J. 19 (2005) (arguing that Chevron 
deference, properly understood, should be outcome-decisive only in those cases in which a 
judge is persuaded that there exists an interpretation of the relevant statute that is not legally 
compelled,  but  nonetheless  superior  to  the  agency‘s  reasonable,  but  less  attractive 
interpretation). 
111. Hickman, supra note 21, at 547–53.  Professor Seifter would apparently hold out
little hope for a decision tree approach in cases implicating administrative federalism.  She 
argues that Chevron must turn to the use of standards (instead of rules) in the federalism 
context, underscoring that ―federalism inquiries and values tend to be multifaceted and 
nuanced in ways that make them poor fits for more formalistic, rule-bound features of 
administrative law.‖ Seifter, supra note 98, at 638. 
112. Merrill, supra note 44, at 757–58.
113. Gluck & Bressman, Part I, supra note 59, at 995–99; Walker, Chevron Inside the
Regulatory State, supra note 73, at 715–17 & fig.1. 
114. Walker, Chevron Inside the Regulatory State, supra note 73, at 722–25 & fig.3.
115. Hammond, supra note 79, at 673–74.2014]  FOREWORD:  CHEVRON AT 30  495 
have  also  given  Congress  an  effective  vocabulary  for  calibrating  the 
deference it wants courts to give to agencies when Congress wants to make 
that choice explicit.116 
Professor Saiger finds that Chevron has been less of a big deal in the 
states than it deserves to be.117  Like much of federal separation of powers 
jurisprudence,  Chevron  cannot  and  should  not  be  adopted  by  states 
mechanically  because  state  constitutions  differ  as  to  government 
organization,  and  the  institutional  characteristics  of  state  courts, 
legislatures, and agencies may differ sufficiently from those of the federal 
government  to  warrant  somewhat  different  understandings  for  the 
appropriate occasions for and scope of deference to be accorded agency 
views of state law.  Yet, as noted above, Chevron‘s analysis of the issues 
posed by deference doctrine provide a model of sorts for how state courts 
might sort out an appropriate balance between politics, the rule of law, and 
agency expertise.  As state governments continue to grow in size and range 
of activity, it seems inevitable that scholars will increasingly turn their 
attention to this very question. 
There is, of course, one way in which the ―big deal‖ of Chevron is 
unassailable.  It has energized a virtual cottage industry within the academy 
of reexamining—both descriptively and normatively—the relationship of 
courts  and  agencies  and  the  appropriate  role  and  recognition  in  the 
administrative state of rule of law values.  Administrative law is built 
around—indeed, necessitated by—the inevitability and ubiquity of agency 
discretion  in  contemporary  governance.    Judicial  review,  as  Professor 
Hammond  says,  is  widely  taken  to  be  an  essential  component  to  the 
legitimacy of administrative governance.118  So long as these things are 
true,  the  issues  highlighted  by  this  symposium  will  remain  ripe  for 
discussion and are likely to sustain symposia for many more of Chevron‘s 
birthdays. 
116. Barnett, Preemption and Chevmore, supra note 66, at 587.
117. Saiger, supra note 72, at 582–84.
118. Hammond, supra note 79, at 673–74.