See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265025292
Executive Branch Self-Policing in Times of Crisis: The Challenges for
Conscientious Legal Analysis
Article
CITATION READ
1 1
1 author:
Peter M. Shane
The Ohio State University
53 PUBLICATIONS   247 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Peter M. Shane on 18 September 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX (DO NOT DELETE)  1/19/2012 1:03 PM 
 
Executive Branch Self-Policing in Times of Crisis:  
The Challenges for Conscientious Legal Analysis 
Peter M. Shane* 
Presidential  advisers,  both  Democratic  and  Republican,  long  ago 
discovered  ways  to  magnify  presidential  power  at  the  cost  of  legal 
principles  and  the  system  of  checks  and  balances.    This  essay  briefly 
considers the limits to executive branch capacity to provide reliable legal 
and constitutional analysis in times of emergency, including covert military 
operations.  It highlights the special risks government faces when the circle 
of presidential advisers narrows because of highly classified operations and 
there is less opportunity for senior officials, including attorneys, to pass 
judgment on pending initiatives. 
I.  THE HISTORICAL PATTERN 
Following  the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  2001,  the  Bush 
administration  received  legal  advice  from  attorneys  within  the  Justice 
Department and other agencies purporting to afford support for warrantless 
surveillance  by  the  National  Security  Agency  (NSA),  the  detention  of 
enemy combatants, the creation of military tribunals, the use of coercive 
methods of interrogation, and the rendition of suspects to other countries for 
interrogation and torture.  All of these initiatives relied on broad claims of 
unilateral presidential power.  Legal memoranda – many of them secret – 
were later subjected to severe criticism after they were made public.1 
In many respects, the Bush administration’s claims of power followed a 
pattern set by other administrations that decided to elevate presidential 
power over legal and democratic constraints: the Tonkin Gulf Resolution of 
August 1964 (based on a reported second attack that we now know did not 
occur2); the Watergate break-in and subsequent cover-up; the abuses within 
 
  *  Jacob E. Davis and Jacob E. Davis II Chair in Law, The Ohio State University 
Moritz School of Law.  From 1978 to 1981, I served in the Office of Legal Counsel, U.S. 
Department of Justice.  In preparing this essay, I have quoted liberally from my book, Peter 
M.  SHANE,  MADISON’S  NIGHTMARE:  HOW  EXECUTIVE  POWER  THREATENS  AMERICAN 
DEMOCRACY (2009).  I am grateful to Louis Fisher for instigating this essay.  Those who toil 
for any significant time in the separation of powers orchard will soon and repeatedly find 
themselves significantly indebted to Lou for his prolific, well-informed, and insightful 
scholarship. 
  1.  HAROLD H. BRUFF, BAD ADVICE: BUSH’S LAWYERS IN THE WAR ON TERROR 209 
(2009). 
  2.  Id. at 52-60, 66-67, 101-105; Ryan M. Check & Afsheen John Radsan, One 
507 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX  (DO NOT DELETE)  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
508  JOURNAL OF NATIONAL SECURITY LAW & POLICY  [Vol. 5:507 
the  intelligence  community  exposed  by  the  Church  Committee 
investigations in the 1970s; assistance to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua in 
the 1980s, leading to the Iran-Contra Affair; and the unauthorized war 
against Serbia in 1999.  The problem of illegal and unconstitutional activity 
within the executive branch has become chronic, raising questions whether 
remedies are available to minimize this chronic threat. 
Our Constitution was founded on the hope that government can be 
structured to limit the ambitions of public officials who are tempted to 
abuse their power.  What we find, instead, is a willingness to abandon the 
system of checks and balances to facilitate prompt action, often at the cost 
of individual liberties and constitutional violations.  There are many ways 
to summarize this trend.  I call it “presidentialism,” the assertion that what 
we need in times of crisis (real or contrived) is a President free to act as 
necessary, even if in violation of statutes, treaties, and the Constitution.  
Dismissed from our political system is the understanding that at the heart of 
constitutionalism is a willingness and desire to form public policy through 
consensus and accommodation.  I call institutional practices that support 
consensus and accommodation “pluralist.”  Part of the impetus toward 
concentrating power in the executive branch is the belief, which I consider 
false, that the President is better able and more likely to operate in the 
“national interest” under presidentialist, rather than pluralist arrangements.3 
The risks of moving in this direction are heightened with regard to 
foreign and military affairs.  In this realm, policies within the executive 
branch are developed in a climate of isolation and ideological rigidity, 
predictably  undermining  the  soundness  of  presidential  decisions.  
Government attorneys are supposed to operate as a check on abuses of 
government power.  Too often, in matters of national security, they are 
likely to be abettors.  Problems in the past will continue into the future 
unless we rededicate ourselves to the pluralistic government of checks and 
balances that James Madison and his colleagues designed.  Unfortunately, 
the campaign to “imperialize” the presidency reflects the determined work 
of many players, not just in the Oval Office or in Congress but also in 
courtrooms, lawyers’ offices, and scholarly law reviews. 
The  choice  between  presidentialism  and  pluralism  is  crucial  for 
constitutional government.  Presidents who believe they are constitutionally 
entitled to preserve all decisionmaking power in their own hands are likely 
to attract a group of actors and advisers that will be too small and too 
 
Lantern in the Darkest Night: The CIA’s Inspector General, 4 J. NAT’L SECURITY L. & 
POL’Y 247, 270-278 (2010).  In 2005, NSA released an agency study that concluded that 
what had been reported as a second attack in the Gulf of Tonkin in August 1964 was actually 
late  signals  coming  from  the  first.    The  agency  report  is  available  at  http://www. 
nsa.gov/public_info/_files/gulf_of_tonkin/articles/rel1_skunks_bogies.pdf 
  3.  PETER M. SHANE, MADISON’S NIGHTMARE: HOW EXECUTIVE POWER THREATENS 
AMERICAN DEMOCRACY 82-83 (2009). 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX (DO NOT DELETE )  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
2012]  EXECUTIVE BRANCH SELF-POLICING AND LEGAL ANALYSIS    509 
homogeneous for best results.  The dangers of presidentialism are evident in 
two costly wars: the Vietnam War in the 1960s-1970s and the Iraq war that 
began in March 2003.  It is pluralism that is most likely to assure the 
advantages  of  open  discussion,  competing  perspectives,  and  the 
conscientious weighing of diverse options, both within and beyond the 
bureaucracy. 
The escalation of the war in Vietnam is surely one of the most tragic 
examples of presidentialism at work.  Decisionmaking was shallow, ill 
informed, hostile to genuine debate, unwilling to confront uncertainties 
about basic issues, and driven more by wishful thinking and by perceived 
political momentum than by sound interpretations of fact.  Our military 
policy was never seriously tested as to its underlying assumptions about the 
nature of the conflict and the soundness of alternative strategies.  The 
governing  political  imperative  was  never  to  admit  error.    Presidential 
advisers  fed  the  White  House  only  the  spin  it  wanted  to  hear.  The 
ascendancy of Richard Nixon to the presidency exacerbated the penchant 
for tightly controlled executive branch decisionmaking and the affinity for 
secrecy and deception in prosecuting the war.4 
The March 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq – which both diverted American 
attention from Afghanistan and all but inevitably increased the regional 
power of our weightier adversary, Iran – was arguably even a worse disaster 
for American interests.  In many respects, it appears to have replayed an 
earlier script.  The Bush administration followed flawed intelligence and 
made policy by wishful thinking.  Worst-case scenarios about Iraq’s nuclear 
and unconventional weapons programs were offered to justify the invasion, 
while  best-case  scenarios  predicted  how  American  troops  would  be 
welcomed.  Intelligence was overplayed or underplayed, depending on how 
it could support the invasion.  Decisionmakers suppressed personal doubts 
in the face of what they believed to be conclusions already reached by 
higher authorities.  False claims were made, or strongly implied, about a 
connection between Iraq and al Qaeda.  The presentation by Secretary of 
State Colin Powell before the U.N. Security Council in February 2003, 
providing key support for the invasion, was deeply flawed by unreliable and 
false intelligence.5  Other deficiencies were evident, including invading the 
country  with  insufficient  forces  to  make  it  secure  and  protect  its 
infrastructure after toppling Saddam Hussein.  According to Paul Pillar, the 
CIA’s national intelligence officer for the Near East and South Asia in 
2002, “For any analyst, favorable attention to policymakers is a benchmark 
of success.  There was a natural bias in favor of intelligence production that 
supported,  rather  than  undermined,  policies  already  set.”6  In  short, 
 
  4.  Id. at 65-68. 
  5.  Id. at 71. 
  6.  MICHAEL R. GORDON & BERNARD E. TRAINOR, COBRA II: THE INSIDE STORY OF 
 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX  (DO NOT DELETE)  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
510  JOURNAL OF NATIONAL SECURITY LAW & POLICY  [Vol. 5:507 
presidential  unilateralism  imposed  a  kind  of  ideological  discipline  that 
disabled sound analysis. 
In making these military commitments, a recurrent problem is “agenda 
overload.”  An internal atmosphere  of pressure  and urgency will push 
groups  and  officials  to  premature  conclusions.    In  order  to  obtain  a 
President’s or even a Secretary’s attention, there will be a profoundly felt 
need to shrink the range of facts or issues under debate, to treat decisions 
already  made  as  beyond  rethinking,  and  to  generally  economize  one’s 
concentration on any particular item.  As an operation drags out, important 
decisions  will  often  be  made  on  the  basis  of  decisionmakers’  shallow 
analyses.  The problem of unreliable information is intensified if Congress 
is not part of the policy making process.  During both the Vietnam and Iraq 
episodes,  senior  members  of  Congress  with  foreign  policy  experience 
would have felt freer than presidential subordinates to test key assumptions 
and challenge the quality of information. 
II.  THE BREAKDOWN OF GOVERNMENT LAWYERING 
The  military  and  foreign  policy  disasters  generated  by  presidential 
unilateralism  demonstrate  the  practical  importance  of  maintaining  a 
pluralist view of checks and balances.  Political officials are not simply 
rational actors who respond with dispassionate calculation to evidence and 
circumstance.  Facts and options are always filtered through ideological 
prisms.  Presidentialism narrows the prism.  Pluralism works to offset that 
filtering.    Pluralism  guards  against  too  much  distortion  by  seeking  to 
maximize  the  number  of  meaningful  institutional  voices  in  the  policy 
making process. 
Equally troubling is the risk of presidentialism to the rule of law.  Even 
in normal times, a heavy burden falls on government attorneys in virtually 
every agency.  Government lawyering frequently represents the exclusive 
avenue  through  which  the  law  is  actually  brought  to  bear  on 
decisionmaking.  This professional review within the executive branch is 
crucial.  Most government decisions are simply too low in visibility, or too 
diffuse in impact, to elicit judicial review or congressional oversight as 
ways  of  monitoring  legal  compliance.    Yet,  the  ideological  prism  of 
presidentialism can bend the light of the law so that nothing is seen other 
than the claimed prerogatives of the sitting chief executive. Champions of 
executive power – even skilled lawyers who should know better – wind up 
asserting  that,  to  an  extraordinary  extent,  the  President  as  a  matter  of 
constitutional entitlement is simply not subject to legal regulation by either 
of the other two branches of government. 
 
THE INVASION AND OCCUPATION OF IRAQ 154 (2006). 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX (DO NOT DELETE )  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
2012]  EXECUTIVE BRANCH SELF-POLICING AND LEGAL ANALYSIS    511 
Government  attorneys  must  understand  their  unique  roles  as  both 
advisers and advocates.  In adversarial proceedings before courts of law, it 
may be fine for each of two contesting sides, including the government, to 
have a zealous, and not wholly impartial, presentation, with the judge acting 
as a neutral decisionmaker.  But in their advisory function, government 
lawyers must play a more objective, even quasi-adjudicative, role.  They 
must give the law their most conscientious interpretation.  If they fail in that 
task, frequently there will be no one else effectively situated to do the job of 
assuring diligence in legal compliance.  Government lawyers imbued with 
the  ideology  of  presidentialism  too  easily  abandon  their  professional 
obligations  as  advisers  and  too  readily  become  ethically  blinkered 
advocates for unchecked executive power. 
Jack Goldsmith headed the Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) for a little 
less than ten months in 2003-2004.  Of the work done by some government 
attorneys  and  top  officials  after  9/11,  he  said  they  dealt  with  FISA 
limitations on warrantless surveillance by the National Security Agency 
(NSA) “the way they dealt with other laws they didn’t like: they blew 
through them in secret based on flimsy legal opinions that they guarded 
closely so no one could question the legal basis for the operations.”7  He 
describes a 2003 meeting with David Addington, who was Counsel and 
later Chief of Staff to Vice President Dick Cheney, in which Addington 
denied the NSA Inspector General’s request to see a copy of OLC’s legal 
analysis in support of the NSA surveillance program.  Before Goldsmith 
arrived at OLC, “not even NSA lawyers were allowed to see the Justice 
Department’s legal analysis of what NSA was doing.”8 
OLC’s analysis of the legality of NSA surveillance, issued on January 
19, 2006, justified the program on two grounds: the President’s inherent 
war powers and the Authorization for Use of Military Force (AUMF).  
However, the AUMF did not say anything about electronic surveillance.  In 
1978,  Congress  expressly  stated  that  no  statute  other  than  the  Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) or Title III – the law that applies to 
ordinary federal criminal prosecution – provides authority for electronic 
surveillance by the federal government.  The AUMF could supersede FISA 
by repealing it, but only by making the repeal explicit.  An argument that 
the AUMF implicitly repealed FISA necessarily falls short.  OLC also 
argued that the President had an inherent constitutional power to conduct 
the NSA program no matter what FISA said.  According to OLC, if FISA of 
1978, as amended, were read to preclude the NSA program, the statute 
would be unconstitutional.9   
 
  7.  JACK GOLDSMITH, THE TERROR PRESIDENCY: LAW AND JUDGMENT INSIDE THE 
BUSH ADMINISTRATION 181 (2007). 
  8.  Id. at 182. 
  9.  U.S. JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, LEGAL AUTHORITIES SUPPORTING THE ACTIVITIES OF 
 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX  (DO NOT DELETE)  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
512  JOURNAL OF NATIONAL SECURITY LAW & POLICY  [Vol. 5:507 
What prompted the Justice Department to argue in this fashion?  One 
answer  might  be  that  Justice  Department  lawyers  are  institutionally 
expected to advocate for the President’s powers and simply adopt the most 
ambitious arguments consistent with appropriate standards of professional 
competence  in  legal  research  and  analysis.    However,  it  is  not  the 
responsibility  of  Justice  Department  lawyers  to  advocate  for  every 
contemplated assertion of presidential authority, no matter how far-fetched.  
Even in my brief period at Justice, I witnessed multiple and significant 
examples of Department lawyers refusing to provide analytic support for 
legally  ill-conceived  proposals  for  executive  action.    Moreover,  it  is 
difficult  to  make  a  case  for  the  professional  competence  of  the  FISA 
memorandum.  Although the Justice Department manages to elaborate its 
views in over forty pages of single-spaced and highly technical verbiage, its 
memorandum never confronts the enormity of the initiative it is endorsing 
or the power of alternative arguments.  Instead, it proffers distinctions from 
contrary precedents that are often, in a word, silly.  Even if the authors felt 
institutionally constrained to reach a particular bottom line, the failure to 
assert any principle limiting the claims being made and the too-frequent 
lack of rhetorical judgment in structuring their argument suggest something 
other than diligent lawyering was at play. 
What accounted for the bad arguments was political and professional 
pressure.  When I worked at Justice, the refusal to take positions that could 
not be defended by respectable standards did not harm the lawyer.  As 
anyone who has ever worked in an organization knows, however, informal 
pressure can be an extraordinarily effective method of stifling disagreement 
and guiding decisions in the way top management desires.  We know that 
supervision  of  the  process  of  executive  branch  lawyering  on  the  NSA 
memorandum was significantly usurped by the Office of the Vice President.  
David Addington, the Vice President’s Counsel, and John Yoo, then a 
deputy  in  OLC,  worked  together  to  craft  a  series  of  arguments  for 
unprecedented claims of executive power to pursue the campaign against 
terrorism.10  Jack Goldsmith reports that Addington blackballed from future 
advancement in the executive branch any lawyer who dared cross swords 
with him.11 
The deficiencies of legal analysis of NSA surveillance were replicated 
in other initiatives after 9/11, including the treatment of persons captured 
and suspected of aiding and abetting terrorism.  The Justice Department, 
through  OLC,  produced  legal  opinions  stating,  in  effect,  that  anyone 
 
THE NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY DESCRIBED BY THE PRESIDENT 17 (2006), available at 
http://www.justice.gov/olc/2006/nsa-white-paper.pdf. 
  10.  My  account  of  Administration  lawyering  with  regard  to  the  warrantless 
surveillance program is based on Daniel Klaidman, Stuart Taylor, Jr. & Evan Thomas, 
Palace Revolt, NEWSWEEK, Feb. 6, 2006, at 34. 
  11.  GOLDSMITH, supra note 7, at 170-171. 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX (DO NOT DELETE )  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
2012]  EXECUTIVE BRANCH SELF-POLICING AND LEGAL ANALYSIS    513 
captured in the Afghanistan campaign had few, if any, rights under U.S. or 
international law and certainly no rights susceptible to vindication in U.S. 
courts.12    The  function  of  these  legal  opinions  –  indeed,  their  obvious 
purpose – was to ratify a scheme of maximum license to do with the 
detainees whatever the military, the CIA, or any other U.S. authority might 
choose to do with them.  The Administration’s lawyering process cleared 
the path to horrors at the Abu Ghraib prison and Guantánamo – crimes 
whose stain upon our national honor is likely to remain, for decades at least, 
firmly embedded in the world’s collective memory, deeply undermining our 
image and influence abroad. 
It is understandable that the Administration would want some flexibility 
in dealing with a threat it rightly regarded as in some ways unprecedented 
and of very grave magnitude.  And yet, to move the detainees so completely 
beyond the realm of normal legal process was itself a plainly risky strategy 
in terms of compromising international support, exposing U.S. military 
personnel to mistreatment, risking the honor of U.S. military culture, and 
weakening the fabric of international law generally in its protection of both 
combatants and civilians during wartime.  The desire for flexibility was 
understandable, but not at the cost of all other values. 
On  a  number  of  the  most  important  points  discussed  in  the  OLC 
lawyers’  memoranda,  the  courts  subsequently  held  them  to  be  wrong.  
Contrary  to  OLC,  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  foreign  detainees  at 
Guantánamo who challenged their classification as enemy combatants were 
entitled to judicial review of the legality of their detention.13  Contrary to 
OLC, the Court held that the Geneva Conventions protected the detainees, 
whether or not they strictly qualified as prisoners of war.14  Contrary to 
OLC  and  Justice  Department  briefs,  the  Court  held  that  the  military 
commissions as originally constituted were not sufficiently protective of the 
detainees’ rights to permit their use for war crimes trials.15 
On all of these questions, whether of morality, policy, or law, there 
were at least serious arguments to be entertained by both sides.  The fact 
that the Administration reached incorrect conclusions is, in itself, only a 
limited indictment of its lawyering.  Even good lawyers make mistakes, and 
the fact that executive branch lawyers would consistently make mistakes 
erring on the side of executive authority is not in itself damning.  What is 
damning, however, is that on critical questions – questions going to the core 
of national honor and identity – executive branch lawyering was not just 
 
  12.  The key memos are reprinted in KAREN J. GREENBERG & JOSHUA L. DRATEL, THE 
TORTURE PAPERS: THE ROAD TO ABU GHRAIB 3-24, 38-222 (2005) [hereinafter TORTURE 
PAPERS]. 
  13.  Rasul v. Bush, 542 U.S. 466, 484 (2004). 
  14.  Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557, 627-631 (2006). 
  15.  Id. at 634-635. 
 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX  (DO NOT DELETE)  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
514  JOURNAL OF NATIONAL SECURITY LAW & POLICY  [Vol. 5:507 
wrong, misguided, or ethically insensitive.  It was incompetent.  It was so 
sloppy, so one-sided, and at times so laughably unpersuasive that it cannot 
be defended as ethical lawyering in any context.  Tax advice this bad would 
be malpractice.  Government lawyering this bad should be grounds for 
discharge. 
With regard to federal statutes to implement the U.S. obligation to 
enforce the Convention Against Torture (CAT), an OLC memo states, flat 
out, that the President may simply ignore the law.  Without any authority, 
the opinion announces ex cathedra: “Any effort by Congress to regulate the 
interrogation of battlefield combatants would violate the Constitution’s sole 
vesting of the Commander-in-Chief authority in the President.”16  That is a 
stunning proposition, and one that no worthy legal adviser would advance 
without  due  examination  of  counterarguments.    A  competent  legal 
memorandum on this particular point would consider the implications of 
constitutional text pointing conspicuously in the other direction: the sole 
vesting in Congress of the power to make laws necessary and proper to 
carrying executive authorities into effect, and the vesting in the President of 
the obligation to take care that the laws be faithfully executed, which, at its 
core, is a bar against the Executive’s suspension of statutes.  This OLC 
memorandum represents the extremes of presidentialism, a tendency to 
express disregard, even disdain, for other opinions, and to argue by fiat in 
the belief that the rightness of a largely unprecedented position is self-
evident, beyond dispute, and to be taken on faith. 
In an effort to define physical torture, OLC lawyers relied on the idea 
that other statutes with similar phrasing may shed light on the textual 
meaning in question through analogy.  They turned to statutes that refer to 
“severe pain” and ended up citing statutes that define emergency medical 
conditions that entitle their victims to federally funded health benefits.  To 
count as “torture,” physical pain would have to be of comparable severity to 
the  pain  that  would  entitle  its  sufferer  to  government-provided  health 
insurance.  This is an amazing performance.  I think we can safely assume 
that,  whatever  policy  considerations  underlie  the  structuring  of  our 
Medicare  statutes,  they  probably  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  policies 
underlying  the  CAT.    In  defining  “severe  pain”  for  emergency  health 
insurance  purposes,  Congress  was  presumably  creating  a  very  narrow 
entitlement to fill a hole in a much more comprehensive scheme of health 
insurance.  This has nothing to do with levels of brutality appropriate to 
military detainees.  Looking at health insurance statutes to determine the 
meaning of torture is a little like defining the rules in a “court” of law by 
 
  16.  Memorandum of Jay S. Bybee, Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department of 
Justice for Alberto Gonzales, Counsel to the President, Re: Standards of Conduct for 
Interrogation Under 18 U.S.C. §§2340-40A (Aug. 26, 2002), reprinted in TORTURE PAPERS, 
supra note 12, at 172, 207. 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX (DO NOT DELETE )  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
2012]  EXECUTIVE BRANCH SELF-POLICING AND LEGAL ANALYSIS    515 
looking up the rules that apply to a basketball “court.”  It is more of a play 
on words than serious lawyering.17 
III.  RESTORING LEGAL COMPETENCY 
The Office of Legal Counsel exists as an office outside the White 
House  precisely  to  insure  that  the  President’s  legal  advice  has  some 
measure of independence to it.  OLC includes both political appointees and 
“career employees,” the latter often long-time members of the office whose 
institutional  memory  spans  more  than  a  single  presidency.    However 
predisposed it may be to uphold plausible assertions of executive power, 
OLC is traditionally mindful of its quasi-adjudicative role.  It is supposed to 
be a conscientious adviser to the President and to the Attorney General, not 
their blind advocate.18  The location of OLC outside the White House, its 
reliance on career lawyers as well as political appointees, and the quasi-
adjudicative norms that traditionally shape OLC legal advice are intended 
to mitigate the gravitational pull of politics.  Especially in contexts where 
the executive branch works in secrecy and largely free of either judicial 
review  or  close  congressional  oversight,  the  dedication  to  a  balanced, 
dispassionate, multivocal approach to legal interpretation is indispensable to 
any meaningful adherence to the rule of law. 
The process of securing legal analysis after September 11 was anything 
but  balanced,  dispassionate,  and  multivocal.    Genuine  influence  was 
deliberately limited to a group of lawyers united by ideology, not only in 
terms of amenability to claims of executive power, but also in hostility to 
international law, a likely source of constraint on that power.  Members of 
the group wanted to distinguish themselves by the risks they were willing to 
advocate  in  order  to  maximize  the  President’s  flexibility.    Despite  the 
number of immediate legal questions that would affect military personnel, 
military lawyers were largely excluded from the key legal deliberations 
following September 11.  Then-White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales, 
with little national security experience, was exposed to the views of the 
Vice President’s Counsel, David Addington, an extreme presidentialist, and 
Deputy White House Counsel Timothy Flanigan, an alumnus of  OLC 
during its aggressively presidentialist days under President George H. W. 
Bush.    Other  key  figures,  like  John  Bellinger,  the  National  Security 
Council’s top lawyer, were not even told of their plans. 
Addington brought John Yoo into the circle.  As an academic, Yoo had 
written an article indicating that Congress’s constitutional power to declare 
 
  17.  For further evaluation of OLC’s analogy between the torture statute and the health 
statute, see SHANE, supra note 3, at 101-103. 
  18.  See generally Walter E. Dellinger, et al., Principles To Guide the Office of Legal 
Counsel, 81 IND. L. J. 1348 (2006). 
 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX  (DO NOT DELETE)  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
516  JOURNAL OF NATIONAL SECURITY LAW & POLICY  [Vol. 5:507 
war  had  no  bearing  on  the  President’s  unilateral  authority  to  deploy 
American  military  force  wherever  and  whenever  he  likes.    Yoo  was 
ultimately lead author of the infamous torture memo, but his thinking was 
foreshadowed by an earlier memo he wrote shortly after September 11, 
which declared that Congress may not “place any limits on the President’s 
determination as to any terrorist threat, the amount of military force to be 
used in response, or the method, timing, and nature of the response.”19  Led 
by  Timothy  Flanigan,  the  inner  circle  of  Administration  lawyers 
researching  the  use  of  military  commissions  did  not  turn  to  State 
Department legal adviser William H. Taft IV for his input on U.S. treaty 
obligations towards military detainees.  They did not trust him to toe the 
line on extreme presidentialism, even though he had served in the Reagan 
administration.20 
Perhaps the most celebrated of the attorneys who sought to slow the 
Administration’s  embrace  of  unlimited  discretion  with  regard  to  the 
treatment of detainees is Albert J. Mora, who served from 2001 to 2006 as 
General  Counsel  to  the Navy.21    As  succinctly  stated  by  reporter  Jane 
Mayer, his 2004 memo shows that “Mora tried to halt what he saw as a 
disastrous and unlawful policy of authorizing cruelty toward terror suspects. 
. . .  Mora’s criticisms of Administration policy were unequivocal, wide-
ranging,  and  persistent.”22    William  Haynes,  the  Pentagon’s  General 
Counsel, who was a protégé of Addington’s, told Mora in January 2003, 
that  Defense  Secretary  Donald  Rumsfeld  was  suspending  harsh 
interrogation  techniques  and  convening  a  working  group  to  develop 
interrogation guidelines; he did not reveal that the working group would be 
following the August 2002 OLC “torture memo” authored by John Yoo. 
The theory that the President is accountable to no one invites a style of 
decisionmaking  in  which  any  dissent  from  the  expansion  of  executive 
power is regarded not merely as wrong, but disloyal.  Dissenters do not just 
lose arguments; they are punished.  The tension between presidentialism 
and the rule of law is not just a matter of principle.  Presidentialism licenses 
a style of executive policy making that, in utterly foreseeable ways, makes 
certain types of violations of law more likely.  Aggressive presidentialism 
does not produce superior decisions in terms of  wisdom or attractiveness as 
public policy.  Instead, the pattern we have seen with regard to previous 
 
  19.  Memorandum  from  John  Yoo,  Deputy  Assistant  Attorney  General,  U.S. 
Department of Justice, Office of Legal Counsel, to Timothy Flanigan, Deputy Counsel of the 
President, The President's Constitutional Authority To Conduct Military Operations Against 
Terrorist Organizations and the Nations that Harbor or Support Them (Sept. 25, 2001), 
reprinted in TORTURE PAPERS, supra note 12, at 3, 24. 
  20.  Tim Golden, After Terror: A Secret Rewriting of Military Law, N.Y. TIMES, Oct. 
24, 2004, at 13. 
  21.  This account is derived from Jane Mayer, The Memo, NEW YORKER, Feb. 27, 
2006, at 32. 
  22.  Id. 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX (DO NOT DELETE )  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
2012]  EXECUTIVE BRANCH SELF-POLICING AND LEGAL ANALYSIS    517 
administrations – constricted debate among the like-minded – produces 
decisions at odds with even the executive branch’s professed vision of the 
national interest.  Surely, no policy maker in the Bush administration would 
have argued for antagonizing the world’s Muslim population as a way of 
advancing America’s policies and global position.  Yet, as described jointly 
by attorney Joseph Margulies, who successfully established the right of 
Guantánamo prisoners to habeas corpus, and Lawrence Wilkinson, who 
served from 2002 to 2005 as Secretary of State Colin Powell’s Chief of 
Staff: “Guantánamo has become a word that inspires rage for millions of 
Muslims,”23  essentially  because  of  Bush  administration  policies  that  its 
lawyers effectively sanctioned. 
Presidentialism in action distorts the processes of legal analysis that are 
supposed to serve as a protection against the abuse of power.  No sane 
President claims to be above the law, and every administration will take 
pains to defend controversial actions as legal.  The defense by the Bush 
administration after 9/11 of extraordinary rendition is typical: “In addition 
to the terrorists held at Guantánamo, a small number of suspected terrorist 
leaders  and  operatives  captured  during  the  war  have  been  held  and 
questioned outside the United States, in a separate program operated by the 
Central Intelligence Agency. . . .  This program has been subject to multiple 
legal  reviews  by  the  Department  of  Justice  and  CIA  lawyers;  they’ve 
determined it complied with our laws.”24 
What the Bush record confirms, however, is that “legal reviews” by 
self-interested  lawyers  within  an  administration  devoted  to  supporting 
presidential goals are often insufficient by themselves to satisfy the rule of 
law.  The “suspected terrorist leaders and operations” were clearly suspects 
and  many  of  them,  apparently  absolved,  were  released  by  the 
Administration after abusive interrogations.  Mistakes are made because 
legal analysis within the confines of one branch of government, especially 
when done in secret to carry out national security policy, lacks the level of 
accountability that the rule of law demands. 
Checks and balances, in operation, depend on an assemblage of norms, 
cooperative arrangements, and informal coordination activities, both within 
and between branches.  Jack Goldsmith wrote about the critical role of 
institutional  norms  in  preserving  the  rule  of  law  within  the  executive 
branch.    In  order  to  prevent  itself  from  simply  interpreting  the  law 
opportunistically to serve the political ends of the executive branch, OLC 
“has developed powerful cultural norms about the importance of providing 
 
  23.  Joseph Margulies & Lawrence Wilkerson, Op-Ed, Guantanamo Prison Observes 
Sad Anniversary, MIAMI HERALD, Jan. 28, 2007. 
  24.  Press Release, President Discusses Creation of Military Commissions To Try 
Suspected Terrorists (Sept. 6, 2006), available at http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives. 
gov/news/releases/2006/09/20060906-3.html. 
 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX  (DO NOT DELETE)  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
518  JOURNAL OF NATIONAL SECURITY LAW & POLICY  [Vol. 5:507 
the President with detached, apolitical legal advice, as if OLC were an 
independent court inside the executive branch.”25  His statement echoes the 
observations of a group of former OLC attorneys, led by former Assistant 
Attorney General Walter Dellinger, who were deeply upset by the national 
security opinions written by attorneys within the Bush administration after 
9/11.26  The robustness of these rule of law norms, however, is powerfully 
buttressed by the interaction of the executive branch with Congress and the 
judiciary.    The  internal  norms  rightly  underscored  by  Dellinger  and 
Goldsmith are unlikely to be self-sustaining without external reinforcement. 
If we read the academic work of the presidentialists, their position 
becomes clear.  They feel justified in elevating Article II over Article I 
because  they  regard  the  executive  branch  as  a  better  institution  than 
Congress.  They think it better at making decisions because it is more 
centralized and hierarchical.27  They may think it is better at handling 
sensitive information because of the same structural features.  And, most 
notably, they think it more reliable in pursuing the national interest because 
the President, unlike his legislative colleagues, is accountable to a national 
constituency, thus supposedly fostering an accountability to the general 
interest  that  is  less  parochial,  less  factional,  than  the  perspectives  of 
individual members of Congress.28 
These normative claims are important to evaluate, especially because 
the  last  is  a  red  herring  –  the  proper  comparison  is  not  between  the 
President  and  a  member  of  Congress,  but  between  the  President  and 
Congress as a body – and the others are easily overstated.  The Framers of 
our Constitution did not share this sense of executive branch superiority for 
making policy decisions.  On the contrary, they designed an elaborate and 
pluralistic  legislative  process  out  of  the  conviction  that  Congress’s 
structural characteristics – its size and bicameral design – were superior for 
resolving issues of public policy because they would insure due discussion 
and thorough deliberation.  To the extent presidentialism embraces informal 
norms of governance or legal interpretations that disrespect the role and 
perspective  of  Congress,  presidentialism  is  at  odds  with  constitutional 
originalism. 
My strategy, however, in painting the dangers of presidentialism is to 
rely ultimately not on theory, but on experience.  The performance of the 
Bush administration gave Americans a kind of natural experiment in how 
the presidentialists’ attitude plays out in practice, and it is the record of that 
 
  25.  GOLDSMITH, supra note 7, at 33. 
  26.  Dellinger, supra note 18. 
  27.  Lawrence Lessig & Cass R. Sunstein, The President and the Administration, 94 
COLUM. L. REV. 1, 106 (1994). 
  28.  See generally Steven G. Calabresi, Some Normative Arguments for the Unitary 
Executive, 48 ARK. L. REV. 24 (1995). 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX (DO NOT DELETE )  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
2012]  EXECUTIVE BRANCH SELF-POLICING AND LEGAL ANALYSIS    519 
administration that indicts the presidentialist vision of the rule of law most 
effectively. 
The  fact  that  prior  Democratic  administrations,  including  that  of 
Lyndon B. Johnson, occasionally displayed the same damaging dependence 
on unchecked executive power, secrecy, and deception, means that the 
defects of presidentialism are not partisan, but structural. 
Healthy checks and balances in a separation of powers system like ours 
depend on informal practices of cooperation and mutual respect among the 
branches of our federal government.  For at least the last quarter century, 
many of these key informal practices, which have long helped to sustain 
effective governance in the United States, have withered.  Their decline has 
accelerated the ascent of executive power at least since the second Reagan 
administration.  Through a variety of rules and institutional practices, many 
voices within our national democratic conversation have been artificially 
suppressed.  What we need is more democracy to level the playing fields of 
electoral  competition  and  democratic  deliberation.    No  feature  of 
government is more essential to democratic legitimacy than the ongoing 
pervasiveness within government of free and open dialogue.  Checks and 
balances were intended to protect the republic by restraining the capacity of 
any one branch to rule tyrannically by “checking” unwise initiatives. 
Executive  unilateralism  legitimates  secrecy,  and  secrecy  promotes 
effective  decisionmaking  in  the  public  interest  only  in  exceptional 
circumstances.  An administration’s conspicuous availability to have its 
performance subjected to public scrutiny will improve both the quality of 
that performance and public confidence in the executive branch.  President 
Franklin D. Roosevelt in September 1940 decided to give Great Britain fifty 
“over-aged”  destroyers  in  exchange  for  military  bases  in  the  Western 
Hemisphere.  Roosevelt concluded that it was best to release to the public 
the legal reasoning of Attorney General Robert Jackson, rather than proceed 
in secrecy.  Jackson’s opinion did not persuade everyone, but Roosevelt 
strengthened his hand by acting publicly.  As Jack Goldsmith has pointed 
out, having Jackson’s opinion published in the pages of The New York 
Times was an important method of undercutting the objections of those who 
objected on legal grounds.29  Roosevelt took some risks in going public.  
The risks of acting in secret, however, are much greater.  To Goldsmith, the 
kind  of  strategy  employed  by  the  Bush  administration  after  9/11  “is 
guaranteed not to work, and is certain to destroy trust altogether.”30 
In his review of legal advice offered by recent administrations, former 
law dean and fellow OLC alumnus Harold Bruff inquires into the lessons of 
history:  “Will  the  public  beatings  Bush  administration  officials  have 
 
  29.  GOLDSMITH, supra note 7, at 199. 
  30.  Id. at 212. 
 12_SHANE_V12_011012.DOCX  (DO NOT DELETE)  1/19/2012  1:03 PM 
520  JOURNAL OF NATIONAL SECURITY LAW & POLICY  [Vol. 5:507 
received  deter  their  successors  from  repeating  their  excesses?    Recent 
experience suggests not.  It was about a decade from Watergate to Iran-
Contra,  and  another  fifteen  years  to  the  war  on  terror.    Attempts  to 
aggrandize the executive branch have produced some punishments in each 
case, but the sting does not seem to last very long.”31  What plausible 
remedies exist to sanction government attorneys who act unprofessionally?  
The counseling function is covered by the American Bar Association’s 
Model  Rules  of  Professional  Conduct.    Rule  2.1  provides  that,  in 
representing  a  client,  a  lawyer  is  expected  to  “exercise  independent 
professional judgment and render candid advice.”32  Bruff notes that a 
leading legal ethics treatise warns that a lawyer may not simply reinforce 
the preferences of a client: 
A client may consult a lawyer to have her own preconceptions 
confirmed rather than to seek genuine advice.  A lawyer may be 
tempted to play sycophant to such a client, to ensure continued 
employment.  Rule 2.1 prohibits such an approach, however, first 
by  requiring  that  a  lawyer’s  advice  be  candid;  and  second,  by 
requiring the lawyer to exercise judgment that is both independent 
and professional.33 
Lawyers  within  the  executive  branch  who  fail  to  discharge  the 
obligations of Rule 2.1 are subject to sanctions, ranging from rebuke to 
disbarment.  We are all familiar with the lax enforcement of this rule 
against government attorneys.  Many attorneys and public officials paid a 
price for Watergate, including prison sentences, but there has been little in 
the way of penalties in subsequent years.  There are strong reasons for the 
public to insist on higher standards, both to guide government attorneys in 
the  future,  and  to  assure  a  commitment  to  democracy,  constitutional 
government, and the rule of law.  Unless these standards are strengthened, 
clarified and enforced, there is every reason to worry about the capacity of 
the executive branch to provide reliable legal and constitutional analysis in 
times of emergency. 
 
 
 
 
  31.  BRUFF, supra note 1, at 289. 
  32.  Id. at 294-295, citing MODEL RULES OF PROF’L CONDUCT R. 2.1 (2003). 
  33.  Id. at 295 (quoting 1 GEOFFREY C. HAZARD, JR. & WILLIAM H. HODES, THE LAW 
OF LAWYERING (3d ed. 2001), at §23.2). 
VViieeww  ppuubblliiccaattiioonn  ssttaattss