10/22/2018 How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years? | History News Network
HNN Information...
Join our mailing list
SUBSCRIBE
Departments
6-21-09 
How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years?
News at Home 
 
 
1.8k
Shares
 
 
by Peter M. Shane
Mr. Shane is the Jacob E. Davis and Jacob E. Davis II Chair in Law at The Ohio State University.
If you asked Americans how the institutional
Presidency has changed most in the last 30 years, the
overwhelming majority would probably be clueless. 
This has less to do with Americans’ low levels of civic
knowledge generally than the obscurity of this
particular development and its seeming lack of
drama.  The most important change in the presidency
in recent decades is the increasing White House
control of domestic rulemaking activity by
administrative agencies.
Madison’s Nightmare: Executive Power and the Threat to American
Democracy (University of Chicago Press, 2009) analyzes the theory and
practice of “presidentialism” as they unfolded from 1981 to 2009.  The book
https://historynewsnetwork.org/article/88190 1/810/22/2018 How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years? | History News Network
argues that American presidents during this period waged an escalating war
on checks and balances. They (and their lawyers) advanced ambitious and
unsubstantiated claims of vast unilateral executive authority. They claimed
to be largely immune to oversight by Congress and the courts.  In a sense,
their practices might be seen as merely extending a trend towards increased
executive power, which has existed since the Depression, World War II, and
the founding of the modern national security state.  On the other hand,
recent claims to presidential authority – including the genuinely audacious
theory of “the unitary executive” – have so clearly accelerated the modern
trend as to represent a genuinely distinct and dangerous phenomenon.
In our current political atmosphere, the issues this subject brings most
readily to mind tend to be questions of war making and national security. 
One thinks also of the Bush Administration’s proliferation of constitutional
signing statements and extraordinary pursuit of government secrecy.  But
the most novel assertion of presidential authority, and one for which
Republicans and Democrats have shown equal enthusiasm, has to do with
control over the federal policy making bureaucracy.
Under our Constitution, the federal executive branch has no inherent
authority to issue general rules on the air we breathe, the water we drink, the
food we eat, the drugs we take, the cars we drive, the conditions under which
we work and play, our susceptibility to discrimination in schools, in public
accommodations, and in the workplace, our entitlements to health care,
disability insurance, and income security in our old age – or on any of the
other aspects of our individual or collective welfare that are currently subject
to administrative regulation.  The reason the executive branch regulates in
these areas is that Congress, exercising the constitutional powers of the
legislative branch, has decided to create administrative agencies and to
empower those agencies to issue binding rules as Congress’s instruments for
accomplishing the legislature’s constitutionally authorized objectives.
Up until at least 1980, if a federal administrative lawyer were asked to
describe the relationship between the President and the administrative
bureaucracy, the lawyer would probably say something like this:  The
President has powerful influence.  He appoints the heads of all agencies
(albeit with Senate advice and consent).  Under laws enacted by Congress,
the President can also fire most agency heads at will – and he can discharge
any of them for good cause, such as law breaking.  An agency’s failure to
attend respectfully to the President’s concerns may elicit punishment in the
https://historynewsnetwork.org/article/88190 2/810/22/2018 How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years? | History News Network
preparation of the agency’s future budget.  And, of course, the President is
the President.  By virtue of his office and his personal influence, what he
says always carries great weight.
But that lawyer would have added a crucial final point: The President cannot
actually order administrative agencies to issue the precise rules and
regulations he wants.  Agencies can issue rules and regulations that bind the
public only insofar as they have legislative authority from Congress to do so. 
That authority may leave the agency with substantial room for exercising its
own judgment in how to develop the very best regulation.  In exercising
discretion, no sensible agency will be oblivious to the President’s policy
agenda.  But the decision of how best to exercise agency judgment remains
with the head of the agency, not the President.  That means the President
may fire an agency head if he is disappointed too often, but he cannot insist
beforehand that the agency head follow the President’s policy preferences.
Since 1980, however, a different theory has taken hold. Presidents have
increasingly subjected all significant administrative rules to months of
painstaking scrutiny by the Office of Management and Budget, effectively
second-guessing much of the regulatory work product of the executive
agencies.  Our Republican Presidents – President Reagan to some degree
and, most especially, both Presidents Bush – regarded the system as a
logical outgrowth of the theory of the “unitary executive.”  Under this theory,
the conventional legal understanding just described is wrong.  “Unitarians”
believe the President is entitled to command all administrators in the
exercise of their discretionary powers.  Contemporary presidentialists
believe, in other words, that authority explicitly granted by Congress to
agency heads is power actually delegated to the President. This is not just a
matter of what Congress wants.  It is what the Constitution compels. 
Congress could not provide otherwise.
The Clinton Administration did not adhere to this constitutional theory, but
it embraced its operational equivalent.  It interpreted all of Congress’s
regulatory statutes, except those directed at independent agencies, as
approving the presidential direction of rulemaking activity.  Congress may
not have been constitutionally compelled to defer to the President so
strongly, but it has.  And so, for President Clinton, as for the Republicans,
presidential commands to regulatory agencies were appropriate.
https://historynewsnetwork.org/article/88190 3/810/22/2018 How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years? | History News Network
Americans, of course, might not suspect much difference in operation
between the pre-1980 view and the view of the presidentialists.  Won’t an
administrator subject to at-will discharge always follow orders?  But the
answer is, no.  An agency head fearful of disappointing the President, even at
risk of being fired, is constrained also by other constituencies.  She will
worry about the congressional committees that oversee her agency.  She will
worry about industry or public interest groups that monitor and publicize
her performance.  She will worry about maintaining personal credibility
within her agency, with future clients or employers and with the larger
public.  She will know that the President can fire her, but only at political
cost to the President.  Thus, the difference in these two views of the
presidency can shape many a key decision. 
The move towards centralization of policy control in OMB should worry
Americans for three reasons.  First, a tightly controlled bureaucracy is
actually less responsive to public sentiment than a bureaucracy in which
administrators enjoy some room for independent judgment.  This seems
counterintuitive because we elect presidents, but not bureaucrats.  The
problem, however, is that the President is unlikely to reflect the views of the
median voter on each and every issue of significant public concern.  Because
the President chooses agency heads, they will all share his general policy
outlook, but each agency head is somewhat more inclined than the President
to respect the median voter’s view on the particular issues that his or her
specific agency addresses.
Second, the system is potentially less accountable to the public.  The more
decision making is concentrated in the White House, the easier it becomes to
use executive privilege as a shield against disclosure of the decision making
process.  To be fair, recent Presidents have taken some significant steps to
make White House regulatory review more open and transparent than it was
in the 1980s, but the potential for changing course towards more secrecy is
always present.
Third, the system adds months of delay to the process of issuing new
regulations.  As I detail in Madison’s Nightmare, it has never been
demonstrated that the reduction in regulatory costs produced by White
House review has adequately compensated for the value of benefits foregone
by delaying new health, safety and environmental regulations for periods
often lasting six months or longer.
https://historynewsnetwork.org/article/88190 4/810/22/2018 How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years? | History News Network
I wrote Madison’s Nightmare partly in the hope of explaining persuasively
what’s wrong with the “unitary executive” as constitutional law and partly in
the hope of demonstrating how aggressive presidentialism undermines good
governance.  Much of the book deals with the dramatic questions of torture,
domestic surveillance, and executive secrecy that are so often in the news.  I
hope that the book also brings at least some greater attention to the
centralization of presidential policy making control, which deserves far more
public attention and debate than it has seen since its inception.
Report ad
0 Comments HistoryNewsNetwork 1 Login
 Recommend tTweet fShare Sort by Best
 
Start the discussion…
LOG IN WITH OR SIGN UP WITH DISQUS  ?
Name
Be the first to comment.
✉Subscribe dAdd Disqus to your siteAdd DisqusAdd 🔒 Disqus' Privacy PolicyPrivacy PolicyPrivacy
https://historynewsnetwork.org/article/88190 5/810/22/2018 How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years? | History News Network
Sponsored Links
[Columbus] What are Web Design Prices in 2018?
Expert Market Web Design
A Brave Photographer Smuggled These 28 Photos Out Of North Korea
StandardNews
Drivers With No Tickets in 3 Years Should Do This in 2018
EverQuote Insurance Quotes
Identical Sisters Born In 2010 Have Grown Up To Become Most Beautiful Twins In The World
Give It Love
Surgeon Reveals: “You Can Fill In Wrinkles At Home” (Here’s How)
Beverly Hills MD
Columbus Residents Should Be Using This Technology Instead Of a Landline
VoIP | Search Ads
NEWS
Breaking News
Historians
DC
Stone Mountain: The Largest Confederate Monument Problem in the World
Who Will Be the Face of the £50 Bill? Probably Not a Soccer Player Riding a Unicorn
Thousands of Theodore Roosevelt’s Papers Are Now Online
Khashoggi’s Name Runs Through Middle East History
When did Vesuvius erupt?
TRENDING NOW
Trending on HNN
https://historynewsnetwork.org/article/88190 6/810/22/2018 How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years? | History News Network
Capitalism’s Final Solution Is Nothing Less than Complete Ecological Collapse
This Is What Max Hastings Did.  Is this Plagiarism?  You Decide.
Is Islam a Western Religion?
https://historynewsnetwork.org/article/88190 7/810/22/2018 How Has the Presidency Changed Most in the Last 30 Years? | History News Network
 
•  Know available prostate cancer treatment options?
•  WashPost: Mueller Probing Stone, WikiLeaks Contacts
•  CNN Shows 'Body Double' of Khashoggi in Istanbul
•  Trump Met With Bondholders Demanding China Pay $1.2 Trillion
•  Scaramucci: John Kelly's 'Hissy Hits' Have 'Hurt the President'
•  Graham: Saudi Crown Prince 'Done to Me' After Khashoggi
•  Homan: Immigration Loopholes Caused Dangerous Migrant Caravan
•  Trump: Caravan a National Emergency, Calls to End US Aid to Countries
•  Sears Chairman Lampert Said to Seek Partner for Bankruptcy Financing
•  RealClearPolitics Chief: GOP Leads in Competitive Districts
Powered by 
Copyright 2018. All rights reserved.
NEWSLETTER SUBMISSIONS ADVERTISING DONATIONS INTERNSHIPS MASTHEAD MISSION STATEMENT FAQ
https://historynewsnetwork.org/article/88190 8/8