10/22/2018 Opinion | President Trump Can’t Just Fire Robert Mueller - The New York Times
OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
President Trump Can’t Just
Fire Robert Mueller
By Peter M. Shane
June 13, 2017
The latest attention-grabbing trial balloon to be ﬂoated by a White House staffer or apparent
surrogate for President Trump is the suggestion by Christopher Ruddy, a longtime friend of the
president, that Mr. Trump is “considering, perhaps, terminating” Robert S. Mueller III, the
special counsel appointed to investigate the Trump campaign’s links to Russia.
President Trump cannot legally do so.
Authority to appoint Mr. Mueller landed with Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general,
because Attorney General Jeff Sessions recused himself last March from the Russia probe. In
appointing special counsel, Mr. Rosenstein was exercising authority that Congress had given the
Justice Department by statute. The Justice Department, in turn, issued implementing regulations
in 1999 speciﬁcally to govern such appointments. Those rules provide that a special counsel is
appropriate when a criminal investigation is warranted but presents a conﬂict of interest for the
department.
Under these rules, only the attorney general — or, in this case, the deputy attorney general —
may remove a special counsel. He may do so only “for misconduct, dereliction of duty, incapacity,
conﬂict of interest or for other good cause.”
Because the deputy attorney general serves at the pleasure of the president, Mr. Trump may
direct Mr. Rosenstein to ﬁre Mr. Mueller. Although Mr. Rosenstein has cautiously avoided any
statement more deﬁnitive than insisting he would not dismiss the special counsel except for good
cause, he has added that he does not anticipate such a scenario. Should Mr. Rosenstein refuse a
dismissal order, then Mr. Trump, like President Richard M. Nixon, could ﬁre however many
ofﬁcials it takes to get someone in place willing to execute the discharge. That is not likely to be
easy because there is no reason at this point to suspect that Mr. Mueller has done anything that
would warrant his dismissal for “good cause,” and it is doubtful there are many Justice
Department ofﬁcials who would rush to act unlawfully.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/13/opinion/donald-trump-fire-robert-mueller.html 1/310/22/2018 Opinion | President Trump Can’t Just Fire Robert Mueller - The New York Times
Following the Saturday Night Massacre — the now-infamous dismissal of the special prosecutor
Archibald Cox by Robert H. Bork, then the acting attorney general — several members of
Congress sued in federal court because the Cox ﬁring made it more difﬁcult to perform their duty
in deciding whether to proceed with a Nixon impeachment.
You have 3 free articles remaining.
Subscribe to The Times
Judge Gerhard A. Gesell, one of the most highly regarded federal trial judges of the last century,
held that the ﬁring of the special prosecutor was unlawful because it violated Justice Department
regulations governing Mr. Cox’s ofﬁce. He observed that the attorney general chose to “limit his
own authority” by specifying the narrow circumstances under which Mr. Cox could be ﬁred. “It is
settled beyond dispute,” Judge Gesell wrote, “that under such circumstances an agency
regulation has the force and effect of law, and is binding upon the body that issues it.” What was
true for Mr. Bork would also be true for the deputy attorney general now.
To be sure, there are at least some legal scholars who believe the president is constitutionally
entitled to take personal charge of implementing all statutes. Under “unitary executive” theory,
the president can simply seize whatever administrative authority Congress gives anyone in the
executive branch. This would mean that whatever authority Congress gives the attorney general
to appoint or ﬁre a special counsel would be authority the president could carry out himself.
That position, however, is constitutional nonsense. Early attorneys general representing
presidents as different in their politics as John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson agreed that
presidents could not simply assume tasks that Congress had assigned speciﬁcally to other
administrative ofﬁcers. Moreover, the Supreme Court has held repeatedly that agencies may not
discharge their ofﬁcers in a manner that violates their own regulations. It follows that Mr. Trump
lacks authority to ﬁre Mr. Mueller under current rules, and he cannot personally impose new
regulations to give himself that power.
Broadcasting that Mr. Trump is “considering” some dramatic action has become a familiar, if
tiresome, tactic. Whether he follows through, as he did in withdrawing from the Paris climate
accords, or not, as in failing to use executive privilege to shortcut congressional testimony by
James Comey, the former F.B.I. director, such grandstanding has political uses. A combination of
suspense and outrage can distract from whatever congressional Republicans are doing, sap
energy from political opponents and keep the glare of public attention where the president likes it
best — on himself.
In this case, however, it ought to be clear that what Mr. Trump may be “considering” is beyond his
powers. Following through, as with the Saturday Night Massacre, would only provide fodder for
his own removal.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/13/opinion/donald-trump-fire-robert-mueller.html 2/310/22/2018 Opinion | President Trump Can’t Just Fire Robert Mueller - The New York Times
Peter M. Shane teaches constitutional and administrative law at Ohio State Universityʼs Moritz College of Law.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today
newsletter.  
READ 224 COMMENTS
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/13/opinion/donald-trump-fire-robert-mueller.html 3/3