CONVENTIONALISM  IN
CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION
AND  THE  PLACE OF
ADMINISTRATIVE  AGENCIES
PETER M. SHANE*
On a single  day in  1935,  the Supreme  Court announced  three
anti-New  Deal decisions  that helped provoke  Franklin Roosevelt's
attack on the Court's structure and membership.'  The better known
of the  three  are  Humphrey's Executor v.  United States,2  and A.L.A.
Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States.3  Humphrey's Executor explained
in  categorical  and seemingly simple-minded  terms  why the  Presi-
dent  could  not  discharge  all  regulatory  commissioners  at  will.4
Schechter is the last vigorous stand of the federal nondelegation doc-
trine.5  It also represents  one of the Court's last attempts  to read
Congress'  commerce  powers  narrowly  on the  understanding  that
federalism places judicially enforceable limits on congressional reg-
ulatory power.6
*  Professor of Law, University of Iowa.  A.B.  (1974),  Harvard; J.D. (1977),  Yale.  I
would like to express my appreciation to Martha Chamallas, Steve Burton andJeff Powell for
their thoughtful comments on this essay.  This essay is dedicated to the memory of Professor
Robert Cover of Yale, a brilliant and humane practitioner of the interpretive art. All his for-
mer students will miss his personal encouragement and inspiration.
1.  On May 27, 1935, the Supreme Court announced three anti-New Deal decisions:
Humphrey's  Ex'r v. United States, 295 U.S. 602 (1935), A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v.
United States, 295 U.S. 495 (1935), and LouisvilleJoint Stock Land Bank v. Radford, 295 U.S.
555 (1935).
2.  295 U.S. 602 (1935).
3.  295 U.S. 495 (1935).
4.  Humphrey's  Ex'r v. United States, 295 U.S. 602, 631-32 (1935).  The Court held
that, when Congress provides for the appointment of officers whose functions are non-execu-
tive in nature, and restricts the grounds on which the officers may be discharged, the Presi-
dent has no constitutional power to remove them for reasons other than those specified by
Congress.  Id.
5.  See A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495,529 (1935) (noting
that Congress is not constitutionally permitted to abdicate or transfer its vested legislative
functions).
6.  See id. at 550-51.  In Schechter, the Court struck certain provisions of a "Live Poultry
Code" (Code) which the President had approved under section three of the National Indus-
trial Recovery Act. Id  The Court held that Congress may not delegate "virtually unfettered"
authority to the President to make laws affecting trade and industry. Il  at 542. Moreover, the
573574 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
The  structural  implications  of Schechter have  fared  badly.  The
Court has  quietly, but conspicuously,  buried Schechter's stance  on
nondelegation.7  In Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Author-
ity,8  the Court interred-or, more accurately, reinterred9-its  crea-
tive efforts on behalf of federalism.  Now, the categorical version of
the separation  of powers proffered  by Humphrey's Executor may be
gasping its last.10
In  each  of these  developments,  I  see what  may be  a  common
theme.  If present, it would be an important theme, but it is so often
stated implausibly  that I utter it here only as  a hypothesis  and in
anticipation of considerable elaboration.  In both developments, we
may be returning to a reading of the structural and operational pro-
visions of the Constitution that seems most obviously to reflect the
conventional  meaning of the Constitution's  language  and its most
conventionally  understood  implications."1  Further, because  these
conventional meanings are so commonly interpreted, we are finding
that the Constitution, in at least some of its structural  and opera-
tional provisions, speaks most sensibly when it is treated as "speak-
ing plainly,"  even in the modern administrative state.12
This hypothesis  occurred  to me for two  reasons.  First, at least
some of the Court's excursions into administrative theory independ-
ent of the constitutional text seem question-begging and confusing.
Court stated that the Code provisions to fix hours and wages of defendants'  employees in
their intrastate business was a constitutionally invalid exercise of federal power. Id. at 550.
See also LouisvilleJoint Stock Land Bank v. Radford, 295 U.S. 555, 601-02 (1935) (invalidating
Frazier-Lemke Bankruptcy Act which provided federal farm mortgage relief).
7.  American Textile Mfrs. Inst. v. Donovan, 452 U.S. 490, 543 (1981)  (Rehnquist, J.,
dissenting) (criticizing congressional delegation of "hard policy choices" to Executive Branch
in enacting occupational safety and health standards).  But cf National Cable Television Ass'n,
Inc. v. United States, 415 U.S. 336, 342 (1974)  (reading statute narrowly to avoid difficult
issue of constitutional delegability).
8.  429 U.S. 528 (1985) (overruling National League of Cities v. Usery, 426 U.S. 833
(1976)  and holding that tenth amendment does not immunize state transit authority from
minimum wage and overtime requirements of Fair Labor Standards Act, enacted by Congress
under commerce clause).
9.  See United States v. Darby, 312 U.S. 100, 124-25 (1941)  (holding Congress had au-
thority under commerce clause to regulate working conditions where manufactured goods are
shipped in interstate commerce).
10.  See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 135-36 (1976) (disregarding Humphrey's Ex'r as inap-
posite to questions of presidential appointments).
11.  For a discussion of various definitions of "conventionalism,"  see infra note 23.
12.  This is not to say that (a) all structural and operational provisions of the Constitution
are susceptible to plain reading, or (b) no power-limiting provision of the Constitution is so
susceptible.  The analysis that follows might apply, for example, more readily to the warrant
clause of the fourth amendment, U.S. CoNsT. amend. IV, than to the question whether the
President may abrogate a treaty without the consent of either House of Congress.  See Gold-
water v. Carter, 444 U.S. 996 (1979) (discussing congressional opposition to President's uni-
lateral termination of defense treaty with Republic of China), vacating 617 F.2d 697 (D.C. Cir.
1979).1987] CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION 575
For unhelpful  dicta, Humphrey's Executor is the worst example.  Sec-
ond,  I  have never  found much in  the constitutional  status of the
agencies that is truly uneasy.  What is chiefly uneasy is the agencies'
political status, and that is because, on my reading, the Constitution
plainly seems to leave the shaping of administrative agencies essen-
tially to the political branches, with Congress playing the predomi-
nant, but not exclusive oversight role.
The principal papers reinforce my conviction that the action here
is nearly all political13 because they show little disagreement on any
legal question.  Indeed, although Professor Bruff finds presidential
regulatory oversight more agreeable on policy grounds than Profes-
sor McGarity,14 he does not dispute his colleague's urging that Con-
gress  play  a  more  vigorous  role  in  overseeing  the  world  of
administrative regulation.' 5  Certainly there is nothing in Professor
Bruff's  remarks  suggesting  that any  of Professor McGarity's  ten-
dered reforms would be unconstitutional.
Although it follows that, like Professor Bruff, I view the truly im-
portant administrative law debates as political, my essay focuses on
the constitutional rather than the policy side of things to help coun-
terbalance a problem in the world of scholarly (and perhaps of even
more popularly digested) constitutional law.  The unabating litera-
ture on constitutional theory and metatheory' 6 often ignores sepa-
ration of powers questions as terrain for interpretation.17  The texts
that  animate  most  debates  over  constitutional  interpretation  are
such words as "privileges  and immunities," 18 "equal protection  of
the laws,"' 9 and "due process."'20  Fourteenth amendment jurispru-
13.  Professor Bruff has gone so far in revising his remarks as to argue that "no more
detailed anatomy is necessary or desirable at the constitutional level."  Bruff, On the Constitutional
Status of the Administrative Agencies, 36 AM. U.L. REv. 491, 491 (1987) (emphasis added) (foot-
note omitted).
14.  See McGarity, PresidentialC ontrol of Regulatory Agency Rulemaking, 36 AM. U.L. REv. 443,
463-89  (1987).
15.  Compare id. at 457 (stating that President is unaccountable for agency decisions and
that agencies can usually manipulate analysis of existing data to fit presidentially required
outcome) with Bruff, supra note 13, at 509 (stating that President cannot make every decision
and that President's responsibility is logically, therefore, one of oversight).
16.  I refer here to literature concerning the general enterprise of constitutional interpre-
tation, not to the voluminous literature actually interpreting the first three articles of the
Constitution.
17.  For recent notable exceptions to this statement, see Carter, ConstitutionalAdjudication
and the Indeterminate Text: A PreliminaryD  efense of an Imperfect Muddle, 94 YALE LJ.8 21, 853-87
(1985)  (differentiating interpretation of clearly determinate constitutional clauses from less
clearly determinate clauses protecting individual rights) and Schauer, Easy Cases, 58 S. CAL. L.
REV. 399 (1985) (discussing textual interpretation of structural provisions in Constitution as
"easy cases").
18.  U.S. CONST. amend. XIV, § 1.
19.  Id.
20.  Id.576  THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
dence, however, may require interpretive strategies that are less ob-
viously  necessary  to  construing  the  Constitution's  opening
21
articles.
To see this point, it is helpful to reflect first on the chief reasons
why  theory, and normative  theory especially,  plays  a conspicuous
part in the interpretation of certain provisions of the Constitution-
even where the relevant normative theory is highly controversial.  I
believe that these reasons do not pertain as strongly to the interpre-
tation of much of articles I and II of the Constitution.22  Admittedly,
interpreting these articles requires  normative theory also.  But, we
can get surprisingly far in the interpretive enterprise by relying on
value premises that are uncontroversial  in the sense that, although
they are debatable, they are not at issue for our particular society.
To test this hypothesis, I will attempt to elaborate and apply a con-
ventionalist method23 to interpreting articles I and II of the Consti-
tution as they relate to a series of questions regarding administrative
agencies.  I will discuss the plausibility of the method  and also its
inability to answer all constitutional questions regarding administra-
tive agencies.  If I am right that such an interpretive strategy is pos-
sible for  at least a  significant  minority  of important  questions,  I
would like to consider the implications of a Constitution that seems,
in its different aspects, to evoke different interpretive strategies, and
of the  availability  of conventionalist  "plain  reading"  as  a helpful
route to answering some, though by no means all, questions of ad-
ministrative structure and design.
21.  Carter, supra note 17, at 852 (contrasting presentment clause embodying "concrete
conception of the way a particular government process is at work" with due process clause
stating "very vague and very general value preference").
22.  See U.S. CONST. art. I (legislative power); id. art. II (executive power).
23.  It is only with trepidation that I borrow "conventionalism" or any other brief label to
capture the essence of the argument that follows.  See Schauer, supra note 17, at 438 (noting
that "apart from a general objection to 'ismism,'  I find such characterizations either simply
inaccurate ... , or merely misleading.  . ."). Aside from the customary capacity of labels to
oversimplify, my particular label suffers from the variability with which it is used in scholar-
ship.  For example, Professor Dworkin describes "conventionalism"  in his most recent work
as a conception of law (that he disapproves and which I do not share) that limits law "to what
has been endorsed by legal conventions."  R. DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 123 (1986).  What I
have in mind is, instead, an interpretation that emphasizes practice and context, and looks to
community agreement as a referent for the accuracy of interpretation.  See generally Fiss, Con-
ventionalism, 58 S. CAL. L. REv. 177 (1985) (defining conventionalism as viewpoint that empha-
sizes practice and context); S. BURTON, AN INTRODUCTION To LAW AND LEGAL REASONING 94-
98 (1985).
Because I believe  that the structural and operational phrases relevant to administrative
agencies are often so commonly understood by all persons who read the Constitution, my
emphasis on practice and context in this area supports, in my view, a "plain reading" approach
to the interpretation of these phrases.  This is by no means to suggest, however, that a diction-
ary-oriented  approach  to textual  interpretation  is always  or even usually  consistent with
conventionalism.1987]  CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION  577
I.  INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND THE "PULL"  OF PHILOSOPHY
Most governmental  decisions that affect us are state and local de-
cisions.  The federal  constitutional  limitations  on state  and local
government  emanate  predominantly  from the  fourteenth  amend-
ment  insofar as  it guarantees  due process,  equal  protection, and
such  fundamental  rights  as  are  deemed  "incorporated"  through
those  provisions,  the  privileges  and  immunities  clause,  or  some
combination of such terms.  Despite the wealth of scholarly litera-
ture to the  contrary,24  the application  of these textual phrases  to
litigated  factual  disputes  inevitably involves  conspicuous  resort to
controversial moral and political philosophy to give meaning to the
rights they create.
First, the key provisions of these and most individual rights guar-
antees in the Constitution25 are manifestly vague and contested.26
There is  no undisputed cultural  identification  of what is a  "privi-
lege"  or an "equal protection,"  or a "due process"  that constrains
us in our attempt to impute conventional, much less sensible, mean-
ing to those words.27  This is partly because the possible and plausi-
ble  ordinary  meanings  of  the  words  (both  contemporary  and
historical)  are so multifarious.28  There is also no strong evidence
that the drafters and ratifiers of those words united around any par-
ticularistic definitions that we can regard as authoritative.29  Even if
24.  See, e.g.,  Meese, Construing the Constitution, 19 U. CAL. DAVIS  L. REV. 22 (1985);  Bork,
Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems, 47 IND. LJ. 1 (1971).
25.  As noted above, supra note 12,  I do not mean this statement to apply either exclu-
sively or universally to individual rights provisions.  References to the "free exercise" of "reli-
gion," U.S. CONST. amend. I, and "the general Welfare of the United States," id. art. I, § 8, cl.
I, are equally vague and contested; references to a "GrandJury,"  id. amend. V, and a "Term
of four Years,"  id. art. II, §  1, cl. 1, are not vague and contested.
26.  It may be that the lesser intelligibility of these phrases is alone sufficient to explain
why straightforward readings of these phrases are less likely than straightforward readings of
articles I and II. Cf Schauer,s upra note 17, at 415 (stating that "vague, ambiguous, or simply
opaque linguistic formulation" of relevant rule can also create hard case).  My guess is, how-
ever, that the universally apprehended normative significance of the topics covered by these
phrases would precipitate hard cases in their application even if they were linguistically easier.
27.  I do not mean to revive any philosophical distinction between physical objects, like
"the President," which some people might regard as identifiable without interpretation, and
normative concepts, such as due process, which are not. All phenomena require interpreta-
tion.  Certain phenomena, however, such as "Congress"  or a "bill"  have been so thoroughly
interpreted that there remains no genuine dispute as to their meaning.
28.  See generally Goldberg, "Interpretation" of "Due Process of Law "-A Study in Futility, 13
PAC.  J.  365  (1982)  (exploring  "due  process");  D.  RAE,  EQUALrrlES  (1981)  (discussing
"equality" in theory and practice); Comment, The Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment:  The OriginalI ntent, 79 Nw. U.L. REV. 142, 158-76 (1984) (discussing "privileges or
immunities").
29.  Cf Brown v. Board of Educ., 347 U.S. 483, 489 (1954) (determining that arguments
made were inconclusive as to fourteenth amendment's intent vis-i-vis racial segregation); P.L.
MURPHY, THE CONSTTUTION IN CRISIs TIMEs 309 n.98 (1972)  (describing NAACP efforts to
research background to fourteenth amendment).578 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
such historical understandings were available, there is no strong evi-
dence that the drafters and ratifiers intended their language to refer
only to those understandings."0  If we are going to be consistently
intentionalist, we, of course, would have to respect the originators'
interpretive intention as well.31
But perhaps most importantly, everyone,  irrespective of politics,
genuinely wants to read the individual rights guarantees, including
the fourteenth amendment, against the backdrop of "extraconstitu-
tional"  normative  theory.  There  is  much  discussion,  of course,
about faithfulness to the language and framers'  intentions, but no
one, I think, is truly prepared  to live with the implications of that
approach.
Brief reflection suggests this is likely to be the case even with re-
spect to Attorney  General Edwin  Meese, who has become  for the
moment our best known advocate of intentionalism in constitutional
interpretation.32  In essence,  the Attorney General has strenuously
urged that courts go no further than the text, history, and structure
of the Constitution  in  giving  meaning  to  constitutionally  created
rights.33  Putting aside all scholarly quibbles about the possibility of
stating that position coherently, it is easy to posit a series of cases in
which the Attorney General would surely depart from this interpre-
tive position.
The  most obvious  instance  is  affirmative  action  based on race.
Whether the Constitution protects white candidates for employment
or for other government benefits from decisionmaking criteria that
favor minority  applicants  cannot be determined  by its language.34
Where language fails, the Attorney General recommends  resort to
history-and herein lies his problem.  The principal originators  of
the  fourteenth  amendment  were  also  drafters  of  legislation
30.  See Brest, The Misconceived Questf or the Original Understanding, 60 B.U.L. REv. 204, 216-
17 (1980) (asserting that Constitution's originators may have intended to provide more inter-
pretive freedom than is generally recognized); Powell,  The Original Understanding of Original
Intent,  98  HARV.  L.  REV.  885  (1985)  (discussing  meaning  of intent  in  constitutional
interpretation).
31.  Brest, supra note 30, at 217 (stating that intentionalist interpretation must determine
to what degree  ratifiers intended to constrain future interpretation of each constitutional
provision).
32.  Meese, supra note 24 (reprinting address given by Attorney General Meese outlining
his theory of intentionalist constitutional interpretation).
33.  Id. at 24-26.
34.  It is sometimes said that the words "equal protection" preclude differential decision-
making by race.  See Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 559 (1895)  (Harlan, J., dissenting)
(asserting "[o]ur constitution is color-blind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among
citizens").  That, of course, is not so.  If blacks and whites are different in some respect rele-
vant to the benefit being distributed-for example, based on need or on opportunity to de-
velop the customary qualifications-then the words "equal protection" would seem not only
to permit differential treatment, but to compel it.1987] CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION 579
designed  to assist former slaves and their descendants.35  It is im-
plausible to assume that those originators understood their consti-
tutional creation might render their statutory creations  unlawful.36
If history is our guide to the resolution of such cases as Regents of the
University of Californiav . Bakke37 or Fullilove v. Klutznick,38 the consti-
tutionality of race-conscious  affirmative  action  seems firmly  estab-
lished.  Yet,  our  intentionalist  Attorney  General  is  a  vigorous
proponent of the opposite position.39
Similarly, the Attorney General attacks the theory of fundamental
rights "incorporation"  as resting on a dubious intellectual founda-
tion, thus urging the Court to repudiate its allegiance to  textually
unspecified  fundamental  rights  deemed  binding  on  the  states
through the due process  clause.40  Even if he is  correct, however,
surely the Slaughter-House Cases,41 in which a narrow majority of the
Court failed to read fundamental  rights guarantees  into  the privi-
leges and immunities clause of the fourteenth amendment, is at least
as dubious on textual, historical, and structural grounds.42  The At-
torney General, to my knowledge, has never mentioned this point.
Likewise, the recognition of corporations as "persons" protected by
the fourteenth amendment43 is a judicial doctrine that flies conspic-
uously in the face of the Constitution's language, history, and struc-
ture.  At  the  risk  of stereotyping  the  Attorney  General's  views
unfairly, I doubt he would seek the reversal of this doctrine.
Finally, virtually all commentators  on equal protection  embrace
ethnicity  as  a  constitutionally  protected  classification.  Some,  like
Judge Posner, acknowledge candidly the ahistoricism of such a prin-
ciple;44 others, like Judge Bork, do not mention it.45  Nothing in the
35.  See Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S.  265, 397 (1978)  (Marshall, J.,
dissenting) (noting that same Congress that passed fourteenth amendment was same Con-
gress that passed "freedmen" legislation).
36.  Id.; see Schnapper, Affirmative Action and the Legislative History of the FourteenthA mendment,
71 VA. L. REV. 753, 754 (1985) (contending that framers could not have intended to prohibit
race-conscious legislation because many such programs were enacted concurrently with four-
teenth amendment).
37.  438 U.S. 265 (1978)  (plurality opinion) (holding that special admissions program
was illegal but that race may be one of several facts considered by schools in passing on
applicants).
38.  448 U.S. 448 (1980)  (holding that set-aside of federal contracts for minority busi-
nesses is constitutional).
39.  See N.Y. Times, Sept. 18, 1985, at A16, col. 4. Meese believes quotas are inherently
discriminatory.  Meese stated that the use of quotas to remedy the effects of past discrimina-
tion is, in principle, senseless and in practice "a legal ...  and constitutional tragedy."  Id.
40.  Washington Post, July 10, 1985, at A6, col. 6.
41.  83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 36 (1873).
42.  Idt at 83 (Field, J., dissenting).
43.  Santa Clara County v. Southern Pac. R.R. Co., 118 U.S. 394, 409-10 (1886).
44.  Posner, The DeFunis Case and the Constitutionalityo f PreferentialT reatment of Racial Minor-
ities, 1974 Sup. CT. REv. 1, 21-22 (1974).THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
language, structure, or history of the Constitution provides a com-
pelling  originalist  case  for  regarding  invidious  discrimination
against German or Irish-Americans  as being equally within the four-
teenth  amendment's  purview  as  invidious  discrimination  against
blacks.46  Yet, again at the risk  of stereotyping  the Attorney Gen-
eral's views, I would wager that, for purposes of constitutional law,
he  commendably  equates  the  two.  If so,  this particular  position
would again conflict with his purported interpretive philosophy.
From these examples, I infer that the fourteenth amendment and
other individual rights guarantees implicate issues of our moral life
so directly that our moral positions irresistably shape our readings
of those guarantees.  What constrains us in interpretation is our in-
stitutional  and  social  life,  not  plain  meaning  or  particularistic
history.
The truth of this observation may result from a sense in which the
"facts"  of individual rights cases seem more important than the rel-
evant  legal  "words."  Even  making  such  a  statement,  however,
seems to fall into the  misleading way  in which lawyers  frequently
speak of interpretation.  Lawyers often speak of legal interpretation
as  if there were distinct worlds "out there"  of already understood
"fact," and "in here" of ambiguous text. We speak as if the process
of interpretation  is concerned  with simply imputing such  meaning
to  the relevant  legal texts as  would lead  to the  right adjudicative
result, given the understood facts.
As  anthropologist Clifford Geertz, among others, has powerfully
asserted, however,  the world of facts is as least as complex and in
need of interpretation as the world of words.47  Under Geertz's the-
ory, when we lawyers  set about interpreting a legal text, we are si-
multaneously testing alternative interpretations of the world of the
real.  It is doubtful that any linguistic interpretation can satisfy us if
it does not help us to imagine the world of facts in a credible way.48
Geertz quotes a Swiss anthropologist who refers to adjudication as a
45.  Dronenburg v. Zech, 741 F.2d 1388, 1397 (D.C. Cir. 1984). Justice Bork's majority
opinion stated that, unlike the right to privacy asserted by petitioner, the Constitution creates
"specific rights" that protect, among others, "ethnic ...  minorities."  Id.
46.  But see Strauder v. West Virginia, 100 U.S. 303 (1880).  The Supreme Court adopted
the view early, and without discussion, that white ethnic groups are entitled to fourteenth
amendment protection akin to the protection for blacks.  Id  I thus do not mean to suggest
that finding ethnic discrimination within the purview of the equal protection clause is histori-
cally implausible. There had been, prior to the late 1860s, significant public debate and agita-
tion with respect to issues of ethnic discrimination.
47.  C. GEERTZ, LOCAL KNOWLEDGE:  FURTHER ESSAYS  IN INTERPRETIVE ANTHROPOLOGY
171-73 (1983).
48.  See id. at 173.1987] CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION
"back and forth movement"  between fact  and precept.49  Turning
our attention continually from one set of inputs  to  the other, we
seek interpretations,  each of which reinforces the credibility of the
other.
To offer an obvious  example, I would observe  that many people
support Roe v.  Wade50 not because the decision resonates in any par-
ticular constitutional language, but because a contrary result would
"interpret"  the fetus as a rights-holding entity whose interests could
overcome  a conscious  person's right to decide  whether  to bear a
child-from  their point of view,  an incredible  description  of real-
ity.51  Conversely, many people oppose Roe v.  Wade52 not because of
any asserted implausibility of Roe as a constitutional interpretation,
but because, from their point of view, Roe would have them "inter-
pret" fetuses  as  something  other than human beings-a  position
they likewise find incredible.
If I am correct, then one reason why controversial moral philoso-
phy plays so strong a role in the interpretation of fourteenth amend-
ment  rights  is  that  the  world  of reality to  which  the fourteenth
amendment  applies is  one of deep, universal  experience  and con-
cern.  Our observation  of political and legal debate in  this society
teaches us  that the choice among different plausible constructs  of
the fourteenth  amendment's language will play a conspicuous role
in  the  prevailing  social  understanding  of such  "facts"  as,  say,
whether individual choice or discrimination has yielded lesser aver-
age incomes for blacks and women than for whites or for men.  It is
inevitable,  therefore, that norm-bound  interpretations  of extratex-
tual reality will be given a predominant role in the process of under-
standing  the  fourteenth  amendment's  language.  Given  what  is
perceived to be at stake, we cannot realistically expect our legal sys-
tem to treat the fourteenth amendment as a bounded set of norms
neatly separable from the facts to which they pertain.
II.  CONVENTIONALISM  AND  THE CONSTITUTIONAL  PLACE  OF
ADMINISTRATIVE  AGENCIES
For all the foregoing reasons, controversial moral or political phi-
losophy will inevitably play a central role in the legal community's
interpretation  of the  fourteenth  amendment  and  other  constitu-
49.  lId at 174.
50.  410 U.S.  113 (1973).
51.  Petchesky, Introduction to Amicus Brief.- Richard Thornburgh v. College of Obstetri-
cians and Gynecologists, 9 WOMEN'S RTS. L. REP. 3, 6 (1986)  (criticizing "fetus-centered"
orientation of popular debate concerning abortion).
52.  410 U.S. 113 (1973).582 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
tional  provisions  that are  opaque  or strongly  relevant  to  critical
human  rights  issues.  Certain  characteristics  of  the  fourteenth
amendment text foreordain this result, thus differentiating that text
from the Constitution's  opening articles.  Articles  I and II, unlike
the fourteenth amendment, establish universally recognized institu-
tions.53  The words of these articles almost always have well-known
ordinary meanings,  whose applicability  often follows conventional
understanding  quite readily.  To  the  extent  normative  theory  is
needed to apply the words, it may be sufficient for such application
to recur to normative  theories about the operation of government
that are conventionally well understood and are not presently at is-
sue in our society.  As a result, the "plain"  meaning of these consti-
tutional words,  amplified  where necessary  by  overt  reference  to
conventionally understood governmental norms, frequently leads to
plausible resolutions  to  a variety of administrative  law questions.
Moreover, I believe there is frequently no persuasive reason to dis-
regard those conclusions.
A.  A ConventionalistA  pproach to Articles I and II
In this portion of the essay, I will attempt to elaborate a conven-
tionalist approach to interpreting articles I and II that rests on what
I believe to be the common understandings  of the words  of these
articles.  I will later apply it to help identify three categories of cases:
(a) cases where the method yields "easy,"  wholly plausible answers;
(b) cases where the method seems to yield no determinate answer;
and (c) cases where the method yields "easy"  answers that are none-
theless troubling.  If I am correct that each of these categories ex-
ists,  it becomes necessary then to consider the implications  of this
method, and of its incomplete utility, for constitutional interpreta-
tion generally.
It was my opening hypothesis  in this essay that, in separation of
powers and federalism issues, we are returning to a reading of the
Constitution's structural and operational provisions that most obvi-
ously reflects the conventional meaning of the document's language
and its most conventionally understood implications.  To make that
claim plausible, it is necessary to outline a believable conventionalist
account of how articles I and II may be read.  This method is not
formalistic in the strict sense of purporting to rely on logically nec-
essary  deductions  from authoritative major premises,  but perhaps
no  constitutional  commentator  today  is  truly  formalistic  in  this
53.  See U.S. CONsT. art. I (establishing powers and limitations of legislative branch); id.
art. II (establishing powers and limitations of executive branch).1987] CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION 583
sense.  The conventionalist method is formalistic in a sense used by
many  constitutionalists  (typically  in  an  uncomplimentary  way)  in
that it asserts that fairly determinate answers to legal disputes may
be reached by reliance on a fairly defined set of materials.5 4  It de-
nies, in other words, that all issues  of meaning and of precept are
fairly contestable, given certain premises that are not at issue in our
society about the text and about the government.
The conventionalist  method  is  explicitly  antiformalist, however,
because  it overtly  depends  on antecedent  normative  premises  to
guide textual interpretation.55  These are  normative premises  not
only about how texts  should be treated56 (although these  exist as
well), but explicitly about how we want the world of government to
behave.  What distinguishes the conventionalist method from other
possible  approaches  to interpretation  is thus not any denial of the
priority of normative commitment in reaching textual understand-
ing.  Rather, it is  my hypothesis  that much textual understanding
vis-a-vis modern government administration is possible if we rely on
a few normative premises that are wholly uncontroversial in society.
Some  uncontroversial  premises  are so widely held  as  to appear
wholly  conventional  and superficially  value-free:  for example,  the
convention that the word "President" in all its appearances refers to
the same person.  It is hardly necessary even to remind ourselves of
such premises.  To make my hypothesis  clear, however, it is neces-
sary to  set forth  three explicit premises  that pertain either to the
54.  See Tushnet, Anti-Formalism in Recent ConstitutionalT heory, 83 MIcH. L. REv. 1502, 1506
(1985)  (stating that formalist criteria "must have relatively well-defined cores about which
there can be no question").  Professor Mark Kelman of Stanford once remarked in conversa-
tion that one rarely hears the word "formalist" these days without the label "arid" attached to
it.
55.  I  believe  that  interpretation  is  impossible  without  prior  normative  premises.
Whether or not this is universally true, it is clearly so with respect to articles I and II of the
Constitution.  In our April 4 discussion, Professor Diver alluded to the dilemma that best
illustrates the point. Article II imposes an obligation on the President to "take Care that the
Laws be faithfully  executed."  U.S. CONST. art. II, § 3.  "Laws,"  as ordinarily understood,
could refer either to congressional enactments or to all federal law, including the Constitution
itself. If "laws"  includes only congressional enactments, then the President's domestic pow-
ers vis-i-vis Congress are clearly of much lesser magnitude than if the latter view is adopted.
Without some preconception of what the interbranch relationship should be, the text cannot
be interpreted.  The only alternative is to have a normative preconception that the historic
intention of the document ought to control, and a plausible view of what the historic intention
is.  See generally Fuller, Positivism and Fidelity to Law-A Reply to ProfessorH  art, 71 HARV. L. REV.
630, 661-69 (1958)  (arguing that legal rules cannot be applied without conception of their
underlying purposes).
56.  Some assumptions about how texts should be treated may be so devoid of any moral
weight that these assumptions should be called "conventional,"  rather than "normative."
Some conventions, however, may be so rooted in a normative vision about how communica-
tion can best take place that I am not sure a bright line between the two is possible.  In any
event, this debate is outside the scope of my discussion.584 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
appropriate way of reading a prescriptive text or to our expectations
as  to the proper working of our government:
Premise One. Among the branches of the federal government, Con-
gress should play the primary role in domestic policymaking.
Premise Two.  Among the branches of the federal government, the
President plays the primary and a significant role in implementing
the substance of such policies as are enacted by Congress.
Premise Three.  Respect for any prescriptive document's  intended
purposes requires that provisions of potentially broad applicabil-
ity should not be read to abrogate provisions of potentially nar-
57
rower applicability.
Assuming these premises, it is possible to adhere to the following
method in answering a great number of questions  concerning gov-
ernment administration.  I almost hesitate to call it a "method"  be-
cause  I  believe  I  am  doing  no  more  than  making  explicit  the
processes we pursue, perhaps unconsciously, whenever we purport
to be reading a text straightforwardly.  In any event, the steps are as
follows:
1.  Once a constitutional question is posed, determine the consti-
tutional  language  which,  as  conventionally  understood,  is
plausibly relevant to the resolution of that question.
2.  Considering the conventional meaning of the identified lan-
guage, determine whether it is possible to answer the ques-
tion posed.  If only one answer is plausible, the question is
presumptively resolved.
3.  If more than one answer is plausible, determine, as our ante-
cedent  premises  above  are  conventionally  understood,
whether one answer is the most likely to make possible the
realization of all three premises.  If so, the question is  thus
presumptively resolved.
4.  Once the issue is  presumptively resolved,  consider whether
the presumptive answer requires an incredible understanding
of the "extratextual  reality"  to which it applies.  If not, the
presumptive resolution is "the answer."
I do not claim that this approach will answer all important ques-
tions, but it does answer a surprising number.  It will yield answers,
any attempted linguistic contradiction of which will ring false to any
lawyer who has studied modem United States administrative law.58
57.  This is a variant of the principle that textual integrity is an important ingredient of
sound interpretation.  See Dworkin, Law as Interpretation,i n THE POLITICS OF INTERPRETATION
249 (W. Mitchell ed. 1983).  As Dworkin notes, "An interpretation cannot make a work of art
more distinguished if it makes a large part of the text irrelevant, or much of the incident
accidental, or a great part of the trope or style unintegrated and answering only to independ-
ent standards of fine writing."  Id. at 254.
58.  A recurring problem for conventionalists in interpretation is the identification of the1987] CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION
Before considering issues the method cannot resolve, I would like to
demonstrate the plausibility of the method.  I will then discuss rea-
sons for its incompleteness.
B.  Easy Cases
I believe the steps outlined above provide ready answers to a se-
ries of questions that administrative lawyers  often consider contro-
versial.  The first issue is the legality of the legislative veto.  Article I,
section 7 states that not only "every  bill,"59 but also "every  Order,
Resolution,  or Vote to which  the Concurrence  of the Senate and
House of Representatives may be necessary  ...  shall be presented
to the President of the United States"  for approval or disapproval.60
It is difficult to see how two-house vetoes, not presented to the Pres-
ident, can pass muster under this language.61 To permit two-house
vetoes under the necessary and proper clause, in light of this lan-
guage, would violate our third premise above.62  If that is true, then
the question in INS v.  Chadha63 was essentially, is there any reason
to think that one-house vetoes are more permissible than two-house
vetoes?  That is, should a "vote" of one house identical in form and
purpose to an impermissible vote of two houses be excluded  from
the purview of the term "vote?"  No matter what purpose is ascribed
to article I, section 7, I cannot imagine an affirmative answer to that
community whose practice and understanding is relevant to the determination of meaning.
Professors Fiss and Burton argue that the "legal community" is the relevant and authoritative
community. Fiss, Objectivity and Interpretation, 24 STAN. L. REv. 739, 745-50 (1982); S. BURTON,
supra note 23, at 125-43.  This is problematic, however.  Because the Constitution establishes
not only a legal but also a political community, all persons subject to the Constitution seem-
ingly have some claim to participate in its interpretation.  See Carter, supra note 17, at 835-40;
Brest, Interpretation and Interest, 34 STAN. L. REv. 765, 771 (1982).  Although I generally regard
this theoretical problem as a serious one, it seems of little consequence here because I do not
perceive that lawyers understand "Congress"  or a "resolution,"  or "nominate," for example,
any differently from the understandings of any English-speaking American with a modest de-
gree of civic education.
59.  U.S. CONST. art. I, § 7, cl. 2.
60.  Id at cl. 3.  In INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S 919 (1983), the Supreme Court held that the
one-house veto, retained in congressional legislation, infringed upon the executive branch's
authority under this article I language.  Id at 955-59.
61.  Following its decision on one-house vetoes in Chadha, the Supreme Court summarily
held two-house vetoes unconstitutional.  Process Gas Consumers Group v. Consumers En-
ergy Council of Am., 463 U.S. 1216 (1983), aft'g, 673 F.2d 425 (D.C. Cir. 1982).
62.  Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 135 (1976).  The Court stated that Congress could not
use one part of the Constitution to invalidate the provisions of another. The Court said:
[C]ongress could not, merely because it concluded that such a measure was 'neces-
sary and proper' to the discharge of its substantive legislative authority, pass a bill of
attainder or ex postf acto law contrary to the provisions contained in section 9 of Arti-
cle I.  No more may it vest in itself, or in its officers, the authority to appoint officers
of the United States when the appointments clause by clear implication prohibits it
from doing so.
63.  462 U.S. 919 (1983).586 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
question.  Certainly,  the normative premises animating our under-
standing compel none.
Second, consider the issue of appointments.  Article II, section 2
provides four modes for the appointment  of officers of the United
States.64  In originally structuring the Federal Election Commission,
Congress did not constrain itself to these four modes.65  The conse-
quent assessment of the legality of the Federal Election Commission
appointments was complicated by the fact that the text is ambiguous
as to whether these four modes of appointment shall be exclusive.
One may ask, however, whether it is possible to ascribe sensibly any
purpose to article II, section  2 that would render these provisions
non-exclusive.  Again,  I  cannot;  I  think  the  attempt  to  persuade
someone that a Federal Election Commissioner is not an "officer of
the United  States"  under article II would  evoke a sense  of game
playing in any reader attentive to text alone.  Thus, Buckley v.  Valeo 66
seems to me an easy case on textualist grounds.
Next, consider the constitutionality of requiring the President to
show "cause"  before removing an agency head from office.  Again,
the text seems to yield a natural answer.  Congress has the power to
make all laws necessary and proper for carrying into execution not
only its own powers, but all other powers vested by the Constitution
"int he Government of the United States, or in any Department or
Officer thereof."67  In connection with removals, the only plausibly
relevant  textual  limitation  on  this  power  is  that  the  President  is
vested with the obligation to take care that the laws be faithfully exe-
cuted.68  But,  so  long as  he can  discharge  any officer  who is  not
faithfully  executing  the  laws-that  is,  discharge  "for  cause"-it
seems that his constitutional obligation remains unimpaired.  Again,
I perceive no interpretive difficulty.69
64.  U.S. CONST. art. II, § 2, cl.2 .  The President nominates and, with senatorial advice
and consent, appoints certain designated officers and all other officers, except that Congress
may vest the power to appoint "inferior"  officers in "the President alone, in the Courts of
Law, or in the Heads of Departments."  Id.
65.  Under the 1974 amendments to the Federal Election Campaign Act, the Commission
included eight members. Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. No.
93-443, § 310, 88 Stat. 1263, 1280-88.  These included: (a) two appointed by the Speaker of
the House upon the recommendations of the majority and minority leaders, (b) two appointed
by the President pro tempore of the Senate, upon the recommendations  of the majority and
minority leaders, (c) two appointed by the President, and (d) the Secretary of the Senate and
the Clerk of the House, serving ex officio. A majority of both Houses was required to confirm
each of the six voting appointees.  Id. at 1280-81.
66.  424 U.S. 1 (1976).  In Buckley, the Court held that the appointment of the Federal
Election Commission violated article II.  Id. at 143.
67.  U.S. CONsT. art. I, § 8, ci. 18.
68.  U.S. CONsT. art. II, § 3.
69.  My analysis is predicated on the assumption that no significant domestic authority
beyond the specific clauses of article II is plausibly delegated by the opening clause of that1987]  CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION  587
My final  problem is the scope  of presidential authority  to guide
administrative agencies  in the exercise of their statutory discretion.
I have argued elsewhere that, where Congress  places no statutory
limits  on  the  President's  power,  a  straightforward  reading  of the
faithful  execution  clause,  buttressed  by  the  vesting  of executive
power in a single individual, supports  the assertion that the Presi-
dent has implicit power to oversee agency discretion for the purpose
of implementing  Congress'  overall  program most  effectively.70  It
seems  to me, however, that an equally straightforward  reading of
the "necessary  and proper clause"  strongly  supports the assertion
that Congress has implicit power to prevent the President from do-
ing so, if Congress so desires.  Imagine a rulemaking authorization
containing the following section:
In issuing rules under this act, the administrator shall rely entirely
on the statutorily specified  criteria and shall not base his or her
decisions on the anticipated impact of those decisions on regula-
tory initiatives authorized by other statutes.  The administrator's
decisions may be based on data or analysis supplied by the Presi-
dent of the United States, but (a) such data and analysis shall be
given only such weight as the administrator deems appropriate in
light of the statutorily specified decisional criteria,  and  (b) such
data and analysis, if relied upon by the administrator, shall appear
in the rulemaking docket.
I perceive nothing in the Constitution that would render such a sec-
tion impermissible.71  Upholding such a statute would not under-
article, which vests "the executive power" in the President. U.S. CONsT. art. II, §  1. Neither
Alexander Hamilton, in his contemporaneous review of article II, THE FEDERALIST Nos. 67-77,
nor the Supreme Court, in its subsequent review, infers any such power.  But cf Myers v.
United States, 272 U.S. 52, 164 (1926)  (dicta locating presidential removal power in vesting
clause). Locating significant powers in the opening clause would violate the rule against read-
ing provisions  of potentially broad  applicability so as to abdicate provisions of narrower
applicability.
70.  Shane, PresidentialR egulatory Oversight and the Separation ofP owers: The Legality of Execu-
tile Order No. 12,291, 23 Asiz. L. REv. 1235 (1981).  In one respect, I believe Professor Mc-
Garity misapprehends the views expressed in my earlier article.  He writes: "Professor Shane
suggests that this interstitial power [of regulatory oversight] will not be abused by the Presi-
dent's staff in the Office of Management and Budget ..  " McGarity, supra note 14, at 482.
What I actually said on this point was that the limited institutional capabilities of OMB gave
"reason to believe OMB will stick to a more general policing role, pressing consultation and
analysis on the President's primary concern with cost-effectiveness,"  rather than trying to re-
analyze the detailed substance of all agency decisions de novo.  Shane, 23 ARIz.  L. REv.  at
1250 n.81.  I concluded that presidential "policy oversight need not compromise the value of
specialized agency expertise" "if the system works well."  Id  (emphasis added).  Whether OMB
would exercise its management discretion properly as to any particular regulation is a topic I
expressly reserved from my discussion.  Id. at 1237.  As Professor McGarity  observes, we
might be in agreement in our assessment of OMB's actual practice to date. McGarity, supra
note 14, at 482 n.197.
71.  At our April 4 session, Professor Oliver Houck of Tulane posed the question of
whether Congress could prohibit the President, in any particular rulemaking, from communi-588 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
mine any of the antecedent normative premises discussed above.
If the foregoing analyses are sound, then conventionalist interpre-
tation does yield plausible answers  to some questions that are com-
monly considered problematic when more controversial normative
theories are explicitly relied upon to guide constitutional interpreta-
tion.  Of course, the fact that answers yielded by conventionalist in-
terpretation are plausible does not mean that they are likely to lead
to fair, effective,  accountable government operation.  Yet, with re-
spect to each of the cases  above, I have found no compelling evi-
dence that the conventionalist answers are less likely to lead to fair,
effective,  accountable  government  than the answers  that might be
yielded by more controversial and elaborate normative interpretive
approaches.  If I am correct, then conventionalism yields answers to
some constitutional questions that are not only plausible, but as use-
ful as any alternative answers for sound governmental design.  This
is all the more acceptable  because  the precepts I derive from the
Constitution by means of a conventionalist approach leave substan-
tial discretion over institutional  design to Congress  and the Presi-
dent, to whom the subtler arguments about fairness, effectiveness,
and accountability may more profitably be addressed.
C.  The Incompleteness of Conventionalist Textualism
Even if the foregoing analysis is correct, it is obvious that the tex-
tualist method does not plausibly answer all constitutional questions
concerning  administrative  structure  and  operation,  much  less  all
constitutional questions generally.  The inadequacies  of the textual-
ist method may be a result of the reasons explained earlier for the
role of controversial normative theory in interpreting the fourteenth
amendment: textual opaqueness  or the predominant significance of
interpreting extratextual reality.  In some cases, moreover, the Con-
stitution may not appear to contain any language specially relevant to
the problem posed either because no provision appears relevant or,
more likely, because so many provisions are potentially relevant as
to preclude any textualist reading from appearing authoritative.72
cating his views in any form to the agency involved. Houck, President X and the New (Approved)
Decisionmahing, 36 AM.  U.L. REv. 535, 550-53 (1987).  Apart from the possible first amend-
ment problems such a broad prohibition would raise, I would reject this possibility under the
necessary and proper clause because it would violate my second uncontroversial normative
premise that the President plays the primary and a significant role in implementing the sub-
stance of such policies as are enacted by Congress.
72.  An instance of such textual unhelpfulness is the Constitution's seeming silence on
the foundational issue whether federal courts may treat unconstitutional federal statutes as
having no legal effect.  The structure of Chief Justice Marshall's argument in Marbury v.
Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 171-80 (1803),  reflects this difficulty.19871 589
CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION
There are two additional reasons for the incompleteness  of textu-
alism,  however,  that apply  even when  conventionally  meaningful
constitutional language is identifiably relevant to a posed constitu-
tional question.  On the one hand, "plain reading" will not yield an
acceptable answer to a posed legal question when the uncontrover-
sial antecedent premises are insufficient to determine which poten-
tial  textual  meaning  is  best.  That  is,  in  a  particular  case,  the
normative  premises  could  consistently  support  or  contradict  any
number of meanings equally well.  These are cases of indeterminacy.
Some such cases are only falsely indeterminate;  a textualist answer
may become possible  once we add to our catalogue  of antecedent
normative premises an additional uncontroversial premise that had
not yet come to mind.  In some cases, however, in order to resolve
an indeterminacy, we must apply normative premises that are not so
widely shared as to be considered uncontroversial.
In my view, an example of a question unresolvable through textu-
alism alone is the existence ve  non of executive privilege.73  Under
the textualist method above, consider whether the President, absent
congressional authorization, is constitutionally empowered  to keep
secret from the public any communications or documents relating to
the implementation  of domestic policy.  No such power appears in
article II.  By contrast, Congress has express power to keep its jour-
nals secret under article I.74  Further, the existence of congressional
power  to make  laws necessary  and proper for carrying into effect
executive, as well as legislative, power buttresses the apparent infer-
ence  that any power  to keep  executive  secrets  depends  on Con-
gress.75  Such an inference would not appear to undermine any of
the three antecedent normative premises articulated above.
On the other hand, I believe a conventionalist reading of a power-
conferring provision of any document presumes that the power con-
ferred includes all authority essential  to the implementation  of the
named power.  Therefore, a conventionalist reading would support
executive privilege if the President's inability to prevent the public
outflow of a deliberative document would cripple his ability to per-
form a named power.76  Such a reading also would not undermine
73.  See generally United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 703-13 (1973) (discussing merits of
executive privilege claim in criminal proceeding context).
74.  U.S. CONST. art. I, § 5, cl. 3.
75.  Cf. Van Alstyne, The Role of Congress in DeterminingI ncidental Powers of the President and of
the Federal Courts: A Comment on the Horizontal Effect of the Sweeping Clause, 40 LAw & CONTEMP.
PROBS.  102,  128  (1976)  (describing  congressional  role  to authorize  executive privilege
through necessary and proper clause).
76.  It might be said that I have not sketched any genuine dispute as to interpretation, but
rather pointed out the difficulty of applying the interpreted text to a fact-based claim ofneces-590 THE  AMERICAN UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
any of my uncontroversial  antecedent premises.
It might be argued that the pro-privilege reading is clearly prefer-
able  once  the  essential  necessity  of executive  privilege  in  imple-
menting  specific  presidential  powers  is  demonstrated.  I  cannot
imagine, however, any noncontroversial  way of demonstrating that
any particular assertion of executive privilege is so necessary.  Fur-
ther, given the controversy that arises when such a demonstration is
proffered, a reader of the Constitution is likely to find this conven-
tionalist reading no less controversial than other interpretive meth-
odologies  directed  at  the  text,  such  as  relying  on  historical
understanding, that might yield  different answers.  Thus, the con-
ventionalist approach I have outlined cannot alone answer the legal
question  posed.  The  indeterminacy  is  all  the more  conspicuous
when questions arise as to when such a privilege may be exercised
and against whom.77
My conventionalist method also will fail where relevant, conven-
tionally meaningful language exists, but the conventional interpre-
tation  (a)  undermines  an  uncontroversial  normative  premise  not
made part of the interpretive scheme, (b) the undermined premise is
indisputably of key importance  to the community's perception of a
proper answer to the question posed, and (c) the relevant language
cannot be conventionally read to produce  the answer indicated by
the uncontroversial  "extra"  premise.  In other words,  my method
will fail where the presumptive answers yielded by the text require
an incredible interpretation  or reinterpretation  of the extratextual
reality to which the text refers.
I find it difficult, however,  to identify any such case involving a
question  of administrative  agency  design.  An  example  from  the
rights-defining  "side"  of the  Constitution  is,  however,  familiar.
Consider whether  the  federal  government  has  any  obligation  to
guarantee persons equal protection.  Surely the absence of an equal
sity.  Professor Van Alstyne, a narrow construer of executive privilege unsanctioned by Con-
gress, would apparently not object to a nonstatutory assertion of executive privilege based on
a need to avoid "crippling"  the President's ability to perform an assigned function.  Id. It
seems to me, however, that, when text cannot be uncontroversially applied, its interpretation
must likewise be considered controversial.  Thus, I do not understand Professor Fiss' state-
ment that controversies, for example, over the historical data relevant to understanding the
equal protection clause pose little threat to the legitimacy of the disciplining rules of interpre-
tation, as they pose only issues of application. Fiss, supra note 58, at 747. It seems to me that,
if the debates over interpretation are to have any importance, whether rules of interpretation
are, indeed, to be considered "disciplining"  or "legitimate"  must depend wholly on how the
interpreted text is to be applied.
77.  See Shane, Legal Disagreement and Negotiations in a Government of Laws: The Case of Execu-
tive Privilege Claims Against Congress, 71 MINN. L. REv. (1987) (forthcoming) (describing three
distinctive understandings of executive privilege law among the three branches of the federal
government).1987] CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION
protection  clause  in  the fifth amendment  and its presence  in the
fourteenth implies a negative answer.  Yet, in Bolling v. Sharpe,78 the
court held differently, reaching the only normatively acceptable  re-
sult given the implausibility of allowing the nation's capital to be the
only permissible situs for racially segregated schools.
In  sum,  my  conventionalist  approach  answers  some  important
questions, but quite clearly not all of them.  It is satisfactory only in
those  cases  where  identifiably  relevant  language  exists,  that  lan-
guage is susceptible to interpretation through conventional reading,
uncontroversial  normative  premises  exist  to  help  decide  among
plausible alternative readings of the relevant text, and the resulting
textual answer does not require us to reinterpret extratextual reality
in an incredible way.
D.  The Nondelegation Doctrine
There is, however, an additional level of interpretive difficulty to
be confronted, and that is the uncertainty that may arise in a particu-
lar case as to the existence of those conditions that make a textualist
reading  of the  Constitution  possible.  This  is  the  case  with  the
nondelegation  doctrine.  The  subject  merits  discussion  both  be-
cause of the concerns raised in the presentations by Professors Lowi
and Stewart, and because the nature of the interpretive anxiety that
surrounds delegation may shed light on the utility of my version of
conventionalism as an interpretive strategy.
Although the literature bemoaning the desuetude of the federal
nondelegation  doctrine is  considerable,  a conventional  reading of
the text does not necessarily suggest any broad nondelegation doc-
trine at all.  The usual reading of the text that supports the existence
of a nondelegation doctrine runs as follows:  The Constitution vests
"legislative power" in Congress.  "Legislative power" is, in general,
the power to make rules with the force and effect of law, and, for
Congress,  the power  to  "regulate"  for the  purposes  enumerated
most exhaustively in article I, section 8.79  Therefore, the making of
binding rules, in general, or the issuance of "regulations"  for article
I, section 8 purposes is "legislative power"  vested in Congress that
cannot  be abdicated  to  any other branch.  No  other branch  pos-
sesses "legislative  power."
A yet  more  plausible  plain reading, however,  is  possible.  This
reading begins with the observation  that article I does not vest ex-
78.  347 U.S. 497 (1954)  (holding that District of Columbia must desegregate despite
absence of any explicit guarantee of equal protection from federal action).
79.  See U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8.592 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
clusively in  Congress an unspecified category  of "legislative  pow-
ers"  with extra-constitutional  definition, but refers instead to "[a]ll
legislative powers  herein granted."  One might conclude from this
that rulemaking performed by administrative agencies is not a "leg-
islative power" in the constitutional sense for the simple reason that
such rulemaking is not a legislative power to which the Constitution
refers.  Although Congress could perform rulemaking under one of
its express powers, it has determined, under the authority granted
by the necessary and proper clause, to remove rulemaking from the
category of "legislative powers"  granted in the Constitution and to
render it an administrative task.  Such a reading does not abrogate
the vesting of regulatory  power in Congress;  it merely recognizes
that Congress may "regulate"  not only by issuing rules, but also by
authorizing  others to issue rules, subject  to congressional  revoca-
tion  of  rulemaking  authority.  Any  such  authorization  renders
rulemaking nonlegislative, for constitutional purposes, despite what
Professor Bruff has elsewhere labeled the "functional  similarity [of
rulemaking]  to legislation."80  This reading seems  not only as re-
spectful to my antecedent normative premises as the anti-delegation
reading, but more so because the nondelegation doctrine prohibits
Congress  from  adopting  a  range  of  plausible  domestic  policy
choices,  namely,  choices  to  delegate  broadly.  This limitation  on
Congress conflicts with my premise of congressional primacy in do-
mestic policymaking.
The strength of one's belief in the presumptive legitimacy of con-
gressional  policymaking  may  lead  one  to  regard  the  delegation
question as an "easy case" in favor of delegability on conventional
reading grounds.  There is nevertheless a rub.  The primacy of Con-
gress in domestic  policymaking was,  indeed, one of the assertedly
uncontroversial premises articulated above.  But that statement of
my premise leaves unresolved what, in this context, becomes a key
question:  should my premise be understood to refer to the scope of
Congress'  authority, that is, to its potential policymaking role, or to
the range of policies Congress has adopted, that is, to its actual poli-
cymaking  role?  If  the  former,  then  my  proffered  view  of  the
nondelegation doctrine is truly untroubling.  On the other hand, the
fact that broad delegation may reduce Congress' actual (as opposed
to its potential) policymaking role may prompt some  "plain read-
ers"  to  reject  broad delegation  under my  first  "uncontroversial"
premise.  The uncertainty as to the meaning of this premise  (and, I
80.  Bruff, Legislative Formality, Administrative Rationality, 63 TEx. L. REv. 207, 207 (1984).19871 CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION
believe, the impossibility of resolving it noncontroversially) robs it
of any value in deciding between  the plausible conventional read-
ings of the Constitution with respect to congressional delegation of
legislative power.  Thus, we are faced with textual indeterminacy.
Indeed, the uncertainty here runs deeper.  A knowledgeable  ob-
server, such as  Professor Lowi,  might even  be persuaded  that the
prodelegation textual reading is correct under a  dictionary-type un-
derstanding  (bolstered  by  my  uncontroversial  interpretive  prem-
ises).  He would regard that reading, however, as a "wrong answer"
to the issue of delegability because it would require him to accept a
version of political reality which he regards  as incredible.8'  Given
Professor Lowi's normative understanding of how a liberal democ-
racy is to be run, he could not accept a prodelegation  textual read-
ing.  Recognizing  these  likely  alternative  viewpoints,  I  cannot
perceive a noncontroversial  way of using my premises concerning
government behavior to choose among competing "plain readings"
of the text.  Even if we could choose among such readings, I predict
that a  conventionalist  answer would  nonetheless  fail  because,  for
many, it may require an unacceptable view of extratextual reality.
Thus it is on the question of delegability  that genuine constitu-
tional anxiety exists-anxiety that challenges not only independent
agencies, but much of modern government administration, no mat-
ter who the administrator(s) may be.  It is a question that cannot be
contemplated, much less answered without reference to controver-
sial normative premises.82
III.  SHOULD COURTS  EVER BE TEXTUALIST?
I have outlined conditions under which a particular conventional-
81.  Lowi, Two Roads to Serfdom: Liberalism, Conservatism and Administrative Power, 36 AM.
U.L. REv. 295 (1987).
82.  My own position is very different from Professor Lowi's on this issue.  I do not dis-
pute, of course, that the current world of checks and balances looks profoundly different from
the framers' world of 1789.  Yet, I do not see that modem delegations of power from Con-
gress to the bureaucracy have undermined the old-fashioned checks and balances.  No sys-
temic violations of popular sentiment, of due process, or of the substantive rule of law have
been identified. This leads me to the conclusion that the system in operation is both checked
and balanced.
Although agencies perform imperfectly,  sometimes even corruptly, these failings  do not
seem related to the breadth of agency delegation.  Indeed, as Professor Mashaw has recently
argued, it is possible to make a strong public welfare case for broad delegation.  Mashaw, Pro-
Delegation: Why AdministratorsS hould Make PoliticalD ecisions, 1 YALEJ. ECON. & ORG. L., 81, 91-
95 (1985).  The specter of tyranny from this source seems truly remote. Yet, while disagree-
ing with Professor Lowi, I see no textual way of adjudicating between our differing positions.
Textualism seems to me to answer many important questions of administrative structure and
design; yet, it does not answer the most central issue-the proper scope of administration per
se.THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
ist strategy of textual interpretation  represents  a useful technique
for constitutional interpretation and conditions under which it does
not.  I have noted that my version of textualism leaves unanswered
the question, central to virtually  all modern administrative  law, of
delegability.  Given these limitations on the general applicability of
my method  of constitutional  interpretation,  the question remains
whether courts (or commentators)  should ever apply a convention-
alist strategy of textual interpretation even in those cases where tex-
tualism is plausible.
This dilemma may be best understood in light of a concrete case.
Imagine that the constitutionality of a two-house legislative veto is
being  litigated  (pre-Chadha).  As  explained  above,  conventional
reading unambiguously points to the unconstitutionality of the veto
under identifiably relevant language.  Its conventional meaning, am-
plified barely by reference to uncontroversial  antecedent premises,
is fairly certain.  The presumptive resolution  the language  dictates
does not require an interpretation of extratextual reality-here, the
reality of government administration-that defies credibility.
Yet, a proponent of the veto may attempt  to introduce contro-
versy into  the proceedings  through  either of two additional argu-
ments.  A proponent might concede the correctness and weightiness
of the textualist's answer, but argue that reading the text according
to its conventional meaning is less preferable than an alternative in-
terpretive  strategy.  Alternatively,  the  veto proponent might  con-
tend that the criteria for finding an answer under my method are not
sufficient to assure us that the answer is even presumptively correct.
The first strategy questions  not the logic of my method, but its
authority as an interpretive technique.  It suggests  that another in-
terpretive  strategy is normatively better.  The principal alternative
to a conventional meaning approach is likely to be a historical ap-
proach  to interpretation.  Its normative  defense is  that it is  more
likely to  give effect  to  the design of the  document's  originators.
Thus,  hypothetically, an advocate  might point to an  express  (and
prescient) discussion of legislative  vetoes at the  1787  Convention
which indicates  that, although  the drafters  drafted  badly,  they in-
tended to permit legislative vetoes.  Here, a conventional reading of
the text would yield the "wrong answer" not because of the insuffi-
ciency of its premises, but because history dictates a reading of the
text that is more privileged than a reading based on the text's con-
ventional meaning.
In general, however, I believe that arguments derived from con-
ventional meaning  are stronger than  arguments  derived from his-19871 CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION 595
tory,  keeping  in  mind,  however,  that  I  am  proposing  textualist
answers  only if they do not require incredible interpretations of ex-
tratextual  reality.  Arguments  derived  from  conventional  textual
meaning have two main advantages, accessibility and certainty.  For
example, with alternative readings of the Constitution-one that is
accessible to all readers and one that is accessible only to the histori-
cally-educated-I  believe  that a democratic  government  will prop-
erly  and naturally  incline  toward  the  former, even  if a  coherent
historically  based  answer  is  imaginable.  Fundamental  law  that is
readily understood by those who are subject to it is of great value in
a democratic  society.  Further, in those  cases  where conventional
understanding establishes a meaning for constitutional language be-
yond fair controversy, it seems  improbable, at best, that historical
inquiry can coherently establish a competing interpretation that we
can  accept with  equal  confidence.83  Thus, when  a  conventional-
meaning approach yields a plausible, determinate answer to a con-
stitutional question, an advocate is unlikely to displace that answer
successfully by resorting to a wholly different interpretive approach.
The second method of establishing controversy is, of course, by
challenging the strategy of textualism itself. An advocate might ac-
cept that conventionalism, as I have outlined it, would yield an an-
swer, but argue that the answer is unworthy of weight.  For example,
an advocate might concede  that the unconstitutionality  of the veto
would not yield an incredible theory of government and is, therefore,
an acceptable result for the "plain reader."  Such an advocate might
argue, however, that the mere plausibility that legislative vetoes are
unnecessary for sound government is not a strong enough reason to
accept the conventional  textualist reading as correct.  An advocate
might even urge, albeit controversially, that the Court weigh an ad-
ditional argument in deciding how  to read the  Constitution.  This
argument would assert that responsible  government  requires  that
important policy decisions be readily subjected to the oversight of
elected officials, not just bureaucrats.  If that argument is accepted,
our advocate would say that the conventional textualist's  answer is
wrong because prohibiting  two-house vetoes during the oversight
process  would  interfere  with  the  important  goal  of government
accountability.
Our advocate would recognize, of course, that equating accounta-
ble  government  with congressional  oversight  as  permitted by  the
legislative  veto  is  a  controversial  conclusion.  Such  an  advocate
83.  See Brest, supra note 30, at 234-37 (arguing that adjudications should treat text and
original understanding "as persuasive but not authoritative").596 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
might say, however, that issues of government design are so impor-
tant that a court should adjudicate between  competing theories  of
government  operation in giving meaning to the relevant constitu-
tional  terms.  In this  view,  it is  not enough  that uncontroversial
premises of government yield a textual reading that is plausible.  If a
court is  fairly persuaded  that one governmental  theory,  although
controversial, is better than another, it should feel free to read the
constitutional  text in a way that helps implement the better theory,
even if the textual reading departs from popular, conventional defi-
nitions of the words involved.
Although I have  great sympathy for such a  stance, I would not
agree with it in the  case of a legislative  veto.  When faced  with a
question to which the Constitution, plainly read, yields a plausible
answer, I see no reason to believe that reading the text "creatively"
will produce results  more likely  to foster good government.  The
functional arguments for and against legislative vetoes are numer-
ous and have been made strongly, but I perceive no way in which a
court could have confidence in one set of arguments  or the other
sufficient to overcome the answer all but dictated by the text when
plainly  read.  This,  I  believe,  is  what  some  commentators  imply
when they state that courts are formalistic in cases such as these be-
cause there is no intellectually supportable alternative.84
Nonetheless, many commentators, I believe, will be wary of a con-
ventionalist  approach  that  is  as  plain  meaning-oriented  or text-
bound as the one I have outlined.  Two reasons would prompt their
skepticism.  The first is a fear that constitutional literalism is unre-
sponsive  to  contemporary  administrative  reality,  especially  the
breadth of congressional  delegations of administrative power. Jus-
tice White urged in Chadha, for example, that we should recognize
the new world and, in effect, adjust our views of the text to accom-
modate broader constitutional  norms of accountability in  the real
world of administrative discretion.85  The second reason for skepti-
cism is that all of the Constitution is normative.  Formalistic inter-
84.  See generally Mashaw supra note 82, at 91-95.  It is not as clear to me as it may be to
Professor Mashaw, however, that formalism and nonjusticiability are the only appropriate ju-
dicial responses to separation of powers disputes.  In some cases, where formalism fails, judi-
cial forbearance (under the guise of nonjusticiability) might require a political solution to an
interbranch problem.  The political solution used to break the impasse may simply involve a
greater cost to the working of government than would judicial imposition of a functionalist
"rule."  Cf. Bruff, supra note  13,  at 504-05 (claiming that "use of [a functional]  approach
seems appropriate in some limited circumstances where the constitutional  text is silent and
judgments about the need for some constitutional protection depend more on common sense
than on complex fact questions").
85.  INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 984-89 (1983) (White, J., dissenting).1987] CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION
pretation of any sort may blind us to the constitutional value choices
that administrative design truly implicates.
Let me first address the formalist's supposed blindness to consti-
tutional value choice, for it is here that I find the difference between
the Constitution's opening articles and the fourteenth  amendment
to be so telling.  The organization  of governmental  structure and
process does, of course, embody value choice, but unlike the value
choices manifested in individual rights provisions, the value choices
of articles I and II are embodied in relatively precise structural  di-
rectives.  This is  not true with the fourteenth  amendment.  Thus,
when the Supreme Court replaced Plessy v. Ferguson8s6 with Brown v.
Board of Education,7 nothing in the Constitution had to be rewritten
or ignored.  There was no constitutionally erected institution to be
sidestepped or supplanted.
Such is not the case with articles I and II.  These articles describe
conventionally understood structures and processes.  They do so for
normative  purposes.  To  vindicate  those  purposes  through  new
structures  or different  processes,  however,  would  mean  ignoring
constitutional language with plainly understood conventional mean-
ing while  leaving intact  governmental  institutions  that adhere  to
constitutionally  described  procedures  that  might eventually  seem
only eccentric.  No case for making this leap has been persuasively
made.  If we are to leave intact the governmental  machine that the
Constitution describes,  it seems  the most functionalist of philoso-
phies to follow the Constitution's operating instructions as well, at
least until we truly believe that constitutional purposes  require re-
placement of the machine itself.
As for ignoring modem reality, I do not perceive any change in
government so profound that following functionally plausible, con-
ventionally understandable  readings  of the operational  provisions
of the Constitution would pose the threat of anachronism.  On the
delegability issue,  for example,  I perceive  no threat to any  time-
honored  constitutional  value  by  permitting  Congress  to  extend
rulemaking power to agencies, so long as such rulemaking power is
practicably  constrainable  through ordinary judicial  review.  I like-
wise perceive both positive social value to broad delegation and pos-
itive  political  value  in  respecting  Congress'  presumptively  valid
value choice  of this  now  commonplace  mechanism  for specifying
economic  and social regulation.  Article I  empowers  Congress  to
make laws  "necessary  and proper"  for carrying out its regulatory
86.  163 U.S. 537 (1896).
87.  347 U.S. 483 (1954).598 THE AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 36:573
tasks.  I would read that text, as did Chief Justice Marshall,  to au-
thorize comprehensively  all laws appropriate in fact and otherwise
constitutional  for implementing Congress'  functions.88
There is an additional value of textualism that is worthy of men-
tion.  If one believes, as I do, that plain meaning yields nothing as to
some portions of the Constitution, then the plausibility of textual-
ism vis--vis  other constitutional  questions  necessitates  an eclectic
approach to the Constitution-part avowedly philosophical, part su-
perficially literalist.  To my mind, and, I take it, to Professor Sargen-
tich's,89  this  eclecticism  is  welcome  because  it  captures  an
appropriate  pluralism  in  our  aspirations  for  good  government.
There are issues where we want most critically to be right.  Rigorous
public deliberation of contending visions of the public interest gives
voice most  effectively  to that aspiration.  Here,  formalism  has no
role.  There are, however, contexts-the details of government ad-
ministration provide many of them-where we also want to be or-
derly, where express adherence to a well-understood  formal rule of
law gives voice to our aspirations  for control  and accountability as
part ofjustice.  It would be advantageous,  in my view, if textualism
in  constitutional  interpretation  vis-a-vis  administrative  agencies
passes the message to government officials that, sometimes, we just
want them to do what they are told.
I do not mean by this to overstate the plausible scope of textual-
ism as an interpretive strategy, or to dismiss as unimportant any of
the sophisticated thinking on the norms of governmental structure
and operation proffered by others.  That kind of thinking is essential
in the pursuit, however frustrating, of a government that behaves in
the public interest.  I do believe, however,  that virtually  all of this
sophisticated thinking should be addressed to Congress with its ex-
pansive powers to design administrative  agencies,  or to  the Presi-
dent  with  his  implicit  interstitial  power  to  oversee  agency
administration.  As  for the  constitutional  questions,  I  agree  with
many, if not all, constitutional conclusions I have read in such com-
prehensive analyses as Professor Bruff's earlier article on presiden-
tial regulatory oversight9° or Professor Strauss' recent examination
of independent agencies.9'  My core suggestion is that the Constitu-
88.  McCulloch v. Maryland,  17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 316, 421 (1819).
89.  Sargentich, The DelegationD  ebate and Competing Ideals of the Administrative Process, 36 AM.
U.L. REV. 419, 441 (1987) (arguing the importance of recognizing that modem debates about
administrative reform are "deeply balanced among competing ideals").
90.  Bruff, PresidentialP ower andA dministrative Rulemaking, 88 YALE LJ. 451 (1979) (explor-
ing scope of presidential oversight within separation of powers framework).
91.  Strauss, The Place ofA gencies in Government. Separationo f Powers and the Fourth Branch, 84
COLUM. L. REV. 573 (1984) (arguing that only Congress, President, and Supreme Court must1987] CONSTITUTIONAL  INTERPRETATION 599
tion provides a quicker route to the solution of many problems than
does  resort  to  broadly  articulated  normative  theory.  It  is  the
Supreme  Court,  not the  Constitution,  that  sometimes  makes  the
constitutional route difficult to discern.
comply with strict  separation of powers  doctrine as  agencies  constitute  commingling of
functions).