Independent Policymaking  and
Presidential Power:  A
Constitutional Analysis
Peter M. Shane*
Legal historians  of the  late  twentieth  century  will undoubtedly
mark  the Reagan years  as a  kind of renaissance  for separation  of
powers law.  The Reagan Justice Department,  whether under Wil-
liam French Smith or Edwin Meese III, was unusually creative, if not
unusually successful,  in invoking  separation  of powers  rhetoric  to
defend  unilateral  presidential  initiatives  and  to  challenge  those
practices it disfavored of the other branches.'  In part as a result of
the Department's efforts, federal courts have been deciding separa-
tion of powers  disputes  at an accelerated  pace,2 Congress has  re-
newed its attention  to  separation  of powers  principles,3 and legal
*  Professor of Law, University  of Iowa; A.B.  1974, Harvard; J.D.  1977, Yale.  I
received helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper from Professors David Kaye,
Greg Williams, and Lakshman Guruswamy.  I benefitted also from the research assis-
tance of Iowa law students Pat Sullivan and John Carver and, most especially, Diane
Marchik.
I.  See generally Miller, From Compromise to Confrontation: Separation of Powers in the Rea-
gan Era, 57 GEo.  WASH. L. REV. -,  - (1989);  Shane, Federal Policy Making By Consent
Decree: An Analysis of Agency andJ udicialD  iscretion, 1987 U. CHI. LEGAL F. 241, 278 n.136.
2.  Miller, supra note 1, at -.
3.  Examples  include  the House Judiciary Committee  investigation  of executive
privilege claims against Congress that triggered the dispute culminating in Morrison v.
Olson, 108 S. Ct. 2597 (1988), see House COMM. ON THEJUDICIARY, INVESTIGATION OF THE
ROLE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE IN THE WITHHOLDING OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTEC-
TION AGENCY DOCUMENTS FROM  CONGRESS IN  1982-83, H.R. REP. No. 435, 99th Cong.,
Ist Sess.  (1985)  (four vols.);  the Iran-Contra  investigation, S.  REP. No.  216, 100th
Cong., Ist Sess. (1987); and the consideration of various proposals  to amend the War
Powers Resolution, see Morrison, New Phasef or War Powers Debate, NAT'LJ.,June 25, 1988,
at 1690.
January 1989  Vol. 57  No. 3Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
academics  have  generated  an exciting  new literature on a host of
separation of powers problems.
The Reagan administration's  efforts  in the separation of powers
area stand  in tension, however,  with another  hallmark of Reagan
constitutionalism,  namely,  the  call  to  constitutional  originalism.
That is because originalism provides only the weakest possible sup-
port for at least some of the separation of powers positions that his
Justice Department urged most forcefully.  The irony of the Reagan
administration's legal legacy may be the degree to which its efforts
in the separation of powers arena may ultimately be regarded as un-
dermining its campaign for originalism.  By ascribing such impor-
tance  to  issues  of government  structure,  the  administration  lent
impetus, however inadvertently,  to an emerging "values-oriented"
separation  of powers  literature.  This  "modernist"  literature,  on
some issues at least, provides more interesting arguments  than did
the Justice Department for the  Reagan  administration's  proffered
conclusions.
This article  seeks  to  make the  case  for at  least  the  occasional
weightiness of values-oriented  separation of powers law by explor-
ing an alleged  constitutional  conflict perceived  by the Reagan  ad-
ministration  (and by  various  scholars).  It  is  a  supposed  conflict
between the President's  constitutionally vested authority as head of
the executive branch and Congress's creation of various "independ-
ent" policymakers, whose administrative functions are not suscepti-
ble to plenary presidential  control.  One such administrator is  the
independent  counsel  created  by  the  Ethics  in Government  Act,4
popularly  known as  the "special  prosecutor  law."  Others  include
the commissioners of the various  "independent agencies,"  each of
whom is statutorily protected against "at will"  presidential removal.
I will argue  two theses.  The first is that the only weighty  argu-
ments against congressional decisions to authorize independent ad-
ministrators are modernist.  The second is that even the modernist
attack on independent policymaking is unpersuasive.  Congressional
decisions to vest authority in independent administrators do down-
play one value embodied in our constitutional structure, that is, the
value  of centralized  accountability.  Such  decisions,  however, also
help  to promote two  other, equally central constitutional  commit-
ments:  the  commitment  to  legislative  primacy  in domestic  poli-
cymaking,  and  the  commitment  to  a  general  diffusion  of
government power.
Part I of this article reviews  the independent counsel dispute, a
4.  Ethics in Government Act of 1978, 28 U.S.C.  §§  591-599  (1982 & Supp. IV
1986).
19891 597dispute  as  to  which  an  originalist  interpretation  of the Constitu-
tion-as  the  Reagan  administration  understood  originalism-is
possible.  Part I argues that formalist interpretations of the Consti-
tution, including originalism,  fully sustain  both the creation  of in-
dependent counsel and the Supreme Court's recent lopsided vote in
Morrison v.  Olson.5 
Part II of this article considers the problem of independent civil
administrators,  an issue on which originalism  again supports  Con-
gress, but may not appear as sensible an interpretive strategy.  Part
II rehearses what might be called a modernist values-oriented attack
on independent  agencies, and musters a modernist values-oriented
defense.  Part II  argues  that the insulation  of civil  administrators
from plenary presidential control is constitutional, even though the
values-oriented  attack on such adminstrators is the most intellectu-
ally important challenge to be met.
Part  III  revisits  Morrison v.  Olson  to consider  two  issues:  first,
whether a modernist case was available against independent counsel
and, second,  if so, Whether  such  arguments  should count when a
persuasive  textualist  or  originalist  case  points  in  a  different
direction.
L  Morrison v. Olson:  An Easy Formalist Case?
In Morrison v. Olson the Supreme Court upheld, in a seven-to-one
vote, the constitutionality of a limited class of judicially  appointed
prosecutors called  "independent  counsel,"  who are subject  to  re-
moval by the Attorney General only for statutorily described  cause.
These prosecutors are appointed, on petition of the Attorney Gen-
eral, in cases involving alleged serious federal offenses by a desig-
nated class of high-level executive branch and campaign officials.6
There was once a time when commentators  on such a case might
simply proceed to proffer their reasoning under the Constitution for
one or another result.  No more.  Jurisprudential  debates  over the
last fifteen years-debates in which the Reagan Justice Department
aggressively  engaged-have  made  constitutionalists  profoundly
aware of the controversy surrounding not only particular constitu-
tional arguments,  but the choice  among different ways  of arguing
about the Constitution.  Before analyzing a constitutional dispute, it
is now common to specify the rules by which one is playing-what
kinds of arguments count and for how much.
A variety of constitutionalists, including former Attorney General
Meese,  adhere  at least sometimes  to some  brand of what is often
called formalism.  By  formalism, I mean to include all varieties of
interpretive theory that purport to yield reasonably determinate an-
swers to legal disputes by relying on a fairly well-defined set of legal
5.  108 S. Ct. 2597 (1988).
6.  28 U.S.C. § 591(a), (b) (1982 & Supp. IV 1986).
[VOL.  57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
materials and not consciously attending to any broad normative the-
ory about what is at stake in a particular controversy.  From a for-
malist point of view, the majority in Morrison was  clearly correct.
A.  Textualism
One brand of formalism is textualism, the theory that, in at least
some cases, one can derive sensible answers to constitutional ques-
tions from conventional readings of constitutional language.7  Imag-
ine, for example,  an English-fluent  legal  scholar from  the planet
Mars-many,  I  suspect,  believe  that  textualists  must  be  from
Mars8-who  is given a copy of the Constitution and told to adjudi-
cate Morrison v. Olson.  Our Martian  is told that independent coun-
sels  may  be  unconstitutional  for  three  reasons:  first,  they  are
appointed by courts; second, their removability  by the President is
impermissibly limited; third, they improperly usurp presidential au-
thority and improperly  aggrandize judicial authority  over criminal
prosecution.
The textualist is likely to come fairly readily to at least the pre-
sumptive conclusion  that independent counsels  are constitutional.
On the appointment issue,  the  Constitution  provides:  "Congress
may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers,  as they
think proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the
Heads of Departments."9  The textualist may have some question as
to the scope of the phrase, "inferior  officer."  Yet, because  an in-
dependent counsel is apparently a temporary appointee for the in-
vestigation  of criminal charges  relating to a single individual, such
an official surely has the feel of "inferior-ness."  The counsel is not
in charge  of very  much  or for very  long.10  The textualist  knows
there are officials such as cabinet secretaries and agency heads who
are responsible for a broad range of policymaking over a substantial
subject matter jurisdiction.  These officials would appear most glar-
ingly to  be  "superior"  or "principal"  officers,  not subject  to  the
above-quoted clause.
As for removals, the text provides only for congressional removal
of government officers,  namely, by impeachment."  The textualist
7.  For a more extended discussion of the limits of plausible textualism, see gener-
ally Shane, Conventionalism in ConstitutionalI nterpretationa nd the Place of Administrative Agen-
cies, 36 AM. U.L. REV. 573 (1987).
8.  Stephen Carter makes a similar remark concerning originalism:  "Among consti-
tutional theorists, originalism holds roughly the status of Lysenkoism among geneticists:
a silly idea no longer worth the energy required to refute it."  Carter, Comment.  The
Independent Counsel Mess, 102 HARV. L. REV. 105,  118 (1988).
9.  U.S. CONST. art. II, § 2, cl. 2.
10.  Morrison, 108 S.  Ct. at 2608-09.
11.  U.S. CONST. art. I, § 2, cl. 5 ("The House of Representatives ...  shall have the
sole Power of Impeachment."); id. § 3, cls. 6-7 ("The Senate shall have the sole Power to
try all Impeachments ....  Judgment in Cases of Impeachment shall not extend further
1989] 599may  be  uncertain  whether  the  implication  of the  impeachment
power is  that Congress  is barred from involving itself in removals
through any other mechanism. 12  That question, however, is beside
the point in Morrison. The constitutional challenge to independent
counsels  is not  that Congress  has aggrandized  its removal power,
but rather that it has limited the President's.
Article II, however, does not make any express reference to presi-
dential removal power.  Much less does it expressly require that the
President have plenary removal power over any official.13 A textual-
ist might  think that Congress  may give the  President plenary  re-
moval authority over an inferior officer if such a delegation of power
appears  appropriate  to  the functioning  of that officer.  The infer-
ence  arises  from  Congress's  express  power  "[t]o  make  all  Laws
which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution...
all...  Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the
United  States,  or in  any Department  or Officer  thereof."' 4  Con-
gress might well consider that the implementation of an administra-
tive  function  might be most  effective  if undertaken  by an  official
subject to presidential  supervision.
By the same token, however, a Congress that thinks it "necessary
and proper" to limit an inferior officer's vulnerability to presidential
removal power would also appear textually authorized to make that
structural choice.  The only limit on Congress's preference in that
regard, a textualist would observe, is that the President could not be
deprived of at least such removal power as is absolutely necessary to
vindicate some express power he enjoys under article II.
As  the textualist canvasses article II to find a presidential power
that might limit Congress's choices regarding presidential removal
authority, only one is likely to emerge as a candidate.  The President
is to "take  Care that the Laws be faithfully executed."' 5  A possible
inference from this clause is that the President must be able to dis-
miss any administrative  officer of the government who is not faith-
fully executing the laws; such would be the most efficient means for
fulfilling  the  President's  express  obligation.  But,  our  textualist
notes,  the Attorney  General may  dismiss an  independent  counsel
"only for good cause, physical disability, mental incapacity,  or any
other condition that substantially  impairs  the performance of such
than to removal from Office and disqualification to hold and enjoy any Office of honor,
Trust or Profit .... "); id. art. II, § 4 (Civil officers "shall be removed from Office on
Impeachment  for, and  Conviction  of, Treason,  Bribery,  or other high  Crimes and
Misdemeanors.").
12.  Bowsher v. Synar, 478  U.S. 714,  727-34 (1986)  (holding that removability of
Comptroller General by Congress other than through impeachment precludes delega-
tion to Comptroller General of significant authority  over executive branch); Myers v.
United States, 272 U.S. 52, 176 (1926)  (invalidating statutory requirement that Presi-
dent obtain Senate approval for the removal of an executive officer).
13.  On the constitutional uncertainties surrounding presidential removal power, see
Entin, The Removal Power and the FederalD  eficit: Form, Substance, and Administrative Indepen-
dence, 75 Ky. LJ. 699, 712-27 (1986).
14.  U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8, cl.  18.
15.  Id. art. II, § 3.
600 [VOL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW REVIEW
independent counsel's duties."'6  Our textualist will probably con-
sider the likelihood that "good  cause"  encompasses unlawfulness.
Because the Attorney General may dismiss an independent counsel
who is acting unlawfully, and because the President has plenary con-
trol  over the Attorney General,  the President's  authority  over re-
movals  of independent  counsels  seems  sufficient  to  protect  his
constitutionally vested law enforcement function.17
On the third argument-that independent counsels impermissibly
usurp  presidential  power  or  impermissibly  aggrandize  judicial
power-there is less text to go on.  The President may, under the
faithful execution clause just discussed, have inherent power to as-
sure that criminal prosecutors are themselves acting lawfully.  Noth-
ing  in  the  text,  however,  says  that  the  President  must  control
criminal prosecution more generally.  The one puzzle for the textu-
alist is  the existence  of a clause vesting "executive  Power" in the
President,'8  which raises the question as to whether criminal prose-
cution is encompassed by this phrase.  Even so, however, Congress
has the power to make laws "necessary and proper for carrying into
Execution ...a ll ...P owers"  vested in the government,' 9 necessar-
ily including executive powers.  Thus, even if criminal prosecution
were an "executive"  power-and the textualist has no easy answers
here-it would not be clear why Congress  could not structure the
counsel's powers as it has.
As for the courts, a textualist cannot regard it as an undue aggran-
dizement ofjudicial power for judges to appoint an official that arti-
cle  II  expressly  permits  them  to appoint.20  Moreover,  it  hardly
seems usurpatious for the court to be given certain narrowly circum-
scribed duties with respect to defining the prosecutor's jurisdiction
and monitoring the prosecutor's  activities,  especially when vesting
those duties in a court is critical for accomplishing Congress's objec-
tive  of preserving  the  prosecutor's  relative  policy  independence
from the executive.2'  The textualist recognizes that some grants of
judicial power to control an inferior official might compromise the
ability  of the judiciary to fulfill its  other expressly vested  powers,
and that would be a problem. Yet, no obvious reason exists why the
limited  judicial  powers  regarding  independent  counsels  should
compromise the  courts'  expressly vested power  to decide  "cases"
and "controversies. "'22
The  Martian  I  have  described  has  come  amazingly  close  to
16.  28 U.S.C. § 596(a)(1)  (1982).
17.  Morrison, 108 S. Ct. at 2619.
18.  U.S. CONST. art. II, § 1, c.  1.
19.  Id. art. I,  § 8, cl. 18 (emphasis added).
20.  Id. art II,§  2, cl. 2; Morrison, 108 S. Ct. at 2612.
21.  See id. at 2613-15.
22.  Id.; Exparte Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) 371 (1890) (upholding the appointment
1989] 601describing  the majority's opinion in Morrison v.  Olson.  The Court's
sole dissenter, Justice Scalia, laments, "The Court devotes  most of
its attention to such relatively technical details as the Appointments
Clause and the removal power .... 23 but the fact is that, from a
textualist standpoint,  these  technical  details  overwhelmingly  sup-
port Congress.
B.  Originalism
A different  kind of formalist  might  object that textualism  is the
wrong interpretive method because the constitutional language  ex-
presses only imperfectly what really should matter, namely, the ex-
pectations  of  the  founding  generation  regarding  the  precise
meaning  of  their  document-what  is  often  called  "original  in-
tent."24  As it turns out, however, the "originalist"  and the "textual-
ist"  analyses converge.
Former Judge Robert Bork has succinctly expressed  the core as-
sertion underlying originalism:  "[T]he  ultimate source of constitu-
tional  legitimacy  is  compliance  with  the  intentions  of those  who
framed and ratified our Constitution."25  Originalism is the species
of formalism-that is, history partly expressed in text-to which the
Reagan administration swore allegiance:
Where  the  language  of the Constitution  is  specific,  it must  be
obeyed.  Where  there is  a  demonstrable  consensus  among  the
framers  and ratifiers  as  to  a  principle stated  or implied  by the
Constitution, it should be followed.  Where there is ambiguity as
to the precise meaning or reach of [a] constitutional provision, it
should be interpreted and applied in a manner so as to at least not
contradict the text of the Constitution itself.26
An originalist  who objects  to  the  textualist resolution  of Morrison
would have to argue that an historical inquiry into the Constitution
reveals  that criminal prosecution  was understood  to be an "inher-
ently"  executive function vested in the President by article II, and
thus a power, his exercise of which must include plenary policy dis-
cretion bounded  only by the Constitution and by properly enacted
criminal law.
Frequent  and  familiar  objections  have  been  made  to  constitu-
tional originalism as an interpretive strategy.27  One must, however,
of judges as supervisors of congressional elections as not incongruous with article III
duties).
23.  Morrison, 108 S.  Gt. at 2625 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
24.  For a distillation of the Reagan administration's official thinking on originalism
(and a bibliography of relevant scholarly works), see U.S. DEPARTMENT  OF JUSTICE OF-
FICE OF LEGAL POLICY,  ORIGINAL MEANING JURISPRUDENCE:  A SOURCEBOOK  (1987).  A
useful "scorecard" for the current debate is Farber, The OriginalismD  ebate: A Guidef or the
Perplexed, 49 OHIO ST. LJ. 1085 (1989).
25.  Barnes v. Kline, 759 F.2d 21, 56 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (Bork, J., dissenting), vacated
sub nom. Burke v. Barnes, 479 U.S. 361  (1987).
26.  Address by Attorney General Edwin Meese III Before the D.C. Chapter of the
Federalist  Society Lawyers  Division (Nov. 15,  1985), reprinted in U.S. DEPARTMENT  OF
JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL POLICY, supra note 24, at 96.
27.  See, e.g.,  Brest, The Misconceived Questf or Original Understanding, 60 B.U.L. REv. 204
(1980).
602 [VOL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
admit this:  If originalism is a strategy with any promise ever, then it
might well  be  employed  to  ascertain  the  merits  of the argument
against independent  counsels,  because  the  originalist inquiry into
the constitutional status of a criminal prosecutor is at least free from
anachronism.  It is not odd to inquire into  the eighteenth  century
conception  of criminal  prosecution  as  it  would  be  odd  to  ask
whether  "the  Framers"  intended  the  Federal  Communications
Commission to be an executive  agency.  The founding generation
was  well acquainted with criminal  prosecution.  Whether criminal
prosecution  was  conventionally  understood  in the late eighteenth
century  as inherently executive  in a government  structured in the
manner of our national government is a coherent question.
There is no definitive federal debate on the subject.  The Judiciary
Act of 1789 originally provided for the judicial appointment of dis-
trict attorneys, which would strongly belie the argument from origi-
nal understanding.28  Yet, the provision was changed by Congress,
which authorized the President to appoint United States attorneys.29
Such a change would support the originalist case against indepen-
dent counsels, except that there is no evidence that the change was
perceived as a matter of "constitutional  compulsion," rather than of
policy choice.30  Indeed, the early functioning of United  States at-
torneys  fails  to  substantiate  any  expectation  that  the  President
would provide some unifying supervision:  "Prosecution was decen-
tralized during the federalist period, and it was conducted by district
attorneys  who  were private practitioners  employed  by  the United
States on a fee-for-services  basis."3'
One  other  piece  of  federal  evidence  is  inconsistent  with  the
originalist attack on independent counsels, but may not be strongly
relevant.  Federal  courts have  always been regarded as  having the
power to appoint prosecutors to bring criminal contempt actions.32
This practice is an obvious breach of executive control over prose-
cution, but originalists  might regard it as  a limited  exception to  a
general rule of executive  control  that was  carved  out for the sole
purpose of preserving judicial independence  in the protection  of
judicial process.
If federal evidence alone is inconclusive, however, other evidence
28.  In re Sealed Case, 838 F.2d 476, 533 n.41 (D.C. Cir.) (R.B. Ginsburg,J., dissent-
ing), rev'd sub nom. Morrison v. Olson, 108 S. Ct. 2597 (1988).
29.  Id. at 492.
30.  Id. at 533 n.41.
31.  Id. at 526-27 (citation omitted).  It was not until 1831 that an Attorney General
opined that the President could lawfully order the discontinuation of a prosecution-in
that particular instance, an in rem proceeding against the property of a friendly foreign
power. The Jewels of the Princess Orange, 2 Op. Att'y Gen. 483, 487 (1831).
32.  Young v. United States ex rel. Vuitton et Fils S.A., 481  U.S. 787,  793 (1987)
(observing that "inherent" judicial power to appoint private lawyers to prosecute con-
tempt actions is "long settled").
603
19891regarding  the  founding  generation's  likely  perceptions  regarding
criminal prosecution and its constitutional status is both consistent
and telling.  States  had prosecutors,  and state practice in  the late
eighteenth  century  most strongly  suggests  that  there was  no  late
eighteenth century expectation that criminal prosecution was an in-
herently executive function, to be conducted solely by gubernatorial
appointees  and  under  exclusive  executive  supervision.  Indeed,
there appear at least five states in which clear evidence belies  any
such understanding.
In 1787, Virginia was operating under its Constitution  of 1776,
under which "the executive powers of government" were vested in a
governor.33  That Constitution provided, however, that the Attor-
ney General would be appointed by the "two  Houses of Assembly
by joint ballot."34  The North Carolina Constitution of 177635
... 
and the South Carolina Constitution of 1778,36 also operational in
1787, likewise provided for their respective legislatures  to appoint
each  state's Attorney  General,  although  each  Constitution  vested
the "executive power"  in the governor.37  Moreover, a North Caro-
lina statute of 1777 empowered county courts to appoint additional
prosecuting attorneys.38
In 1784, Connecticut  provided by statute for the appointment of
state's attorneys by the county courts.39  This practice persisted un-
til at least  1854,40 notwithstanding the adoption of a new Constitu-
tion  in  1818  to  replace  the  Charter  of  1662  as  the  state's
33.  VA.  CONST. of 1776, reprinted in 10 W. SWINDLER,  SOURCES AND  DOCUMENTS OF
UNITED STATES CONSTITTIONS 53 (1979) ("A Governor...  shall be chosen annually by
joint ballot of both Houses  . . . and he shall, with the advice of a Council of State,
exercise the executive powers of government.").
34.  Id. at 54 ("The two Houses of Assembly shall, by joint ballot, appointJudges of
the Supreme Court of Appeals, and General Court,Judges in Chancery,Judges of Admi-
ralty, Secretary, and the Attorney-General.").
35.  N.C. CONST. of 1776, art. XIII, reprinted in 7 W. SWINDLER,  SOURCES AND  Docu-
MENTS OF UNITED STATES CONSTI-trrIONS 405 (1978) ("That the General Assembly shall,
byjoint ballot of both houses, appointJudges of the Supreme Courts of Law and Equity,
Judges of Admiralty, and Attorney-General.").
36.  S.C. CONST. of 1778, art. XXIX, reprinted in 8 W. SWINDLER, SOURCES AND DOCU-
MENTS  OF UNITED  STATES CONSTITUTIONS  473 (1979) ("That two commissioners of the
treasury, the secretary of the State, the register of mesne conveyances in each district,
attorney-general ....  be chosen in like manner by the senate and house of representa-
tives jointly, by ballot.").
37.  N.C. CONST. of 1776, art. XIX, reprinted in 7 W. SWINDLER, supra note 35, at 405
("The Governor...  shall have power to draw for and apply such sums of money as shall
be voted by the general assembly ....  He also may ...  lay embargoes .. .have the
power of granting pardons and reprieves...  and may exercise all the other executive
powers of government."); S.C. CONST. of 1778, art. XI, reprinted in 8 W. SWINDLER, supra
note 36, at 470 (providing "[t]hat the executive authority be vested in the governor and
commander-in-chief").
38.  1 THE FIRST LAWS OF THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA § LXVIII, at 311 (J. Cush-
ing ed. 1984).
39.  THE FIRST LAWS OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT  10-1 1 (J. Cushing ed. 1982).
40.  A post-1854 statute appears to have reorganized the courts.  Subsequent refer-
ences to the judicial appointment of prosecuting attorneys place the power with "supe-
rior" courts.  CONN.  GEN. STAT. tit. 11,  § 35 (1866).  Connecticut retained some form of
judicial involvement in the appointment of state's attorneys until 1985.  See CONN. GEN.
STAT. ANN.  tit. 51,  § 51-278 and historical note (West 1985 & Supp. 1988).
604 [VOL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE  WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
fundamental law.  The Constitution of 1818 not only vested the ex-
ecutive power in the governor, but required the governor to  take
care that the laws be faithfully executed-in a charge identical to the
President's.41  Moreover, there is no provision in the article on the
judiciary  independently  authorizing  the judicial  appointment  of
prosecutors.  Thus, Connecticut's  practice of judicial appointments
for criminal prosecutors persisted in the face of a separation of pow-
ers  system  worded  identically  in relevant  respects  to the  federal
Constitution.
Finally, under the  Delaware Constitution  of 1776,  the Attorney
General was appointed by the Governor together with a privy coun-
cil  consisting  of four  members  of  the  legislature.42  Moreover,
courts had statutory authority to appoint prosecutors in any case in
which  the  Attorney  General  or  a  designated  deputy  failed  to
43
appear.
If criminal prosecution were conventionally thought to fall inher-
ently under executive  authority,  the links just recounted  between
prosecuting  authorities  and  state courts  or legislatures  would be
anomalous.  The one other piece  of contemporary  evidence as  to
common understanding, however, bolsters the conclusion that pros-
ecution need not be an executive function, and that the state prac-
tices  just  recounted  were  consistent  with  conventional
understanding.  In England, criminal prosecution  was still largely a
private function.44  There was a degree, now enlarged, to which the
English Attorney-General  could supervise criminal prosecutions.  In
41.  CONN. CONST. of 1818, art. IV, §§  1, 9, reprintedi n 2 W. SWINDLER, SOURCES AND
DOCUMENTS  OF UNITED STATES  CONSTITUTIONS  147-48 (1973).
42.  DEL. CONST. of 1776, art. 8, provides that "[a]  privy council, consisting of four
members, shall be chosen by ballot, two by the legislative council and two by the house
of assembly ..  " Article 12 charges the governor and the privy council with appointing
various officers, including the attorney-general.  2 W. SWINDLER, supra note 41, at 200-
01.
43.  1 LAWS OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE,  ch. XIII, § 2 (1797).  Of the five states dis-
cussed above, only Connecticut, as of 1818, had a faithful execution clause worded iden-
tically to the U.S. Constitution. The Constitution of South Carolina and the Declaration
of Rights of Delaware and of North Carolina, however, each prohibited the executive
suspension of statutes.  S.C. CONST. of 1778, art. XXIV, reprinted in 8 W. SWINDLER, supra
note 36, at 474; DEL. CONST.,  DECLARATION OF RIGHTS AND  FUNDAMENTAL  RULES, cl. 7,
reprinted in 2 W. SWINDLER, supra note 41, at 198; N.C. CONST. of 1776, A Declaration of
Rights, art. V, reprinted in 7 W. SWINDLER, supra note 35, at 402.  If I am correct that the
original import of the federal faithful execution clause is identical to the English prohibi-
tion on the royal suspension of statutes, then there is no textual difference between the
state and federal constitutions relevant to the controversy whether criminal prosecution
was inherently executive.  See BILL OF RIGHTS  § 1, 1 W. & M., 2d sess., ch. 2  (1689),
reprintedi n 4 THE FOUNDERS'  CoNsTrrtroN 123 (P. Kurland & R. Lerner ed. 1987).
44.  J. JACOBY, THE AMERICAN PROSECUTOR:  A SEARCH FOR IDENTITY 7-11  (1980); J.
BEATrIE, CRIME AND THE COURTS IN ENGLAND  1660-1800, at 35-36 (1986).  Indeed, pri-
vate parties in England still retain authority in principle for the commencement of pros-
ecutions.  E.  WADE  & A.  BRADLEY,  CONSTITUTIONAL  AND  ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW  356
(1985).
1989] 605making prosecutorial decisions, however, the Attorney-General was
regarded as an independent  officer, personally accountable to Par-
liament, whose judgments were not controlled by the Crown or by
the Prime Minister.45
In sum, an  originalist from the Planet Meese,  like the textualist
from the Planet Mars, should find Morrison an easy case.  Historical
argument indicates  that the degree of autonomy that an independ-
ent counsel enjoys cannot undermine constitutionally vested execu-
tive  power  over  criminal  prosecution  for  a  simple  reason:  the
Constitution does not require criminal prosecution  to be at all the
exclusive domain of the executive branch.  The Reagan administra-
tion's  contrary  position  was  in  error  under  its  own  preferred
method of interpretation.
C.  Argument from Precedent
Formalists from earth might also argue that, notwithstanding the
clear  implications  of both  constitutional  text  and late  eighteenth
century history, criminal prosecution has become an inherently ex-
ecutive power because federal courts and the federal executive have
for so long so regarded it.  Dicta in several federal judicial opinions
do refer to prosecutorial discretion as being "executive." 46
To  this argument,  there are two  important responses.  The first
comes from Mr. Meese, who caused a political  stir by arguing  that
the Constitution is something different from what interpreters, in-
cluding the courts, say about it.  Except in  the decided case itself,
the country need owe no allegiance to constitutional law, the Attor-
ney General said, when the law is wrong.47  Thus, even if the courts
(or, self-servingly,  the executive) did repeatedly characterize  crimi-
nal prosecution  as  an  executive  function,  we  should be prepared
simply to dismiss that conclusion as wrong when the text and origi-
nal  history  both  show  the  interpretation  to  be  so  unpersuasive.
Such is the case here.
The second,  of course, is that dicta are not law.  While it is true
that a number ofjudicial opinions characterize criminal prosecution
as an executive function, this characterization  is not actually neces-
sary  to  explain  what  such  rhetoric  is  usually  invoked  to justify,
namely,  the  deferential  stance  of the  federal  judiciary  towards
prosecutorial  decisionmaking  by  someone other  than  a  court.  In
45.  E. WADE & A. BRADLEY, supra note 44, at 358.
46.  E.g., United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683,  697-713 (1974)  (commenting that
"the Executive Branch has exclusive authority and absolute discretion to decide whether
to prosecute a case"); United States v. Cox, 342 F.2d  167,  171 (5th Cir.) (refusing to
compel an United States attorney to sign indictments returned by the grand jury, rea-
soning that "it is as an officer of the executive department that [the United States attor-
ney]  exercises  a discretion  as  to whether or not  there shall be a  prosecution  in a
particular case"), cert. denied, 381 U.S. 935 (1965).  See The Confiscation Cases, 87 U.S.
(20 Wall.) 92 (1873) (refusing to compel prosecutions involving confiscated property on
behalf of informants who stood to acquire such property as reward  upon successful
prosecution).
47.  Meese, The Law of the Constitution, 61 TUL. L. REV. 979, 981-83 (1987).
606 [VOL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE  VASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
light of the textualist and originalist supportfor independent coun-
sels,  formalists  should  agree  that  contrary  dicta  should  have  no
force in attacking independent counsels if there is a fully persuasive
alternative theory explaining the results of cases in which such char-
acterizations appear.
The courts'  deference to prosecutorial  discretion  is  entirely  ac-
counted  for under a  theory  of government  called  "separation  of
functions."'48  By this, I mean the prescription for distributing gov-
ernment power that focuses on the unfairness of melding the pow-
ers to make rules, to enforce rules, to interpret rules, and to impose
sanctions  for rule violations  all in the same  actor.  For example,
modern  administrative  agencies  typically  exercise  each  of these
functions somewhere within each agency.  Therefore, structural pro-
tections such as  the ban on ex parte contacts between prosecuting
attorneys and attorneys advising the agency on its ultimate decision-
making are used to assure fairness.49  Their functions are separated.
What is  critical from the  separation of functions  point of view-a
point of view most clearly rooted in due process50-is  not that the
executive branch have plenary discretion regarding prosecution, but
that article III judges do not become unduly involved in the deci-
sions whether and with what to charge individuals in the first place.
Such involvement would be wrong because judges may be finders of
fact, adjudicators of law, and sentencers in criminal cases.
Separation  of functions  theory  provides a  coherent explanation
for the courts'  reluctance to  engage in any but the most marginal
oversight of prosecutorial  decisionmaking.  The public might per-
ceive that a judicial failure to defer to prosecutorial decisionmaking
would implicate our adjudicators too strongly in initial charging de-
cisions.  This would breach the separation of functions and threaten
the commitment to due process that the Constitution manifests.  Be-
cause references to prosecution as an "executive"  function can thus
be explained as  meaning only that prosecutorial discretion  should
not be usurped by courts,51 they do not provide any weighty legal
support  for the argument that criminal  prosecution  must be con-
ducted by a prosecutor  subject to plenary  presidential policy con-
trol.  The  Ethics  in  Government  Act  would  be  objectionable  on
48.  The relationship between separation of functions ideas and separation of pow-
ers theory is explored in Verkuil, Separation of Powers, The Rule of Law and the Idea of Inde-
pendence, 30 WM. & MARY L. REV. 301  (1989).
49.  See Adminstrative Procedure Act, § 5(d), 5 U.S.C. § 554(d) (1982).
50.  Verkuil, supra note 48, at 341.
51.  "[A]s  an incident of the constitutional separation of powers .... the courts are
not to interfere with the free exercise of the discretionary powers of the attorneys of the
United States in their control over criminal prosecutions."  United States v. Cox, 342
F.2d 167,  171  (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 381 U.S. 935 (1965).
1989]separation of functions grounds if it vested courts with sufficient su-
pervisory authority over prosecution  to implicate  courts in  the ac-
tual charging  decision.  Because  that is not  the case, the statute is
unobjectionable  on this ground.
In sum, Morrison v. Olson is an easy case from a formalist point of
view.  The text  strongly  vindicates  Congress's authority  to design
the office of independent counsel as it has.  Originalist history shows
that the founding generation did not conceive of criminal prosecu-
tion as an inherently or exclusively executive function.  Prior refer-
ences  in judicial decisions  to  criminal prosecution  as an executive
function are dicta, explainable as a shorthand reference to the inap-
propriateness of subjecting prosecutorial discretion to excessive ju-
dicial supervision.
II.  Independent Agencies:  Formalism and Modernism
A.  What is at Issue?
Independent counsels are relatively rare creatures compared to a
much  better  known variety of independent  adminstrator,  namely,
the heads of what are often called "independent  agencies."  Unfor-
tunately, to speak-as commentators often do-of the constitution-
ality of some undifferentiated phenomenon called an "independent
agency"  is to  put the problem misleadingly.  Federal  agencies  do
not come in  two  discrete  models,  one  "executive"  and  one  "in-
dependent,"  that are recognizable by clearly distinguishable charac-
teristics.52  Questions  concerning  the  constitutionality  of various
aspects of agency design and operation must be asked and resolved
with much greater specificity.
The  general  reason  why  some agencies  are informally  denomi-
nated  "independent  agencies"  is  that certain  of their features  are
designed to mitigate the degree to which partisan politics can domi-
nate their decisionmaking.  Not all of these structural features  are
controversial.  Well-accepted  accoutrements  of independence  in-
clude the adoption of collegial decisionmaking, staggered terms for
the agency's prime decisionmakers,  terms of office  that are longer
than the four-year presidential  term, and quotas on the number of
agency  members  who  may belong  to either of the major parties.
There is no current challenge to the constitutionality of any of these
politics-mitigating features.
The one aspect of some agencies' independence that has attracted
current challengers is the supposed immunity from removal of cer-
tain agency heads  who refuse to follow the policy directives of the
President. Although these "independent"  administrators are appar-
ently removable "for cause,"  it is conventionally understood that it
would not be cause for removal that such an administrator declined
52.  Strauss, The Place of Agencies in Government:  Separation of Powers and the Fourth
Branch, 84 COLUM.  L. REv. 573, 583-85 (1984).
608 [VOL.  57:596Shane
THE GEORGE  WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
to follow the President's policy preferences in favor of policy initia-
tives  that the administrator  prefers  and which  are  also within the
administrator's lawful discretion.  This insulation from direct presi-
dential policy supervision is the aspect of agency design that is most
provocatively independent, and it may be most helpful to refer to
such insulation as "policy independence."
Were it not for statutory limits on the removability  of independ-
ent commissioners,  challengers  to agency policy independence  as-
sume that the President could lawfully supervise the way in which all
administrators  exercise  their  policymaking  authority.  As  to
"purely"  executive or "non-independent"  administrators, it is pre-
sumed  that the  President  is  constrained  only by the requirement
that he not direct any act beyond the bounds of an administrator's
legal authority.53  In contrast, the President's direct supervisory au-
thority over independent  agency  commissioners  is  limited identi-
cally to his authority over independent counsel-he may police such
officials for legal compliance, but no more.
It is not obvious what practical  significance currently attaches to
agency independence.  Despite the  theoretical interest inherent in
the constitutional issues, no one has comprehensively assessed the
impact on agency policymaking  of whatever insulation from direct
presidential  supervision  such agencies  enjoy.  Independent  agen-
cies, even if not required to do so, may nonetheless choose to align
their policies with those of the President.54  It is hard to imagine that
the Federal Trade Commission under James C. Miller III, for exam-
ple, could have cooperated any more fully than it did with the Rea-
gan  administration's  philosophy  of  economic  regulation.
Conversely, "executive"  agencies may not always be as cozy towards
the White House as might be imagined.  The Environmental Protec-
tion Agency under William Ruckelshaus  tried to maintain at least
something  of an arm's-length  relationship  to  the President.  The
"independent"  Civil Aeronautics  Board was  abolished in  the late
1970s, and its functions folded into the "purely  executive" Depart-
ment of Transportation.55  It is an open question whether this shift
had any policy impact at all.
Furthermore,  conventional  understanding  of the legal limits  on
53.  Compare Sierra Club v. Costle, 657 F.2d 298 (D.C. Cir. 1981)  (upholding EPA
regulations against challenge that non-record presidential communications affected ex-
ercise of agency policymaking discretion), with Kendall v. United States ev rel. Stokes, 37
U.S.  (12  Pet.) 522  (1838)  (holding that President could not direct Postmaster to act
contrary to ministerial duty imposed by statute).
54.  Several attempts at assessing the actual policy independence of independent
agencies, most suggesting that their degree of independence is less than commonly sup-
posed, appear in Symposium: The Independence of Independent Agencies, 1988 DUKE LJ. 215,
215-99.
55.  See Civil Aeronautics  Board Sunset Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-443,  98 Stat.
1703.
1989] 609the  President's  ability  to  direct  independent  administrators  may
amount to no more than folklore.  No President has ever attempted
to  discharge an  independent administrator for disobeying a direct
presidential order to implement a policy within the administrator's
lawful discretion.  There is, therefore, no judicial test as to whether
such disobedience  would constitute cause sufficient  to  sustain dis-
missal under an independent agency's organic statute.  As observed
by Professor Geoffrey  Miller, a leading challenger  of the indepen-
dent agency form, a judicial interpretation  of "for cause"  removal
that would  permit  such  discharges  would  eliminate  the  constitu-
56
tional controversy.
Despite these reasons for questioning the current practical signifi-
cance of the dispute over independent agencies, administrative law-
yers  and scholars have devoted substantial energy to  the fray.  An
authoritative pronouncement  that agencies  are not insulated  from
direct presidential supervision of their policy discretion-whether as
a matter of constitutional  compulsion or statutory interpretation-
might  invite  an  innovative,  systematic  program  of independent
agency supervision that would have real significance.57  Also impor-
tant,  a  constitutional  decision  against  the  independence  of in-
dependent  agencies  would  bolster  a  categorical  approach  to
separation of powers disputes that could strengthen the President's
hand generally in defending other supposed aspects of presidential
prerogative.
All current constitutional  challenges to the political insulation of
independent agencies are variations of a single argument.  The chal-
lengers' shared premise is that, because the President heads the ex-
ecutive  branch,  the  Constitution  mandates  plenary  control  in  the
President over whatever policymaking discretion Congress  vests in
an administrative  officer outside Congress.  No  one questions  this
proposition with respect to administrators  who assist the President
in  carrying  out  express  article II  powers.  That  is,  no one  thinks
Congress may set up an independent  agency to  negotiate treaties,
direct troops in battle, or make pardon decisions.  The area of con-
troversy is thus limited to that zone of administrative discretion that
Congress  delegates  to  persons  outside  Congress  on  issues  over
which Congress would have plenary policy control-and the Presi-
dent none-but for Congress's decision to delegate.  These include
such areas as  trade and financial  regulation, product safety regula-
tion, and the regulation of domestic health and environmental con-
cerns.  Challengers  to  the  independent  agencies  insist  that  the
56.  Miller, Independent Agencies, 1986 Sup. CT. REv. 41,  86-90.
57.  President  Reagan's  program  of regulatory  oversight  excluded  independent
agencies from mandatory participation,  Exec. Order No.  12,291,  § 1(d),  3 C.F.R. 127
(1981),  reprinted in 5 U.S.C.  § 601 note at 431-34 (1982),  although the Justice Depart-
ment advised in 1981 that at least certain provisions of the President's order could con-
stitutionally be applied to those agencies.  United States Department ofJustice Office of
Legal Counsel, Memorandum for Honorable David Stockman, Director, Office of Man-
agement and Budget, Re: Proposed Executive Order on Federal Regulation (Feb.  12,
1981), reprinted in P. SHANE & H. BRUFF, THE LAW OF PRESIDENTIAL  POWER:  CASES AND
MATERIALS  355, 357 (1988).
610 [VOL.  57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
President must be able to supervise all such delegated policymaking
discretion.
B.  Textualism and Policy Independence
Textually, there are three hooks for challenges to administrative
policy independence.  One is that the "executive  power" vested by
article I158 should be read to encompass the policy supervision of all
administrative  officers to whom Congress delegates authority.  The
second,  which  amounts  to  the  same  thing, is  that the vesting  of
power in a unitary Presidencyv-that is,  in a single individual-sig-
nals  an intent to consolidate policy  control in a way that requires
plenary  presidential  policy  supervision.  The third is  that plenary
presidential  control of policymaking  is necessary  in  order for the
President  to  fulfill  his obligation  to  "take  Care  that  the Laws  be
faithfully executed."59
Each of these arguments runs into the textual hurdles that my tex-
tualist from Mars  encountered  in  assessing  independent  counsel.
First, nothing in article II expressly grants the President any power
to remove administrative officers on policy grounds.  Second, article
I vests authority in Congress to pass laws necessary and proper for
carrying into execution even executive powers.60  Third, the natural
reading of the faithful  execution  clause renders it a limitation  on
presidential  power, not a grant.61  A naive reader might entertain
the possibility that the words "executive power" in article II conven-
tionally denote illimitable control over any administrative discretion
that is exercised by the government of the United States.  The fact
is, however, that such a reading is not conventional, either now or in
1789.62  Thus, textual analysis suggests that protecting administra-
tive officers from direct policy supervision is a choice within the per-
missible legislative discretion  of Congress.  If such is  the  case for
criminal prosecutors, who were familiar figures in 1789, it is afortiori
the case with modern regulatory administrators, who were not.
58.  U.S. CONST. art. II, §  1,c I.  1.
59.  Id. § 3.
60.  Id. art. I, § 8, cl. 18.
61.  Tiefer, The Constitutionality of Independent Officers as Checks on Abuses of Executive
Power, 63 B.U.L. REV. 59, 90 (1983).
62.  The scope of debate since 1789 over the meaning of the article II vesting clause
belies any argument that a single interpretation of "executive power" is so well accepted
as to be regarded as conventional.  "The most obvious meaning of the language of Arti-
cle II, § 1, is to confirm that the executive power is vested in a single person, but almost
from the beginning it has been contended that the words mean much more than this
simple designation of locus."  CONGRESSIONAL  RESEARCH SERV., THE CONSTITUTION  OF
THE UNITED  STATES  OF AMERICA:  ANALYSIS AND  INTERPRETATION,  S. Doc. No. 82, 92d
Cong., 2d Sess. 431  (1973).  For a brief review of contending  theories of executive
power, see P. SHANE & H. BRUFF, supra note 57, at 4-20.
1989]At this point, however, many  constitutionalists  will not be satis-
fied.  The issue seems too weighty to ignore what may be historical
or normative  support for the challenge to independent  agencies-
arguments  that may not be clearly manifested in constitutional lan-
guage, but which might be persuasive once surfaced.
It is important to note, however, that once we go beyond the sur-
face text, there are different and distinct ways  of casting the argu-
ment  for  plenary  presidential  control  over  administrative
policymaking.  I  shall  call  these  "originalist"  and  "modernist."
Logic compels  the originalist to argue  two propositions:  first, that
the founding generation addressed the issue of administrative policy
control in a way that is reasonably analogous  to our understanding
of that issue; second, that, insofar as they understood the problem
as we might, the "framers" and "ratifiers"  vested administrative pol-
icy control in the President.
The modernist takes a more functional tack.  The modernist con-
cedes  that the problem  of administrative discretion  in  1989  bears
little  resemblance  to  the  problem  as  understood  in  1789.  The
founding generation, however, decided quite deliberately on a uni-
tary presidency in order to vindicate certain values-accountability,
most notably-that are still worthy and of obvious relevance to the
control of administrative discretion as we understand it.63  In order
to  protect  the  general  values  we impute  to  the  Constitution,  the
modernist insists we must vest in the President plenary policy super-
vision over administration.
The modernist argument as I have put it still maintains a link to
originalism.  No one appears  to argue against  the constitutionality
of independent agencies from a full-fledged  modernist stance-for
example, that, wholly without regard to values conventionally trace-
able to the Constitution, independent agencies are patently so bad
for government that they should be struck down as unconstitutional
on empirical,  functional  grounds.  The  modernist  argument  as  I
have cast it is, as Professor Miller would say, "neoclassical." 64  It is
value-oriented, but purports to draw only on values that interpreters
can plausibly argue are signaled by the debates and decisions of the
founding generation.  What makes  the argument modern is that it
draws on those values at a level of abstraction so far removed from
any context recognizable to the founding generation that it becomes
misleading to  regard the argument as an argument from "original
intent."  Although I do not believe that either the originalist or the
modernist  form  of the  argument  against  agency  policy  indepen-
dence  is  persuasive,  I do  believe  that the  modernist  argument is
more internally coherent, subtler, and thus weightier.
63.  C. THACH,  THE  CREATION  OF THE  PRESIDENCY  1775-1789,  at 89-90  (1923);
Strauss, supra note 52, at 599-600.
64.  Miller, supra note 56, at 52-58.
612 [VOL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
C.  Oiinalism and Policy Independence
The  originalist  argument  against  independent  agencies  cannot
sustain either proposition it asserts-either that the founding gener-
ation addressed the issue of administrative policy control in a way
that is reasonably analogous  to our understanding  of that issue, or
that,  insofar as  they  understood  the problem,  the  "framers"  and
"ratifiers"  vested administrative policy control in the President.
Originalists correctly insist that the organization of the presidency
was one of the most important structural questions debated in con-
nection with the framing of the Constitution.  It is equally clear that
the express constitutional  design, relying on a "unitary president,"
was intended to promote accountability  and "energy" in the execu-
tive.  What these premises imply for administrative agencies,  how-
ever, depends on the particular conception of accountability that the
founding generation perceived as linked to its structural design.  It
is just on this point that the originalist attack on independent agen-
cies suffers  the fallacy of anachronism.
Modem  originalist  challengers  to  independent  agencies  assert
that such agencies mitigate  the President's intended  accountability
for the policy content of administrative decisions, that is, his political
accountability.65  It is  today urged  that power be centralized  in the
President so that voters will know whom to blame if administrative
policy is too "liberal,"  too "conservative,"  too "cost-insensitive,"  or
too  oblivious  to  nonmonetizable  values.  The  politicized  modem
framework, however, is not the framework within which the found-
ing  generation  conceptualized  the  President's  accountability.  To
the extent that the executive was thought to enjoy discretion in car-
rying out congressional enactments not pertaining to military or for-
eign  policy,  the  accountability  that  contemporaries  expected
pertained to what we would now categorize as manageriala ccountabil-
ity.  The executive was to keep  within lawful bounds, spend public
funds carefully, and deal with problems evenhandedly.  The Presi-
dent's duty to take care that the laws be faithfully executed was an
obligation, not a source of power.  It incorporated into the Constitu-
tion  the  English prohibition  on the  executive  suspension  of stat-
utes.66   When,  for  example,  Publius  discusses  government
administration, it is not in terms of its policy orientation, but rather
65.  Strauss & Sunstein, The Role of the President and OMB  in Informal Rulemaking, 38
ADMIN.  L. REV.  181,  190 (1986).
66.  "That the pretended power of dispensing with laws, or the execution of laws, by
regal authority, as it hath been assumed and exercised of late, is illegal."  BILL OF RIGHTS
§ 2, 1 W. & M., 2d sess., ch. 2 (1689), reprintedi n 4 THE FOUNDERS'  CONSTITrrUTION, supra
note 43, at 123.
1989] 613in terms of whether administration  will prove "good"  or "bad." 67
Merit, not policy, was the criterion for judging administration.
The idea  that the  President  was  to be a  source of political  ac-
countability for government policy, as we currently understand it, is
implicitly refuted  by the original  design for presidential  elections.
The electoral college was conceived as a repudiation, ultimately un-
successful, of our now partisan and plebiscitory presidential politics,
in favor of a meritocratic  vision  of the presidency.68  Indirect  elec-
tion was  supposed  to  mitigate  the degree  to which  politics might
control  the  choice  of Presidents.  Electors  were  even  required  to
cast their votes in the separate states to prevent political discussion
among them from influencing their choice.69
Indeed, an  obvious implication  of the unitary presidency  is that
political representativeness  of the kind associated with the House of
Representatives is not a goal of the executive organization.  A multi-
membered  body would clearly  have  created  greater  opportunities
for popular representation than the executive branch-for example,
by geographic region-and consequently greater political accounta-
bility.  Implicit in the  choice of a unitary  presidency  was the view
that the  President  was  not  to be a  mirror  of popular  sentiment,
but-as far as  legislation  was concerned-a  defender  of a unitary
public interest in  any case  should political faction overtake public
good.  In this respect, his function was akin to the anticipated func-
tion of the highly undemocratic  Senate.70  Thus, any argument that
central presidential administrative authority is necessary to preserve
political accountability is based on a democratic  theory different from
the original  constitutional  vision.  The  repository of the Framers'
commitment to democracy, such as it was, was not the executive, but
Congress-primarily,  the House of Representatives.71
An originalist might, of course, retreat to  the argument that the
Framers'  commitments  to centralized managerial accountability  and
energetic  decisionmaking  are enough  to  require  centralized  presi-
dential authority  over all administrative  agencies.  This argument,
however, is weak for two reasons.  First, it is by no means clear that
Congress has today precluded the President from exercising a cen-
tral managerial role over the agencies.  Congress  has provided the
Office of Management and Budget-and thus the President-with a
critical  role in  evaluating  the  independent  agencies'  budget  re-
quests72 and paperwork  requirements.73  The President is typically
67.  J. ROHR,  To RUN  A CONSTITUTION:  THE  LEGITIMACY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE
STATE  1-3 (1986).
68.  See generally R. KETCHAM, PRESIDENTS ABOVE PARTY:  THE FIRST AMERICAN PRESI-
DENCY,  1789-1829 (1936).
69.  U.S. CONST. art. II, § 1, cl.3 .  On the meritocratic vision of the presidency, see
also THE FEDERALIST No. 68 (A. Hamilton).
70.  J. ROHR, supra note 67, at 29-32.
71.  George Mason called the House "the grand depository of the democratic princi-
ple of the Government."  G. WOOD, THE CREATION OF THE AMERICAN  REPUBLIC 1776-
1787, at 553 (1969).
72.  See 31 U.S.C. § 501 (1982 & Supp. IV 1986) (establishing the Office of Manage-
ment and Budget).
614 [VOL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
permitted  to  choose  the  chair  of each  multi-member  agency.74
"Inefficiency"  and  "neglect  of duty"  are  often  mentioned  in the
statutes  authorizing  independent  agencies  as  causes  sufficient  to
sustain the presidential removal of even an independent administra-
tor.75  All  of this  comports  with a vision  of constitutionally  com-
pelled centralized management.
A careful originalist, however, should regard even these congres-
sional decisions to be constitutionally discretionary.  Whatever com-
mitment  the founding generation  had to centralized  management
did not translate-even in the late eighteenth century-into a model
of executive control  over all administration  at the state or federal
level.  We have already seen that this is true with respect to criminal
prosecutors,  who  are,  after all,  administrative  policymakers.  Evi-
dence regarding civil administration also supports  the point.
In 1789, the first Congress created four civil administrative estab-
lishments-the  departments  of War,  of Foreign  Affairs,  of the
Treasury, and of the Post Office.76  Congress's treatment of the four
agencies reflected lengthy deliberation and differing understandings
as  to the relation of executive power to each agency.
Two of the departments-War  and Foreign Affairs-were under-
stood to be assisting in the implementation  of presidential  powers
vested specifically by the Constitution and were denominated "exec-
utive departments." 77  Their organic statutes sketched their depart-
mental organization and their duties only in broad terms.  Congress
anticipated a broad supervisory relationship of the President to the
78
department.
The new Post Office establishment, however, was not called a de-
partment.79  The Postmaster General  had a reporting relationship
to the Secretary  of the Treasury, and it is  clear  from the  debates
73.  See Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, Pub. L. No. 96-511, 94 Stat. 2812 (codi-
fied as amended at 44 U.S.C. §§ 3501-3520 (1982 & Supp. IV 1986)).
74.  See, e.g.,  15 U.S.C. § 2053(a) (1982) (Consumer Product Safety Commission); 42
U.S.C. § 5841(a) (1982)  (Nuclear Regulatory Commission).
75.  See, e.g.,  15 U.S.C. § 2053(a) (1982)  (Consumer Product Safety Commission); 42
U.S.C. § 5841(e) (1982)  (Nuclear Regulatory Commission).
76.  J. SANDERS,  EVOLUTION  OF EXECuTIVE  DEP'TS OF THE CONTINENTAL  CONGRESS
1774-1789, at 187-92 (1935); Casper, An Essay in Separation of Powers: Some Early Versions
and Practices, 30 WM. & MARY L. REV. 211, 233-42 (1989).
77.  Casper, supra note 76, at 239.
78.  Id.; see Act ofJuly 27, 1789, ch. 4, 1 Stat. 28-29 (establishing the Department of
Foreign Affairs); Act of Aug. 7, 1789, ch. 7,' 1 Stat. 49-50 (establishing the Department
of War).  Even so, it was by no means clear to the first Congress that the President was
constitutionally vested with plenary removal power over the heads of these departments.
On the ambiguities surrounding early removal controversies and the so-called "Decision
of 1789," see L. FISHER, CONSTITUTIONAL CONFLICTS BETWEEN CONGRESS AND THE PRESI-
DENT 60-66 (1985).
79.  J. SANDERS, supra note 76, at 192.
19891 615surrounding the Treasury Department that the character of Treas-
ury was not perceived to be executive in a manner akin to the de-
partments  of War  and  Foreign  Affairs.80  First,  unlike  the  other
departments, Treasury was not denominated "executive"  by statute.
Congress  went to great length  to specify  the Department's  struc-
ture, creating a number of fiscal officers with reporting responsibil-
ity to  the Secretary.8'  Most tellingly,  the first Congress perceived
the Secretary's obligations  as running to Congress as well as to the
President.  The  most  important  debate  in  this  regard  centered
around  a proposed  duty  of the  Secretary  "to  digest  and prepare
plans for the improvement and management of the revenue, and for
the support of public credit."8' 2  This wording is nearly identical to
the charge to the financial officers authorized under the Articles of
Confederation. 3  Some in Congress were alarmed that this parlia-
mentary duty would so involve the Secretary in legislation as to un-
dermine  the  authority  of the  House;  others  saw  the  charge  as
undermining  the President's  power  to propose  legislation.  None-
theless, Congress conferred this duty upon the Secretary, essentially
borrowing a description of the Secretary from this country's former,
short-lived parliamentary system.
The implications of this analysis were borne out in practice.  For
several years,  the Secretary of the Treasury functioned as the Com-
mittee on Ways  and Means  of the House of Representatives.84  As
late as  1823,  the Attorney  General  advised  the President that, far
from the President being constitutionally obligated to correct an al-
legedly improper settlement by the Treasury Department of an indi-
vidual's claim for reimbursement, it would be legally impermissible
for the the President to substitute his judgment for that of the ac-
counting officer.8 5
The vision of an air-tight executive  establishment under plenary
presidential control that is conjured by originalist challengers  to in-
dependent agencies  thus cannot be matched by the early history of
administrative practice.  One noted commentator has gone so far as
to say that the Constitution, as adopted and implemented in  1789,
actually marked the repudiation of the separation of powers princi-
ple.86  Dean  Gerhard  Casper's  observations,  however,  may  come
80.  Casper, supra note 76, at 240-42.
81.  Id. at 240.
82.  Id. (quoting 1 Stat. at 65-66 (1789)); see J. ROHR, supra note 67, at 18-27.
83.  J. ROHR, supra note 67, at 22-23.
84.  Casper, supra note 76, at 241.  The flexibility of the founding generation in ad-
ministrative design is also illustrated by Congress's  1791  decision to charter the Na-
tional Bank of the United States.  Despite the critical importance Hamilton attached to
the bank as the federal government's fiscal agent, he successfully urged Congress-inso-
far as possible-to place the bank under private direction, which would bolster public
confidence in the bank.  Act of Feb. 25, 1791, ch. X,  1 Stat. 191, 193 (obsolete).
85.  The President and Accounting Officers,  1 Op. Att'y Gen. 624, 625 (1823).
86.  F. McDONALD,  Novus ORDO  SECLORUM:  THE  INTELLECTUAL  ORIGINS OF THE
CONSTITUTION  258 (1985).
616 [VOL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAWr REVIEW
closer to the mark.  Casper regards late eighteenth  century govern-
ment decisionmakers as not having had before them any single, co-
herent vision of a "separation of powers"  principle either to adopt
or to reject.87  Instead, they were intent on structuring an adminis-
trative apparatus that would be but one version of a government of
largely  separated  powers.  The  aims  of this  structure  were  func-
tional, to balance the need for effective, coordinated administration
with the need to protect against tyranny.  The failure of a modern
Congress  to respect any single, coherent vision of a separation of
powers  principle  thus  does  not  run  afoul  of  any  original
understanding.
D.  Modernism and Policy Independence
By now, any thoroughgoing originalist should be persuaded  that
the decision whether  to insulate agency administrators from direct
presidential policy supervision is wholly within congressional discre-
tion.  Neither  the text nor the  history relevant  to  original  under-
standing of the separation of powers commands plenary control in
the President.
Yet, originalism  in this  context seems  almost a sleight  of hand.
To put it bluntly:  why should we be bound, in our understanding of
the President's  proper role vis-a-vis  a vast modern  administrative
bureaucracy, by  the conventional  conceptualization  of administra-
tion in an entirely different world?  An additional and perhaps more
provocative level of constitutional  argument is possible.
As I noted briefly above, one might start this argument, like the
originalist argument, by observing that the Constitution clearly em-
bodies a commitment to a unitary executive and that the fundamen-
tal purpose underlying the constitutional organization was executive
accountability.  It  may  be  conceded  that  the  terms  in  which  the
Framers discussed accountability  were not the policy-laden, frankly
partisan terms by which we understand the concept.  They assessed
administration in terms of virtues "above" politics-was administra-
tion honest or corrupt, efficient or inefficient, dedicated to the pub-
lic good or overtaken by faction?  But the differences in the terms by
which they and we understand our very different worlds do not belie
the shared concern.  It is arguably as legitimate for us as it was for
them to build a contemporaneous  conception of accountability into
our reading  of the  constitutional  text.  This is  so,  the modernist
urges, even without a formal alteration of that text.
The difference between this argument and a genuinely originalist
argument can be illustrated by comparing two Supreme Court opin-
ions regarding  another  structural  dimension  of the  Constitution,
87.  Casper, supra note 76, at 212, 224.
1989] 617namely,  federalism.  In  1976,  then-Associate  Justice  Rehnquist
wrote for the Court an opinion invalidating part of the Fair Labor
Standards Act88 because it violated a judicially  enforceable protec-
tion  for  states'  rights  that  the  majority  purported  to  find in  an
originalist view of the Tenth Amendment.89  Justice Brennan's dis-
sent persuasively argued that the majority had essentially invented
its  original  understanding,90  and  the  weakness  of the  majority's
rhetoric may have helped insure a short life to its holding.91
In contrast, Justice O'Connor in  1982 wrote a modernist dissent
from a decision upholding another attempt at federal regulation of
the states.92  She provided a more  compelling  (though ultimately
unsuccessful)  rationale  for Justice  Rehnquist's  approach.  Justice
O'Connor recapitulated the virtues of federalism that the founding
generation  hoped to  secure  and argued  for the increased  impor-
tance of those virtues under modern government.  She then argued,
in essence,  that those virtues could  not be preserved in a modern
United  States  without creating  a judicially  enforceable  federalism
principle  and locating it in the Tenth Amendment.93  In avoiding
any  reliance  on an historical  claim  that her reading  of the Tenth
Amendment was the original reading, she freed herself to make the
more subtle and less vulnerable argument that her reading was nec-
essary  to vindicate  original  constitutional  concerns  about democ-
racy,  pluralism,  and  the  decentralization  of power  under  vastly
changed economic  and social circumstances.
The modernist  argument against  independent  agencies  runs  as
follows.  The Constitution created a unitary presidency in order to
concentrate accountability  in  the President.  Although the original
constitutional  vision of administration  was  essentially meritocratic,
we have come to perceive that the administrative implementation of
public policy is infused with political value judgments.  The found-
ing  generation  believed  that  House  of Representatives  elections
would preserve  political  accountability,  yet  that is  clearly  not the
case.  An electorate  unable to influence the policies  that guide the
exercise of administrative discretion in the executive branch is sig-
nificantly disenfranchised.  The way to preserve our commitments to
democracy and to accountability  is by reading into Article II a ple-
nary presidential power to guide executive branch policymaking.94
88.  Fair Labor Standards Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-259, § 6(a), 88 Stat.
55 (extending the Act's minimum wage and maximum hour requirements to the states).
89.  National League of Cities v. Usery, 426 U.S. 833, 840-52 (1976).
90.  Id. at 860-63 (Brennan, J., dissenting); see also Powell, The CompleatJeffersonian:
Justice Rehnquist and Federalism, 91 YALE LJ. 1317 (1982) (arguing thatJustice Rehnquist's
theory of federalism as it emerged in National League of Cities was not based on constitu-
tional first principles intended by the Framers).
91.  See Garcia v. San Antonio Metro. Transit Auth., 469 U.S. 528 (1985) (overruling
National League of Cities).
92.  FERC v. Mississippi, 456 U.S. 742, 775 (1982)  (O'Connor, J., dissenting).
93.  Id. at 787-96.
94.  Cf McConnell,  Why Hold Elections? Using Consent Decrees to Insulate Policies from
Political Change, 1987 U. Cm. LEGAL F. 295 (arguing that consent decrees that bind the
administrative discretion of federal agencies undermine democratic accountability em-
bodied in presidential authority over administrative policymaking).
618 [voL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
This argument is more compelling, it might be urged, because of
thoroughly changed  political,  social, and economic  circumstances.
First, although the democratic character of the original Constitution
was  significantly  attenuated,  formal  changes  in  the  Constitution
since 1789 have enlarged its commitment to popular democracy and
electoral control.95  Because Congress now delegates such extensive
policymaking authority to administrative agencies, placing ultimate
policy authority in the President is the most effective mechanism for
giving voters influence over the policy agenda of the agencies.96
Second, the limited scope of federal activity in the late eighteenth
century, especially with regard to domestic regulation, made it plau-
sible to think Congress would keep to itself all significant discretion
over federal policymaking.  The scope  of modern federal  govern-
ment activity is, by contrast, enormous, prompted by the creation of
national  markets  and  national  networks  of communication  and
transport, as well as by the reallocation of civil rights authority fol-
lowing the Civil War.  The fact that Congress has responded by del-
egating important policymaking discretion with respect to virtually
every aspect of our collective economic and social life creates a criti-
cal problem of coordination.  The President is the only official with
the  current  capacity  to impose  some coordinating  discipline  on a
host of administrators, each of whom may otherwise fail to take ac-
count of the competing agendas of different agencies.97
Finally, a core aspiration articulated by Madison for the new gov-
ernment structure was its utility in overcoming what Madison called
the vices of "faction."  To whatever extent eighteenth century social
and  political  conditions  might have  rendered  that  hope  realistic,
modernists  insist that our current  Congress  and  the agencies  are
easy prey to narrow  interests, the  current analogues  to factions.98
The President, because he has the broadest possible constituency, is
least likely to fall prey to special interests.  The unitary presidency
thus  has a  potentially  critical role to  play  in countermanding  the
modern influence  of faction in administrative policymaking.99
95.  "Passage of the Fifteenth, Seventeenth, and Nineteenth Amendments shows that
[the eighteenth century] conception of political equality belongs to a bygone day .... "
Gray v. Sanders, 372 U.S. 368, 377 n.8 (1963)  (holding that states may not structure
gubernatorial elections to resemble the electoral college system where the state struc-
ture violates the one person, one vote requirement).
96.  Mashaw, Pro-Delegation:  'hy Administrators Should Make Administrative Decisions, 1J.
LAw, ECON. & ORG. 81 (1985).
97.  See generally Strauss & Sunstein, supra note 65.
98.  See, e.g.,  B. ACKERMAN  & W. HASSLER, CLEAN  COAL/DiRTY AIR  121-28  (1981)
(discussing the role of organized interests in writing the Clean Air Act).
99.  Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the ANew  Deal, 101  HARV.  L.  REV.  421,  452-63
(1987).
1989] 619These are important arguments, made at greater length and per-
haps with additional subtlety by others.  They do not rest on artifi-
cial attempts to capture what the founding generation thought, but
instead urge what we should now think in applying the general con-
cepts  of accountability  and  coordination  to  our  modern  circum-
stance.  If  one  regards  constitutional  argument  in  the  modern
neoclassical  mode as legitimate, these arguments provide weightier
ammunition  than  does  originalism  for  the constitutional  position
advanced by the Reagan administration on the independent agency
controversy.
These  arguments  are  weightier  than  the  originalist  challenge,
although,  to be sure,  each modernist argument is questionable  on
its  own terms.  It  is  by no  means  clear in practice  that increased
presidential control over agency policymaking would be truer to the
electoral  will than the current system.  Despite President Reagan's
overwhelming electoral mandates, popular opinion never swung be-
hind key  elements  of his  deregulatory  agenda.  It is plausible  that
public enthusiasm  for the President was  strengthened  by the per-
ception that he could not disturb major elements of domestic social
policy  that were  embedded  in legislation  and in  our bureaucratic
culture before his presidency.
Likewise, coordination in the administration of statutes is a virtue
only to the extent Congress wants coordination.  A key anxiety un-
derlying President Reagan's increased oversight of regulatory poli-
cymaking by non-independent agencies'00 concerned  the degree to
which the Office  of Management  and Budget  might try to enforce
policy  uniformity  contrary  to  legislative  intent.101  Although  it  is
plausible that presidential oversight can help to "minimize duplica-
tion and conflict of regulations,"102 this is a proposition to be tested
empirically.  Moreover, improvements in this regard need to be bal-
anced  against the degree  to which such  coordination  threatens to
undermine the effectiveness  of individual statutory programs.
The President's  precise role in resisting "faction"  is likewise far
from  self-evident.  Modern  laments  against  "special  interests"  do
not equate precisely with Madison's notion of faction.  Madison de-
fined faction as
a number of citizens, whether amounting to a majority or minority
of the whole, who are united and actuated by some common im-
pulse of passion, or of interest, adverse to the rights of other citi-
zens,  or  to  the  permanent  and  aggregate  interests  of  the
community. 103
100.  Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127 (1981), reprinted in 5 U.S.C. § 601 note at
431-34  (1982); Exec.  Order No.  12,498, 3 C.F.R. 323  (1986),  reprinted in 5 U.S.C.A.
§ 601 app. at 296-97 (West Supp. 1988).
101.  Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Separation of Powers, 23 ARMZ.  L. REv.  1267,
1272-82 (1981).
102.  Exec. Order No.  12,291,  Preamble, 3  C.F.R.  127 (1981),  reprinted in 5 U.S.C.
§ 601 note at 431-32 (1982).
103.  THE FEDERALIST No.  10, at 57 (J. Madison) (J. Cooke ed. 1961).
620 [voL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE  WASHINGTON  LAW REVIEW
Thus, organizations dedicated,  for example,  to environmental pro-
tection  or  civil  rights  enforcement-organizations  that  President
Reagan  was  wont  to decry  as  special interests-do  not represent
"factions"  in the Madisonian sense because their ideological appeal
is to the long-term common interest, not to momentary passion or
self-interest.104  The modern "special  interests"  most obviously re-
sembling Madisonian factions  are the lobbyists and political action
committees  organized  for  the  protection  of  economic  interests.
That these organizations might be more effectively deployed against
independent agencies than non-independent agencies is an intrigu-
ing empirical proposition that must be tested, not merely assumed.
For constitutional  purposes, however, the modernist arguments,
whatever  their empirical basis,  are  unpersuasive because  they are
incomplete.  Accountability,  coordination,  and  the  obstruction  of
factionalism are not the only relevant general concepts that are both
traceable  to the Constitution and translatable  for modern applica-
tion.  Two other constitutional  principles are critically important-
the diffusion  of power  and  the primacy  of Congress  in domestic
policymaking.
The diffusion of what we would now call regulatory power was of
critical  significance  to late  eighteenth  century  political thought.105
The Constitution  thus recognizes  the continuing integrity of state
governments,  divides the branches of the federal government,  and
bifurcates the federal legislative branch.  Swings in popular majori-
ties can swing the House of Representatives every two years, but not
the  Senate.  Most  regulatory  power was  thought  to reside  in  the
states, wherein the source of regulation  most clearly  analogous  to
our independent agencies was the common law court.  The result is
a deliberate impediment to coordination.
The  contribution  to liberty  of the  diffusion  of power  has  long
been treated as  all but self-evident in American  political  thought.
Our political  evolution,  however,  has  demonstrated  an additional
value-the profound contribution of this diffusion of power to polit-
ical  stability.  The increased  democratization  of American  politics
has exposed deep  divisions within the electorate on basic political
and social questions.  We have witnessed profound changes in ma-
jority sentiment  on a variety  of issues  within  even  the past  three
decades.  Because  policymaking  power  is  diffused,  however,
throughout different branches and among different levels of govern-
ment, two things are true.  Even a strong majority is likely to pro-
duce no more than incremental policy changes  in short periods of
time, and minority opinion, defeated in one forum, is likely to have
104.  Tesh, In Support of "Single-Issue" Politics, 99 POL. Sci. Q 27 (1984).
105.  A classic statement is, of course, THE FEDERALIST No. 10 (J. Madison).
621
1989]other political  forums  in which to  compete more effectively.  This
means  that a political  minority, when it loses an election, does not
lose everything.  Much less does it lose everything if its opinion was
ever majority opinion and, hence, embodied in laws that would have
to  be repealed if another philosophy is to be implemented as law.
Given how hotly  the public currently  contests such  issues as abor-
tion,  civil rights,  environmental  protection, public aid to  religion,
and trade policy, it may be quite dangerous to raise the policy stakes
in  presidential  elections.  Empowering  temporary  majorities  to
swing quickly  the whole of our policy agenda may greatly provoke
electoral  discontent and social strife.
This is all the more true because so  much regulatory power has
passed  to  the  federal government.  The development  of national
markets, and of national networks of communication and transport,
has rendered it highly unlikely that judicially enforceable federalism
principles can ever be sensibly devised to reduce the federal regula-
tory role.106  In a sense, congressional decisions to vest policy inde-
pendence in administrative agencies may help to compensate for the
diminished vitality of federalism.  The relative lack of coordination
among independent agencies  may better accord with the pluralism
and division that often characterizes  the American electorate.  From
the standpoint of stability, the record of the more fully coordinated
western  parliamentary  democracies  of  Europe  does  not  seem
enviable.
The  salience  of the  diffusion  of power  to  our  decision  as  to
whether  Congress  may  authorize  agency  policy  independence  is
even  greater when  considered  in  tandem  with  a second  constitu-
tional  commitment-a  commitment to  the primacy  of Congress in
domestic  federal  policymaking.  Whatever  the  advantages  of that
primacy in 1789, it might be thought to have at least two advantages
two centuries  later.  First, the primacy of Congress, with its divided
structure and staggered Senate  selections,  helps reinforce  the bias
towards incrementalism  that we value as a source of stability.  Sec-
ond, although the diffusion of power within Congress through the
proliferation of subcommittees  undoubtedly diminishes  the coordi-
nating capacity of Congress, it greatly increases  the likelihood that
some politician  will  have  real  incentive  to  pay close  attention  to
agency policy even at a micro-level.  The prestige of a subcommittee
chair-there were 228 subcommittees  in 1987-88t 07-is  likely to be
augmented by that person's  success in drawing attention to issues
raised by the activity of any agency within his or her subcommittee's
jurisdiction.
The arguments from congressional primacy and the virtues of the
diffusion of power are, of course, debatable.  The actual value to the
106.  The inability of Tenth Amendment doctrine to account for innovation was an
explicit ground for the decision overruling National League of Cities v. Usery, 426 U.S.
833  (1976).  See Garcia  v. San Antonio  Metro. Transit Auth., 469  U.S. 528,  543-47
(1985).
107.  See 1987-88 OFFICIAL CONGRESSIONAL DIRECTORY, S. PRT. No. 31, 100th Cong.,
Ist Sess. VI-XIII (1987).
622 [VOL. 57:596Shane
THE  GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
American polity of what independent agencies contribute by way of
congressional primacy and the diffusion of power is as controversial
as the value of what centralized executive power would contribute
by way of coordination, political accountability, and the deterrence
of faction.  My conclusion, therefore, is that the arguments favoring
agency policy independence are too weak to command that the Pres-
ident be denied policy supervision over agencies that are not exer-
cising powers in areas of authority vested in the President by Article
II.
I do believe,  however, that the arguments  are strong enough-
certainly  as  weighty for constitutional  purposes  as  the  arguments
against  the  policy independence  of agencies-that  the issue as  to
whether policy independence is an appropriate feature of an agency
is an issue within Congress's discretion to decide.  There is no sin-
gle argument on either side of the issue that trumps the others be-
cause  it is  either plainly  more  rooted in  Constitutional values  or
plainly more persuasive  empirically.  All  the  arguments  discussed
are policy positions to be weighed in deciding as a matter of legisla-
tive judgment how it is necessary or appropriate for any individual
agency  to be structured.  Congress  is free to weigh  such  constitu-
tionally rooted arguments-as well as a host of other arguments for
and against independence  that may not be linked rhetorically with
constitutional  values-because  all would be within  Congress's  ra-
tional consideration in deciding on agency structure.O1s
This is plainly not a defense of particular decisions Congress has
made.  Critics  are  right  that  no  apparent  principle  explains  why
some agencies are currently "independent" and others "purely" ex-
ecutive.109  That Congress  may make decisions  that are difficult to
rationalize or even wrong does not diminish the scope of its powers
to make  decisions.  If the policy arguments  against independence
are strong enough, Congress  should pay heed.  My point is, how-
ever,  that even  the modernist  Constitution  favors  Congress's  au-
thority  to make the choice.  It corroborates the likeliest inferences
from a textual and historical analysis.
II.  Morrison v. Olson Reprise:  Would Modernism
Alter the Outcome?
On the debate regarding the policy independence of civil regula-
tors, I have argued  that modernism  provides weightier  arguments
108.  Economic efficiency, for example, may provide arguments against policy inde-
pendence that are not constitutionally rooted.  The policy arguments against indepen-
dence are well reviewed in Miller, supra note 56, at 75-83.  For a defense, see 5 SENATE
COMM.  ON GOVERNMENTAL  AFFAIRS,  STUDY  ON  FEDERAL REGULATION,  95th Cong.,  Ist
Sess. 6-8, 67-81 (Comm. Print 1977).
109.  Miller, supra note 56, at 72-75.
1989] 623against independence than does  originalism.  My conclusion,  how-
ever, was that even modernist argument favors congressional discre-
tion  regarding  the  decision  over agency  independence.  Because
formalist argument seems so untenable a foundation for a constitu-
tional  challenge  to  independent  counsels,  it  seems  fair  to  ask
whether  modernism  would  have  better  served  the  Reagan
administration.
My  own  assessment  is  that  the  modernist  elements  in Justice
Scalia's dissent in Morrison v.  Olson"11  are, in fact, the most subtle
and  compelling.  Justice Scalia  argues, first,  that the independent
counsel  offends the constitutional  commitment  to due process be-
cause the judicial appointment of a prosecutor to investigate a sin-
gle  potential  defendant  undermines  the  values  of prosecutorial
detachment, impartiality,  and accountability."'  There is no effec-
tive political check either on such a prosecutor or on those who ap-
point her.12  Neither is the prosecutor's zeal for investigation and
prosecution tempered by the sense of proportion provoked by com-
peting  claims for the prosecutor's  time  and energy-the  situation
faced, that is,  by any United States Attorney or Justice Department
3
prosecutor."1
The second claim is that the independent counsel law destabilizes
the co-equality  of the  branches.1 4  The  Constitution hands  Con-
gress  specific tools  to  check an unlawful executive-most  notably,
impeachment.  The obligation  to appoint an independent  counsel,
however, arises when any person, including a member of Congress,
brings the requisite  information  to  the Attorney General.115  This
gives  Congress a check  on the executive  not contemplated  by the
Constitution,  the very  threat of which  may reduce  the zeal  of the
President's  subordinates  in the discharge of their duties.  Further-
more,  when  any  member  of Congress  successfully  seeks  an  in-
dependent counsel to investigate a prominent executive official,  the
result is arguably to erode public support for the President, whether
or not the charges involved prove meritorious. 116
There is reason to debate whether independent counsel in prac-
tice truly augur the consequences  that Justice Scalia predicts.  Pro-
fessor Bruff has pointed  out that independent counsels have yet to
bring any unsuccessful prosecutions, and potential professional em-
barrassment acts as a strong deterrent to overzealousness. 117  It is
plausible,  of course,  that  multiple criminal  investigations  eroded
President Reagan's  support.  It is less clear whether any erosion is
110.  108 S. Ct. 2597 (1988).
111.  Id. at 2637-40 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
112.  Id. at 2638-39.
113.  Id. at 2640.
114.  Id. at 2630.
115.  See 28 U.S.C.  §§ 591,  592(g) (1982  & Supp. IV 1986).
116.  Morrison, 108 S. Ct. at 2630-31  (Scalia,J., dissenting).
117.  Bruff, Independent Counsel and the Constitution, 24 WILLAMETrE  L. REV. 539,  557
(1988).
[VOL. 57:596Shane
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW
traceable to the investigation rather than to the conduct of particu-
lar  defendants.118  Moreover,  President  Reagan  amply  demon-
strated a President's capacity to mobilize other strengths to combat
any erosion of support.
There are, I would argue, two even more compelling reasons why
Justice Scalia's modernism fails.  The first is that it ignores compet-
ing constitutional values, just as did the modernist argument against
agency  policy  independence.  One  message  of the  impeachment
power is that Congress is accountable for checking executive abuse.
It is fair to say that impeachment has not proven up to that task.
Thus,  Congress's  innovation  in creating  the independent  counsel
may go no further in checking  the President  than would impeach-
ment, were it a more practicable option.  Additionally, the Constitu-
tion commands the President to take care that the laws be faithfully
executed.  A distortion of executive  branch judgment resulting in
the failure to prosecute corrupt officials would be tantamount to the
suspension of a criminal statute-the precise  consequence that the
faithful execution clause was intended to avoid.
The second reason, however, why Justice Scalia's modernism fails
is that the formalist arguments supporting Congress are simply too
strong.  Unless straightforward  textualism produces a real world re-
sult that is implausible  given the normative  interests at stake, for-
malism  respects  the  value  of order  in  our  public adminstration:
"[E]xpress  adherence to a well-understood formal rule of law gives
voice to our aspirations for control and accountability as part ofjus-
tice."119  Even  if Justice  Scalia's  policy  objections  to independent
counsel have merit, they are not so weighty as to overcome the bur-
dens of text and history in divining Congress's powers over govern-
ment organization.120
118.  Olson illustrates the point. The targeting of former Assistant Attorney General
Theodore B. Olson (for whom this author worked for several months in the Justice De-
partment Office of Legal Counsel) for an independent investigation seems to have dam-
aged neither Mr. Olson's reputation nor the political standing of the administration.
Mr. Olson never faced allegations of misconduct other than the allegations surrounding
his handling of an executive privilege dispute.  He was never the subject of widespread
negative publicity.  It is doubtful that his name reached "household  word"  status be-
cause of his case.  For a sympathetic account of the Olson case, see Frankel, Ted Olson's
Five Years in Purgatory, AM. LAW.,  Dec. 1988, at 68.
By contrast, independent investigations of Attorney General Meese may have eroded
political support for the administration.  Mr. Meese was  the subject of a wide range of
allegations of misconduct; the allegations went strongly to his character, he was repeat-
edly the subject of negative publicity (extending beyond the purview of the independent
counsel's investigation), and the independent counsel's report (and a subsequentJustice
Department report) were largely critical of his conduct.
119.  Shane, Conventionalism in Constitutional Interpretation and the Place of Administrative
Agencies, 36 AM. U.L. REV. 573, 598 (1987).
120.  For a more extended discussion of the place of textualist argument in a process
of constitutional interpretation that cannot always be textualist, see generally id.
1989] 625Mistretta v. United States:  A  Concluding Note
The last Supreme Court separation  of powers opinion to be is-
sued during the  Reagan years  is Mistretta v.  United States.  Over
121 
Justice Scalia's lone dissent, the Court upheld the constitutionality
of the  structure  of the United  States  Sentencing  Commission,  an
"independent  commission  in  the judicial  branch  of  the  United
States"  made up of seven members, at least three of whom must be
federal judges.122  All members are appointed by the President with
the advice and consent of the Senate; none may be removed except
"for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office or for other good cause
23
shown."1
The Reagan administration  defended  the constitutionality of the
agency against the particular challenge proffered,  namely,  that the
use ofjudges as commission members impermissibly extended pres-
idential influence over the judiciary and impermissibly aggrandized
judicial power.  The Solicitor General  argued,  however,  that Con-
gress's decision to place the Commission in the judicial branch did
not properly signify the nature of its function.  An agency with its
administrative  powers,  he  argued,  could  be  regarded  only  as
"executive."124
The Supreme  Court's refusal  to  insist  that  the Commission  be
"in"  the executive  branch  is perhaps  the most telling blow to  the
categorical  approach  to  separation of powers  law championed  by
Justice Scalia and by the administration.  The Court announced  the
following principle:  "Congress  may delegate to the Judicial Branch
nonadjudicatory functions that do not trench upon the prerogatives
of another Branch and that are appropriate to the central mission of
the Judiciary."'' 25  The Court's holding necessarily  implies  that the
Commission does  not trench upon an executive prerogative to  su-
pervise policymaking by all administrators to whom Congress dele-
gates  authority  to  help  implement  the  public  law  of the  United
States.  The reason is that no such prerogative exists.
It follows from Mistretta, as from constitutional  text and history,
that Congress  may or may not grant the President supervisory au-
thority over administrative policymaking outside his constitutionally
vested jurisdiction.  Our fundamental law leaves that discretionary
choice to  Congress.  Commentators may muster weighty policy ar-
guments for and against agency policy independence.  These are ar-
guments, however, to be addressed  to Congress, not to courts.
121.  109 S. Ct. 647 (1989).
122.  28 U.S.C. § 991(a) (Supp. IV 1986).
123.  Id.
124.  Arguments Before the Court, 57 U.S.L.W. 3271, 3272-73 (U.S. Oct. 18,  1988).
125.  Mistretta, 109 S. Ct. at 663.
626 [VOL. 57:596