Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation  [Date] 
 
0  
2
0
 
2
 
 
V
O
INTEROPERABILITY AS A 
N
 
TOOL FOR COMPETITION 
 
REGULATION 
IAN BROWN Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Interoperability is a technical mechanism for computing systems to work together – 
even if they are from competing firms. An interoperability requirement for large 
online platforms has been suggested by the European Commission as one ex ante 
(up-front rule) mechanism in its proposed Digital Markets Act (DMA), as a way to 
encourage competition. The policy goal is to increase choice and quality for users, 
and the ability of competitors to succeed with better services. The application would 
be to the largest online platforms, such as Facebook, Google, Amazon, smartphone 
operating systems (e.g. Android/iOS), and their ancillary services, such as payment 
and app stores.  
This report analyses up-front interoperability requirements as a pro-competition 
policy tool for regulating large online platforms, exploring the economic and social 
rationales and possible regulatory mechanisms. It is based on a synthesis of recent 
comprehensive policy reviews of digital competition in major industrialised econo-
mies, and related academic literature, focusing on areas of emerging consensus 
while noting important disagreements. It draws particularly on the Vestager, Furman 
and Stigler reviews, and the UK Competition and Markets Authority’s study on online 
platforms and digital advertising. It also draws on interviews with software develop-
ers, platform operators, government officials, and civil society experts working in 
this field. 
Intended audience: this report is intended to support civil society and parliamentary 
groups developing positions on ex ante competition rules in the EU’s proposed Dig-
ital Markets Act, and digital competition reforms in other jurisdictions. 
Acknowledgements: The author thanks Chloé Berthélémy, Astor Carlberg, Ignacio 
Castro, Kevin Coates, Jon Crowcroft, Cory Doctorow, Gerben (including for drawing 
figures  1 and  2),  Liza Lovdahl Gormsen,  Hamed Haddadi, Bernie  Hogan,  Orla 
Lynskey, Chris Marsden,  Rob Nicholls, Jan Penfrat, Christoph Schmon, Jonathan 
Todd, Kasia Szymielewicz, Tommaso Valletti, Simonetta Vezzoso and Lorna Woods 
for their advice. 
Funding: This research was supported by the Open Society Foundations Information 
Programme. All unattributed analysis and opinions expressed are entirely the au-
thor’s own. 
About the author 
Dr. Ian Brown is visiting CyberBRICS professor at Fundação Getulio Vargas (FGV) 
Law School in Rio de Janeiro. He was previously Principal Scientific Officer at the 
UK government’s Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport; Professor of In-
formation Security and Privacy at the University of Oxford’s Internet Institute; and a 
Knowledge Exchange Fellow with the Commonwealth Secretariat and UK National 
Crime Agency. His books include Cybersecurity for Elections (2020, Commonwealth 
- 1 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Secretariat, with  Marsden/Lee/Veale),  Regulating Code  (2013, MIT  Press,  with 
Marsden), and Research Handbook on Governance of the Internet (ed., 2013, Ed-
ward Elgar). His PhD in computer science is from University College London. 
   
- 2 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Contents 
Figures  4 
Introduction  5 
What would interoperability look like?  7 
High levels of concentration in digital platforms  14 
Economic impacts of interoperability  16 
Multi-homing and tipping  18 
Gatekeepers, conglomerates and ecosystems  20 
Complementary innovation and homogenisation  23 
Static vs dynamic effects  25 
Social impacts of interoperability  27 
Platforms as essential social infrastructure  29 
Media pluralism and diversity  31 
Privacy and data protection  33 
Content moderation  39 
Environmental impact  43 
Digital sovereignty  44 
Existing and planned European interoperability policies  47 
Appendix 1 – Types of interoperability and example scenarios  54 
Vertical and horizontal interoperability  55 
Protocol and data interoperability  56 
Detailed technical and regulatory examples  57 
Straightforward within existing regulatory framework  57 
New but less controversial scenarios (based on past experience from other 
sectors)  59 
New and more challenging scenarios  60 
 
   
- 3 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Figures 
Figure 1 Connecting "gatekeeper" platforms with smaller services.......................... 5 
Figure 2 Network architectures ................................................................................. 8 
Figure 3 Tweetbot and Nuzzel – two alternative apps to access Twitter ...............10 
Figure 4 Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey announces the company’s interoperability 
project ....................................................................................................................... 11 
Figure 5 Mastodon users can communicate via 500-character “toots” with other 
users on their own “instance”, and on other connected instances and services .... 12 
Figure 6 Users of other platforms’ ability to post to/from Facebook .......................13 
Figure 7 Combined indicative market shares of current leading two companies in 
selected UK digital markets ......................................................................................15 
Figure 8 CMA simplified assessment of consumer harm .........................................16 
Figure 9 Andrew Reed’s humorous suggestion for a Twitter redesign, inspired by 
Google’s multiple user interface interventions to promote its videoconferencing 
service ....................................................................................................................... 21 
Figure 10 CMA interpretation of a selection of Google and Facebook services ......22 
Figure 11 TweetDelete and Thread Reader, two complementary services to Twitter
.................................................................................................................................. 25 
Figure 12 Facebook users in the population of the EU’s 27 member states, March 
2020 ......................................................................................................................... 29 
Figure 13 Mastodon helps new users find instances matching their content 
moderation preferences........................................................................................... 40 
Figure 14 Muller et al.'s framework model for interoperability maturity in the 
Building Information Modelling lifecycle .................................................................. 43 
   
- 4 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Introduction 
Interoperability is a technical mechanism for computing systems to work together – 
even if they are from competing firms. An interoperability requirement for the largest 
online “gatekeeper” platforms1 has been suggested by the European Commission as 
one ex ante (up-front rule) mechanism in its proposed Digital Markets Act (DMA), as 
a way to encourage competition. The policy goal is to increase choice and quality 
for users, and the ability of competitors to succeed with better services.2 The appli-
cation would be to large online platforms such as social media (e.g. Facebook), 
search  engines  (e.g.  Google),  e-commerce  marketplaces  (e.g.  Amazon), 
smartphone operating systems (e.g. Android/iOS), and their ancillary services, such 
as payment and app stores. Users of other services could choose to connect to 
friends, businesses and resources on these “gatekeeper” platforms, as shown in 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1 Connecting "gatekeeper" platforms with smaller services 
 
1 The Digital Services Act consultation defines this as “online platforms reaching a certain level of us-
ers and covering different types of services that are considered to have a particularly important im-
pact and play a distinctive role as ‘gatekeepers’ to the services they provide. Since the present con-
sultation itself inquires about the distinctive features, the impact and the potential measures, which 
need to be taken in relation to such platforms, this definition should be understood more as a de-
scription of possible features that identify large online platforms.” 
2 European Commission DG Connect, The Digital Services Act package, 2 June 2020. 
- 5 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
An interoperability requirement has been recommended in varying forms by the spe-
cial  advisers  to  European  Commission  executive  vice-president  Margrethe 
Vestager,3 the UK’s Furman4 and digital advertising5 reviews, and the US Stigler Re-
port. This latter report concludes: 
“Interoperability would facilitate ongoing competition on the merits of the 
user experience, rather than on the size of the installed base, and potentially 
stimulate robust competition… With easy interoperability, users will be free 
to make a real choice about which service they prefer. This will encourage 
new market entry and vigorous competition between providers.”6 
According to civil society group European Digital Rights: 
interoperability would drastically reduce the imbalance of power between 
platforms on the one side and individuals on the other. It would (re)em-power 
Internet users to interact across digital silos and allow them to choose their 
own online  community and appropriate guidelines. An interoperability re-
quirement would ensure that citizens do not sign up to dominant platforms 
just because there is no other way to communicate with their friends and 
participate in the social life of their local community, e.g. students at a uni-
versity. It would also directly strengthen healthy competition among plat-
forms and could even create whole new markets of online services built on 
top of existing platforms, such as third-party client apps or content modera-
tion plug-ins.7 
Effective interoperability requirements need attention to: 
a.  the terms of service that largely govern individuals’ interactions with 
platforms (as contract law); 
b.  intellectual property rights;8 and  
c.  cybersecurity laws.9  
 
3 J Crémer, A de Montjoye and H Schweitzer, Competition policy for the digital era (Luxembourg: 
Publications Office of the European Union, 2019).  
4 J Furman, D Coyle, A Fletcher, D McAuley and P Marsden, Unlocking Digital Competition (London: 
HM Treasury, 2019), pp.32–38. 
5 Online platforms and digital advertising (London: Competition and Markets Authority, 2020). 
6 Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms, Final Report, September 2019, p.118. 
7 EDRi, Platform Regulation Done Right, 9 April 2020, p.22. 
8 I Graef (2015) Mandating portability and interoperability in online social networks: regulatory and 
competition law issues in the European Union, Telecommunications Policy 39(6), pp.502–514. 
9 C Doctorow, Interoperability: Fix the Internet, Not the Tech Companies, EFF Deeplinks, 11 July 2019. 
- 6 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Terms of service are explored by the reviews cited above. Intellectual property 
rights and interoperability have been analysed by Otero in her PhD thesis.10 Little 
attention so far has been paid to cybersecurity laws.  
However, this report focuses on competition policy and regulatory issues raised by 
interoperability requirements, with some consideration of the resulting data protec-
tion and cybersecurity implications. While the EU’s competition law framework is the 
main focus, including the electronic communications-specific directives, there are 
important interactions with data protection and consumer protection frameworks, 
as noted by Graef, Clifford and Valcke: 
While data protection law aims to protect autonomous decision-making by 
data subjects but also more broadly includes the safeguarding of a secure 
and fair personal data processing environment, consumer protection law em-
powers individuals to make well-informed autonomous choices. Therefore, 
although consumer protection and data protection clearly overlap, as data 
protection applies whenever personal data are processed, it is distinct since 
it is not solely connected to the protection of an individual’s decision-making 
capacity and choices. Competition law, for its part, aims to keep markets 
competitive so to ensure that consumers have such choices.11 
The UK’s Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) is no longer an EU member state 
regulator. However, this report draws particularly heavily on its recent market study 
of online platforms and digital advertising, which contains 27 detailed analytical an-
nexes,  based on a year-long market study using statutory powers to require infor-
mation from nearly 120 parties, extensive internal and commissioned research, over 
130 responses to two consultations, and over 150 meetings with over 60 parties.12 
What would interoperability look like? 
What would large online platforms look like to a user if they were required to in-
teroperate with other services? The simplest existing examples are mobile phone 
SMS text messages and email. Mobile phone users can send SMS text messages to 
any other user just by knowing their phone number, whichever type of phone or 
network they are on. The online platform equivalent would be a WhatsApp user 
sending a message to a Facebook Messenger, Signal or Telegram user. In computer 
 
10 B González Otero, Interoperabilidad, internet de las cosas y derecho de autor (Madrid: Reus Edito-
rial, 2019). 
11 I Graef, D Clifford and P Valcke (2018) Fairness and enforcement:  bridging competition, data pro-
tection, and consumer law, International Data Privacy Law, Vol. 8, No. 3, p.203. 
12 CMA, fn 5, p.39. 
- 7 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
networking terms, these are “federated” systems, where the mobile phone user’s 
telephony provider is connected to other networks, as shown in Figure 2. 
Email users can connect to their own email service through a Web browser, and/or 
an email  program (like  Outlook) or app running on  their  personal computer or 
smartphone.  There are a small number of extremely large services such as Gmail; a 
very large number of much smaller services, run by organisations such as Infor-
mation Society Service Providers, businesses and universities (for their customers, 
staff and students); and very small services run by individuals on their own Internet-
connected computers, hosting accounts for themselves and friends/family mem-
bers.  
 
Figure 2 Network architectures 
Users can send email to each other whichever their service, using the familiar email 
address, which contains both a username (before the @ symbol) and a service ad-
dress (after it). Because all email services can connect to each other, this is known 
as a “federated” system (even though it contains some very large individual ser-
vices). Because it does not rely on a single central service, it is “decentralised”. 
An equivalent interoperable social media protocol would connect very large services 
(such as Facebook/WhatsApp/Instagram, Twitter, and LinkedIn) with organisational 
- 8 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
and individually-run services.13 Users of any of these services could communicate 
with each other when authorised to do so, connecting as “friends” or “followers”; 
sending messages; sharing information such as profiles, status updates, “likes” or 
“retweets”, location, and photos, with individuals, groups and the public; following 
and responding to each other’s’ feeds;14 and searching across all connected ser-
vices. The CMA assessed the availability of such features in common social media 
platforms, in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Social media platforms’ functionalities. Source: CMA (2020) p.117. 
This is the functionality that is core to the major social media services used in Eu-
rope, but dominant services required to interoperate would still be able to develop 
new functionality that would not be standardised until it became much more com-
mon. 
Twitter already enables other systems and software to connect to some of its ser-
vices. Many Twitter users read and post tweets using other companies’ apps, such 
as Tweetbot and Nuzzel (shown in Figure 3), although those apps are no longer able 
to access certain features, such as notifications of tweets “liked” by other users, 
due to changes made by Twitter in its technical interface (“Application Programming 
Interfaces”, or APIs). Twitter is funding a small team to explore “decentralising” its 
 
13 For a visualisation, see D Hinchcliffe, Where is interoperability for social media? ZDNet, 28 Febru-
ary 2014. 
14 CMA, fn 5, pp.53–55. 
- 9 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
platform, moving towards a more email-like model,15 as shown in a tweet from CEO 
Jack Dorsey in Figure 4:16  
 
 
Figure 3 Tweetbot and Nuzzel – two alternative apps to access Twitter 
 
15 A Robertson, Twitter wants to decentralize, but decentralized social network creators don’t trust it, 
The Verge, 12 December 2019. 
16 Source: Tweet by @jack, 11 December 2019. 
- 10 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey announces the company’s interoperability project 
The Mastodon social network, a Twitter-like microblogging service with over 4m 
users, also federated with other services, already has such a structure. It allows 
users to create an account on one or more of hundreds of connected “instances”, 
run mainly by individual enthusiasts. Each tweet-like “toot” can contain up to 500 
characters, and has more options than Twitter relating to audience and the ability 
to provide a content warning. 
Users can read toots from other users on the same instance, and users on other, 
connected instances (see Figure 517) – as well as other services using the open 
standards body World Wide Web Consortium’s (W3C) ActivityPub standard,18 such 
as PeerTube (a French free and decentralised alternative to video platforms, with 
over 200,000 videos published by 30,000 users and viewed over 10 million times19). 
Some instances are communities focused on specific subjects, such as travel or 
technology. Others are larger, general-purpose platforms.  
There is (deliberately) only partial connection between instances with different pol-
icies on certain types of content, such as hate speech. Each instance has its own 
content moderation process. Many users also choose to feed their toots to their 
account on the main Twitter platform. 
 
17 Source: Mastodon. 
18 The combination of all these federated systems is often referred to as the “fediverse”. 
19 Framasoft, PeerTube: A free software to take back control of your videos, undated. See statistics 
on the “Fediverse” at https://the-federation.info  
- 11 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Figure 5 Mastodon users can communicate via 500-character “toots” with other users on their own 
“instance”, and on other connected instances and services 
The Mastodon software development, and one of the most popular instances, is 
supported via an ongoing crowd-funding campaign. 
Facebook announced in 2019 it was merging the infrastructure for its Messenger, 
WhatsApp and Instagram direct messaging services, and potentially standardising 
on an encrypted messaging protocol first developed by Whisper Systems, for secure 
messaging app Signal.20 This has led to concerns the firm is “scrambling the eggs” 
to make it more difficult for a competition regulator in future to order a functional (or 
even structural) separation of the services, as explained by Nobel laureate Jean 
Tirole.21 
Facebook also has extensive capabilities for third party developers to run apps on 
its own platform, accessing information and contacts (the “social graph” of friends) 
when authorised by its users, and thereby extending its own capabilities. Figure 622 
 
20 LH Newman, The Pitfalls of Facebook Merging Messenger, Instagram, and WhatsApp Chats, Wired, 
25 January 2019. 
21 J Tirole, Competition and the Industrial Challenge for the Digital Age, Institute for Fiscal Studies “In-
equalities in the Twenty‐First Century” review background paper, 3 April 2020, p.26. 
22 Source: CMA, fn 5, p.W12. 
- 12 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
shows the CMA mapping of the ability of users of other platforms to “cross-post” 
content to and from Facebook.  
 
Figure 6 Users of other platforms’ ability to post to/from Facebook 
Facebook has reduced or blocked access to some of these capabilities since 2010, 
including stopping Twitter’s Facebook app finding other friends using the service; 
stopping Instagram photos appearing on Twitter; then in 2013 cutting off apps “in-
cluding Vine, Yandex Wonder, Voxer and more.”23 As Tirole recently noted: 
As for Facebook, (limited) data portability already exists, enabling the possi-
bility of an individual’s migration toward another social network. “Social graph 
APIs” would further allow users to invite their friends to join the new platform 
and multi‐home; cross‐posting ability would allow a user to stay on multiple 
social networks at low cost. As was the case  for telecommunications or open 
banking standards, such interoperability standards probably could only be 
set by governments or neutral not‐for‐profit bodies.24 
 
23 B Thompson, Portability and Interoperability, Stratechery, 3 December 2019. 
24 Tirole, fn 21, p.16. 
- 13 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Facebook’s terms and conditions until 2018 included a “non-replication” principle to 
limit the ability of other tools to provide functionality competing with Facebook’s 
own services – as does Twitter’s terms and conditions.25  
High levels of concentration in digital platforms 
For many large online platform services, one or two26 companies already have an 
extraordinarily high share of national markets. The Furman review estimated this in 
the UK at close to 100% for mobile operating systems and online search, with social 
media above 90%, shown in Figure 7:27 
 
 
25 CMA, fn 5, Appendix W, p.2. 
26 One former official interviewee reported: “Showing collective dominance is very hard under TFEU 
§102 because of the Airtours merger decision so it’s never done; tacit collusion (I’m thinking what 
you’re thinking) is not caught by §101. So the combination means nothing gets done.” Cave et al. 
note: “a translation to oligopoly presents different challenges than a transition to competition, and a 
debate has been raging over whether the [telecoms regulatory] framework is robust enough to deal 
with the challenge of ‘small numbers’ markets. One form of potential abuse might be ‘collective’ domi-
nance (also known as tacit collusion). Ultimately, the sector has considerable barriers to entry and 
only a handful of players repeatedly interacting with one another. But many regulators believe that 
showing this form of dominance under the regulatory framework has been rendered almost impossi-
ble by the demands that have been placed upon its demonstration by judgments of the European 
Court. Alternatively, there might be several firms that each exercise single-firm dominance: possibly 
by exploiting locked-in customers who are disengaged or are baffled by the difficulties that are 
placed in their way when they seek to ‘search and switch’ in bundled markets.” (p.54) 
27 Source: Furman et al., Unlocking Digital Competition (2019), p.25 
- 14 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Figure 7 Combined indicative market shares of current leading two companies in selected UK digital 
markets 
Since Internet users’ attention is overall a fixed resource (even in pandemic lock-
down, there are limited waking hours), and critical for the advertising-funded ser-
vices that make up most Internet usage, platforms that can gain the highest per-
centages of attention are at a significant advantage. The CMA found Google and 
Facebook’s joint share of online user attention in the UK in April 2020 was 39%.28 
The European Parliament’s 2019 competition report “notes  with regret that one 
search engine that has over 92% of market share in the online search market in most 
of the Member States has become a gatekeeper of the Internet”.29 Research com-
pany SensorTower found in May 2020 Facebook owned four of the top ten down-
loaded (non-game) apps worldwide (WhatsApp, Facebook, Messenger and Insta-
gram), while Alphabet owned two (Google Meet and YouTube).30 
The CMA estimated:  
search advertising revenues totalled around £7.3 billion in 2019, of which 
more than 90% was earned by Google. Total spend on display advertising 
was worth £5.5 billion, of which we estimate more than half went to Face-
book. Overall, we estimate that around 80% of all expenditure on search and 
display advertising in the UK in 2019 went to Google or Facebook… These 
issues matter to consumers: if competition in search and social media is not 
working well, this can lead to reduced innovation and choice, while poor com-
petition in digital advertising can increase the prices of goods and services 
across the economy, and undermine the ability of newspapers and other pro-
viders who rely on digital advertising revenue to produce valuable content31 
(shown in Figure 832). 
 
28 CMA, fn 5, p.48. 
29 European Parliament Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, Report on competition policy – 
annual report 2019 (2019/2131(INI)), 25 February 2020, §40. 
30 SensorTower, Top Apps Worldwide for May 2020 by Downloads, 2 June 2020. 
31 CMA, fn 5, p.42. 
32 Source: CMA, fn 5, p.309 
- 15 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
 
Figure 8 CMA simplified assessment of consumer harm 
An additional competition concern is that dominant firms are able to enter new, re-
lated  (“adjacent”)  markets  at  a  great  advantage to  competitors,  using  their 
knowledge of customers in one or more markets they already dominate; and use 
customer information from those new markets to support their existing dominant 
position. Hence “a first mover in market A can leverage its dominant position, which 
comes with an advantage on user information, to let connected market B tip, too, 
even if market B is already served by traditional incumbent firms.”33  
The UK’s Competition and Markets Authority found in 2020: “Facebook has signifi-
cant market power in social media. Strong network effects mean that entry over the 
last decade has only been successful where platforms have provided a sufficiently 
different service, that does not compete closely with Facebook. By controlling (and 
sometimes degrading) the level of interoperability that it offers to other social plat-
forms, Facebook has further insulated itself from competitive pressure.”34 
Economic impacts of interoperability 
The EU and many other jurisdictions have extensive, well-developed competition 
law frameworks,35 including specialised legislation for electronic communications 
 
33 GR Barker and M Cave, Predicting and Forestalling Market Tipping: The Case of Ride-Hailing Apps 
in the UK, SSRN working paper, 17 January 2020, p.9. 
34 CMA, fn 5, p.73. 
35 Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Title VII, Chapter 1, Section 1, OJ C 326, 
26.10.2012, p. 47; Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of 
the rules on competition laid down in Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty, OJ L 1, 4.1.2003, p.1.  
- 16 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
networks and services.36 Why should large digital platforms need further, special 
rules? 
Economists have found these platforms often benefit from “extreme returns to scale 
and scope”. Since platform costs are mainly fixed, such as developing software, and 
building relationships with suppliers and other types of customers such as advertis-
ers (so-called “n-sided markets”), they can support millions of additional users at 
low additional cost-per-user, and encourage users of one service to try a related 
service, making use of already-gathered data.37 These additional users can gener-
ate further revenues and investment, which can improve the quality of service fur-
ther38 – while smaller competitors face more expensive finance and customer ac-
quisition costs, especially for intangible investments with limited collateral.39  
Many platforms benefit from strong “network effects”, where each new user makes 
the service more valuable for all existing users (since, for example, they can mes-
sage or share a photo with an additional person; additional videos can be used to 
train more accurate object recognition algorithms for all users; or a larger customer 
base encourages more apps to be developed). And it may be difficult for users to 
switch to, or even try out, competing services, if doing so requires significant quan-
tities of user data to be transferred40 – even though the General Data Protection 
Regulation (2016/679/EU) §20 (so-called “data portability”) gives European users 
the right to do this, for some types of personal data (volunteered and observed data 
processed with user consent or for the performance of a contract41). As Carl Shapiro 
and (Google’s chief economist) Hal Varian put it: 
Worse yet for would-be entrants and innovators, switching costs work in a 
non-linear way: convincing ten people connected in a network to switch to 
your incompatible network is more than ten times as hard as getting one cus-
tomer to switch. But you need all ten, or most of them: no one will want to be 
the first to give up the network externalities and risk being stranded. Pre-
cisely because various users find it so difficult to coordinate to switch to an 
 
36 Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 March 2002 on a common 
regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services, OJ L 108, 24.4.2002, 
p.33. 
37 Crémer et al., fn 3, p.19. 
38 OECD, Big data: bringing competition policy to the digital era (Paris: OECD, 2016). 
39 Furman et al., fn 4, pp.32–38.  
40 Crémer et al., fn 3; Furman et al., pp.32–38. 
41 Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on the right to data portability, endorsed by the European 
Data Protection Board on 25 May 2019, pp.8—10.  
- 17 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
incompatible technology, control over a large installed base of users can be 
the greatest asset you can have.42 
These obstacles make it difficult for startups and larger firms to break into such 
markets, competing “on the merits”, even with innovative products, large invest-
ments, and access to extremely skilled technologists – as Google found when it was 
unable to succeed with social media services Google+, Wave or Buzz;43 and as Mi-
crosoft found with a Windows-based operating system for smartphones, and even 
in making significant inroads with its Bing search engine.44 The UK CMA found: 
Google+’s failure: 
•  demonstrates that access to a wide base of potential users and con-
sumer data, as held by Google, is not determinative of successful entry 
to the social media sector; and 
•  indicates that entry with a service similar to that provided by Facebook 
is very difficult indeed.45 
Multi-homing and tipping 
When users make use of more than one platform providing a similar service – at least 
a “partial substitute” – they are said to be “multi-homing”. This is common with in-
stant messaging, and to some degree with social media.46 But for ride-hailing plat-
forms (such as Uber and Lyft), 2017 US data showed “most riders single home or 
are loyal to their favourite brand—or simply creatures of habit.”47 The CMA also 
found: 
consumers’ use of multiple [social media] platforms does not necessarily im-
ply that their services can be used as substitutes by consumers and that 
these other platforms can meet the same consumer needs as Facebook… 
The high proportions of other platforms’ audiences that cross-visit with Fa-
cebook, and the significantly lower proportion of Facebook’s audience that 
 
42 C Shapiro and HR Varian, Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy (Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press, 1999) pp. 184-5. 
43 One interviewee suggested this was “because it was competing with a platform, not a ‘traditional 
incumbent’, and therefore could not benefit from the "first-mover advantage",  which in fact played 
against Google.” See also LL Gormsen and JT LLanos, Facebook’s Anticompetitive Lean in Strategies, 
SSRN Working Paper, p.19. 
44 “In April 2020, online search engine Bing accounted for 6.25 percent of the global search market, 
while market leader Google had a market share of 86.02 percent. Chinese search engine Baidu's 
market share was 0.83 percent.” Source: Statista,  Global market share of search engines 2010-2020. 
45 CMA, fn 5, p.138. 
46 CMA, fn 5, p.129. 
47 Barker and Cave, fn 33, p.13. 
- 18 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
cross-visits with each of the other platforms, suggest that Facebook is a 
must-have platform. Cross-visiting statistics show that other platforms are 
used by sub-sets of users, but nearly always in combination with Facebook.48 
A related competition concern is “tipping”, the point at which one firm takes most of 
a market 
driven by a combination of economies of scale and scope; network external-
ities whether on the side of the consumer or seller; integration of products, 
services and hardware; behavioural limitations on the part of consumers for 
whom defaults and prominence are very important; difficulty in raising capi-
tal; and the importance of brands.49  
Multi-sided markets (where a platform intermediates between multiple sets of users, 
such as taxi drivers and passengers, or social media users and advertisers, or res-
taurants, customers, and delivery drivers; with indirect network effects between the 
multiple sides of the market internalised by the platform) are more likely to tip when 
fewer users on one or more sides multi-home.50 
Advertising-funded platforms use current users to attract additional users and ad-
vertisers,51 which makes it particularly difficult for new services to compete with 
“free” large existing platforms. Competitors find it difficult to attract users to a new 
paid-for service – but also difficult to attract advertisers to a small new platform.52 
One possible route to doing so is for a competitor to offer complementary services, 
so long as users can easily use several platforms simultaneously (i.e. are multi-hom-
ing), and then grow over time to compete directly.53 However, the CMA noted: “en-
tering by providing consumers with a specialised service may limit the scale of the 
consumer base that new entrants can develop in the long-term and may also result 
in consumers developing networks of connections on the platform specific to a par-
ticular need.”54 Sciliani and Giovannetti add:  
This is the typical disruptive innovation scenario whereby the new entrant 
does not initially develop a fully-fledged offer, but instead focuses on a nar-
row scope with the strategy to broaden it as the customer base grows. Under 
 
48 CMA, fn 5, p.129. 
49 Furman et al., fn 4, p.4. 
50 Barker and Cave, fn 33, p.12.  
51 While some economists argue “gatekeeper” platforms are by definition two or more-sided markets, 
others argue that a large user base can still give a one-sided platform gatekeeping power. 
52 Crémer et al., fn 3, p.20. 
53 Crémer et al., fn 3, pp.30, 36–37. 
54 CMA, fn 5, p.135. 
- 19 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
these circumstances, users may be reliant on the incumbent platforms for 
other (complementary) services not offered by the new entrant to a different 
degree. Therefore, users choosing an entrant providing only a smaller range 
of services from the incumbent platform would tend to have a higher propen-
sity to switch.55 
Multi-homing is not cost-free to users. They must spend time and resources to in-
stall multiple apps, read privacy policies and other terms of use (and often consent 
to various types of monitoring), create accounts, manage passwords, and learn fea-
tures. Mistakes can be embarrassing and/or costly in communications with col-
leagues and friends. An infamous UK example is former shadow chancellor Ed Balls 
mistakenly tweeting his name, which was retweeted tens of thousands of times, and 
has since become the basis for an annual “#EdBallsDay”.56 As Zoom became popular 
during the Covid-19 pandemic in early 2020 with 3,000% growth from a low base,57 
there were numerous cases of “zoom-bombing”, where intruders took advantage of 
security misconfigurations to share offensive and sometimes illegal content with call 
participants.58 
Gatekeepers, conglomerates and ecosystems 
Three further terms are useful in differentiating large online platforms:  
Gatekeeper platforms are able to control access between businesses and potential 
customers, for example advertisers wishing to reach users of a ubiquitous social 
media platform, retailers selling to the customers of an extremely popular e-com-
merce platform, or messaging apps wishing to connect to very large user bases on 
dominant services (such as the forthcoming integrated Facebook/WhatsApp/Insta-
gram messaging service, with Facebook already seeing 2.99bn users of these col-
lective services in the first quarter of 2020.59) Such platforms are thereby able to 
control access and charge high fees; manipulate rankings or prominence; and con-
trol reputations of firms.60  
 
55 P Siciliani and E Giovannetti, Platform competition and incumbency advantage under heterogene-
ous switching cost — exploring the impact of data portability, Bank of England Staff Working Paper 
No. 839, December 2019, p.5. 
56 E Lawford, Happy Ed Balls Day 2020! Here's why social media users mark April 28 with the ex-poli-
tician's name, Evening Standard, 28 April 2020. 
57 Ofcom, Online Nations (London: Office for Communications, 2020). 
58 K Paul, Zoom releases security updates in response to 'Zoom-bombings', The Guardian, 23 April 
2020. 
59 Facebook, Inc., Facebook Reports First Quarter 2020 Results, 29 April 2020. 
60 Furman et al, fn 4, p.42. 
- 20 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Andrew Reed’s humorous suggestion for a Twitter redesign, inspired by Google’s multiple user 
interface interventions to promote its videoconferencing service 
Conglomerates are companies with a broad range of sometimes weakly-related 
businesses, achieved through growth, startup financing, and acquisitions. Bourreau 
and de Streel give the examples of Amazon (moving from book sales, to a wide 
range of products, to “payment services, cloud computing, as well as movie and 
television series production and distribution”), Google (“from search to maps, oper-
ating systems, mobile and personal computing devices, and cloud services”, shown 
humorously in Figure 761) and Facebook (from basic social media to “photo and video 
social networking with Instagram, messaging with WhatsApp, and virtual reality with 
Oculus VR.”).62  
Ecosystems are collections of services (such as Apple’s iPhone, iOS, App Store, and 
Apple Pay), connected via privileged channels not fully available to competitors.63 
(NB: the tech industry and media use the term more broadly, including other com-
panies’ products and services.) The UK Competition and Markets Authority visual-
ised the Google and Facebook ecosystems in 2020 as shown in Figure 10:64 
 
61 Source: @andrew_reed/Twitter,  9 July 2020. 
62 M Bourreau and A de Streel, Digital Conglomerates and EU Competition Policy, March 2019. 
63 Crémer et al., fn 3, p.34. 
64 Source: CMA, fn 5, p.57. 
- 21 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 CMA interpretation of a selection of Google and Facebook services 
The CMA noted ecosystems in a market can affect “[p]rice, quality and choice in 
adjacent markets – a powerful platform can leverage its strong position in its core 
market into other adjacent markets, ultimately giving itself an advantage over its 
rivals. The effects of limited competition for consumers discussed above are then 
potentially spread out to a wider range of markets. Importantly, this could act as a 
handbrake on innovation right across the ecosystem of online services and related 
- 22 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
technology.”65 The CMA found specifically: “Google and Facebook have increasingly 
expanded from general search and social media respectively into related markets. 
This can provide benefits for consumers, for example by increasing choice, or al-
lowing them to access services with less friction. However, we are concerned that 
Google and Facebook can leverage their market power into adjacent markets in a 
way that further excludes rivals, diminishing competition and reducing choice and 
innovation over time.”66 
Complementary innovation and homogenisation 
As a mature and diversified business, Microsoft has a much wider range of products 
and services than some of its Silicon Valley competitors.67 Many of these are com-
plements to other firms’ services – to a significant extent, due to US and EU compe-
tition enforcement actions during the 1990s and 2000s – and hence the company 
has a stronger incentive to support interoperability. 
Such firms have incentives to interoperate with market leaders and other competi-
tors, as can be seen with three recent examples relating to Microsoft, and to form 
strategic alliances that match their own longer-term business plans:68 
●  Microsoft worked with the producer of Apple’s device management soft-
ware to let its cloud Active Directory authentication work with Macs (a com-
plementary service, since Microsoft’s cloud services compete in much 
broader markets than Apple’s cloud services, which are focused on its own 
users). 
●  Google and Microsoft improved compatibility between Google Calendar and 
Microsoft Exchange, enabling users of both to take advantage of network 
effects across the joint platforms. The companies compete on online office 
productivity software, with 55.2% (Google Apps) and 38.06% (Office 365) 
of the global market from 2015-2020 according to Statista. This is close to 
a position of joint dominance. 
●  Microsoft enabled its speech assistant Cortana to work directly with Ama-
zon’s Alexa (complements in adjacent markets), so users of either can ac-
cess largely complementary services on both platforms, including Office 
365. 
Where one firm has a dominant position in a market with strong network effects, it 
will have strong disincentives to allow interoperability. A regulatory requirement for 
interoperability in such cases would allow competitors to connect new services to 
 
65 CMA, fn 5, p.71. 
66 CMA, fn 5, p.73. 
67 O Wallach, How Big Tech Makes Their Billions, Visual Capitalist, 6 July 2020. 
68 A Hickey, Why Microsoft is pushing for interoperability with its competitors, CIO Dive, 25 Oct. 2017. 
- 23 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
an existing user base (for example, in the first quarter of 2020, 2.99 billion monthly 
users of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp69), connect users across those ser-
vices, and benefit from the resulting network effects. As Mastodon’s developer Eu-
gen Rochko commented:  
8 years ago, everyone had 20 social media profiles without batting an eye, 
but nowadays people are legitimately hesitant to use just one more platform 
in addition to Twitter and Instagram…70 It’s one thing to get someone to try 
out Mastodon, but for them to keep using it, they need to acquire the happy 
medium of content and personal connections to have a reason  to come 
back… features actually play a much lesser role than you would think. People 
would use a social network based on smoke signals if everybody else was 
using it.71 
Interoperability can further benefit consumers through enabling combinations of 
component products/services that best meet their needs, and increasing innova-
tion/reducing prices in complementary goods, as well  as reducing obstacles to 
switching providers (two examples of complementary services to Twitter are shown 
in Figure 11, connecting via its API).  
 
69 Facebook, Inc. fn 59. 
70 See also P Ohm (2008) The Myth of the Superuser: Fear, Risk, and Harm Online, UC Davis Law Re-
view Vol. 41, No. 4, p. 1327. 
71 S Tilley, One Mammoth of a Job: An Interview with Eugen Rochko of Mastodon, Medium, 9 July 
2018. 
- 24 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
 
Figure 11 TweetDelete  and Thread Reader, two complementary services to Twitter 
However, interoperability can also lead to competing products to settle around a 
standard set of features, reducing incentives for innovation. The creator of the 
widely-used secure messaging app Signal has commented at length on the difficul-
ties federated systems face in adding new features and upgrades (such as end-to-
end encryption.)72 In its recommendation of interoperability requirements for social 
media, the CMA commented: 
stakeholders have raised concerns about the impact of standardisation on 
incentives to innovate. However, whilst this intervention may require certain 
features to be standardised, the specific features we have under considera-
tion, such as words, pictures and videos, are not recently innovative and as 
such an intervention is unlikely to diminish incentives to innovate. Indeed, the 
ability to reach a wider audience should improve incentives to invest and in-
novate in additional services to attract new users.73 
Static vs dynamic effects 
Competition economists often contrast short term (or static) and longer-term (or 
dynamic) competition. Static competition is less significant in markets featuring 
 
72 M Marlinspike, Reflections: The ecosystem is moving,10 May 2016. 
73 CMA, fn 5, Appendix W p.13. 
- 25 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
significant innovation, such as online platforms, since its results can be “[f]irms 
never overcharge customers, but firms offer customers no exciting new products.”74  
Dynamic  competition  occurs  as  product  and  process  innovation  takes  place. 
Schumpeter, still one of the most-cited economists on innovation, described it in 
1943: “competition from the new commodity, the new technology, the new source 
of supply, the new type of organization—competition which commands a decisive 
cost or quality advantage and which strikes not at the margins of the profits and the 
output of existing firms, but at their foundations and their very lives.”75 
In the short run, a smaller number of larger companies often benefit from scale effi-
ciencies and network effects. This will benefit consumers if those efficiencies result 
in lower prices or higher quality – but that in turn is less likely with lower levels of 
competition.  
As the CMA illustrated, “[t]he potential user benefits of interoperability are illustrated 
by Facebook’s decision to develop an interoperable solution across its messaging 
services:  Facebook Messenger,  Instagram’s  Direct  Messenger  and  WhatsApp. 
Whilst this type of integration can give rise to competition concerns, particularly 
when applied asymmetrically as it could strengthen Facebook’s market position, it 
also illustrates the efficiency benefits that can arise from enhanced interoperabil-
ity.”76  
Increased competition on (within) the market in question (e.g. social media) encour-
ages new competitors to enter, tending to reduce prices. But with large economies 
of scale and network effects, there will likely be only a small number of platforms 
competing to provide the same type of service.77  
In the long run, dynamic competition leads to increased quality and innovation. For 
online platforms, this is more likely to come from competition for the market, where 
an incumbent is pushed aside by a competitor. A market can remain “contestable” 
even with very few firms, if other potential competitors can still enter the market. 
Some economists have claimed previous technology market transitions demon-
strate this effect, from IBM’s PC hardware dominance, to Microsoft’s MS-DOS and 
Windows dominance, to Netscape’s browser early successes, to Apple and Alpha-
bet’s iOS and Android smartphone OS joint dominance. But as the UK Furman review 
observed: 
 
74 JG Sidak & DJ Teece (2009) Dynamic competition in antitrust law, Journal of Competition Law & 
Economics, 5(4), p. 603. 
75 J Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism & Democracy (London: Routledge, 6th ed., 2006), p.84. 
76 CMA, fn 5, Appendix W p.3. 
77 Crémer et al., fn 3, p.36. 
- 26 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
these changes were facilitated, in part, by government policy – in particular 
antitrust cases against these companies, without which the changes may 
never have happened. Today, network effects and returns to scale of data 
appear to be even more entrenched and the market seems to have stabilised 
quickly compared to the much larger degree of churn in the early days of the 
World Wide Web.78 
More generally, this “controversial” theory of market “contestability” “is even more 
doubtful in the presence of network externalities and ecosystems”, since a compet-
itor must “convince users of the incumbent to coordinate their migration to its own 
services” (often in the presence of significant switching costs), and “the lack of in-
teroperability with other services of the same ecosystem and the absence or limited 
access to historical and future ecosystem data will make it difficult for a new entrant 
to compete on the merit of the specific service and/or algorithm.”79 Tirole adds: 
"Firms might be playing dirty tricks in the marketplace, spend money on killer acqui-
sitions or hire battalions of lobbyists and lawyers to acquire or preserve their domi-
nant position. Contestability does not rule out social waste.”80 
The CMA concluded:  
We see from analysis of Google’s and Facebook’s profitability that, even con-
sidering a relatively static snapshot of the world as it is today, the potential 
gains for consumers from increased competition are substantial… Looking to 
the future, we could expect the dynamic benefits to consumers from a more 
competitive market to be far greater than the static gains, as the real prize 
for consumers over the long term will come from increased innovation and 
the new transformative products and services that will come online as a re-
sult.81 
Social impacts of interoperability 
While much of the EU policy debate relating to interoperability takes place in narrow 
competition economics terms, it could have a much broader impact on European 
societies.82  
Many  competition  economists  argue that  competition  policy  and  interventions 
should be concerned only with narrow economic measures – in the prevailing US 
 
78 Furman et al., fn 4, p.4. 
79 Crémer et al., fn 3, p.36. 
80 Tirole, fn 21, p.3. 
81 CMA, fn 5, p.71. 
82 I Brown and C Marsden, Regulating Code (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2013) pp.183-203. 
- 27 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
policy consensus since the 1980s, focused on a narrow “consumer welfare” meas-
ure, largely around price (which has obvious issues when so many online platform 
services are provided “free”).83 Alongside price, the EU competition framework pays 
greater attention to quality, choice and innovation.   
Even in the EU, however, there are obvious important impacts of online platform 
market structures in areas of policy far from straightforward economic concerns. 
For example, as Graef, Clifford and Valcke note: 
Rather than a substantive benchmark, fairness can be regarded as an inher-
ent objective or outcome of competition enforcement. By intervening against 
anticompetitive practices, EU competition law protects the competitive pro-
cess in the internal market to the benefit of consumers, competitors, and the 
economy as a whole. In this manner, competition enforcement thus contrib-
utes to a fairer society. Fairness can also be regarded as constituting part of 
the notion of ‘competition on the merits’ that is used to distinguish ‘normal’ 
competitive behaviour on the basis of price, quantity, quality, choice, and in-
novation from conduct that restricts competition. In this sense, when markets 
work fairly, businesses compete on the merits.84 
As the UK’s Competition and Markets Authority added in July 2020, “competition 
concerns can also lead to and exacerbate a range of broader online harms… For 
example, a thriving and competitive market for independent news and journalism is 
essential for an effective democracy: if the sustainability of authoritative journalism 
is undermined, this is likely to worsen concerns around fake news and misleading 
information. More generally, if users are to be truly empowered to keep themselves 
and their children safe online, adequate choice over platforms and other digital pro-
viders is indispensable.”85 And there are concerns that business models based 
around maximising user attention (and hence advertising revenues) have negative 
side  effects, including issues  such  as the  amplification of  disinformation,  hate 
speech and extremism.86 Interoperability could help build the “counter powers”, and 
disperse opinion-forming power, identified as important by Helberger.87 
 
83 M Stucke and A Ezrachi, Competition Overdose (New York: HarperCollins, 2020). 
84 Graef et al., fn 11, p.205. 
85 CMA, fn 5, p.71. 
86 C Marsden, T Mayer and I Brown (2020) Platform values and democratic elections: How can the 
law regulate digital disinformation? Computer Law & Security Review, Vol. 36, 105373. 
87 N Helberger, (2020) The Political Power of Platforms: How Current Attempts to Regulate Misinfor-
mation Amplify Opinion Power, Digital Journalism, s.5. 
- 28 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Platforms as essential social infrastructure 
In many EU countries, particularly during the Covid-19 pandemic, large online plat-
forms increasingly act as essential “social infrastructure” – used by families to share 
news and photos; schools to communicate with parents and students, and to teach 
remotely; sports teams to arrange games; politicians to communicate with constit-
uents; campaign groups to organise protests; and many other aspects of modern-
day life. As shown in Figure 12,88 use of Facebook across the EU in the first quarter 
of 2020 (largely pre-pandemic) varied from 39% of the population in Latvia to 88% 
in Malta, with an average of 56%. 
 
Figure 12 Facebook users in the population of the EU’s 27 member states, March 2020 
As Facebook’s former head of policy for Europe, Richard Allan, put it, the company’s 
“core value proposition is that it allows you [to] communicate with all (or at least a 
significant group of) your family and friends.”89 While Facebook has billions more 
users than its competitors, this strategy means it can strongly differentiate itself 
from them by blocking their access to its own users. 
From the earliest years of social media usage, boyd found evidence of youth com-
munities sorting themselves between different platforms: 
 
88 Data: Internet World Stats. 
89 R Allan, Pub Rules for Platforms, regulate.tech, 29 June 2020. 
- 29 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
As Facebook started gaining momentum, some teenagers switched from 
MySpace to Facebook. Others joined Facebook without having ever been on 
MySpace. Still others chose to adopt both… Subculturally identified teens 
appeared more frequently drawn to MySpace while more mainstream teens 
tended towards Facebook. Teens from less-privileged backgrounds seemed 
likely to be drawn to MySpace while those headed towards elite universities 
appeared to be head towards Facebook. Racial and ethnic divisions looked 
messier, tied strongly to socio-economic factors, but I observed that black 
and Latino teens appeared to preference MySpace while white and Asian 
teens seemed to privilege Facebook.90 
The social importance of connecting all members of society has long been recog-
nised in regulation of telecommunications, with EU national regulators able to im-
pose interconnection (allowing price negotiations) and interoperability duties on 
network providers91 via the Framework Directive (2002/21/EC) and Access Directive 
(2002/19/EC), and to mandate a universal service, including to disabled users, under 
the Universal Service Directive (2002/22/EC).  
In promoting competition, the EU internal market, and citizens’ interests, §5 of the 
Access Directive requires national regulators to “encourage and where appropriate 
ensure, in accordance with the provisions of this Directive, adequate access and 
interconnection, and the interoperability of services, exercising their responsibility 
in a way that promotes efficiency, sustainable competition, efficient investment and 
innovation, and gives the maximum benefit to end-users.” There are also detailed 
requirements for “network neutrality” by Internet access services in the Open Inter-
net Regulation (2015/2120), to “safeguard equal and non-discriminatory treatment 
of traffic in the provision of internet access services and related end-users’ rights” 
(§1(1)). Services must “not block, slow down, alter, restrict, interfere with, degrade 
or discriminate between specific content, applications or services” except for some 
narrowly limited purposes (§3(3)). 
However, some influential economists argue broad interoperability requirements for 
platforms are not justified. Kerber and Schweitzer concluded: 
The extension of horizontal interoperability regulation from physical infra-
structures to interpersonal communications services and digital platforms is, 
however, not at all obvious. The balance of interests differs significantly. Nei-
ther the goal to prevent market tipping nor the universal service rationale are 
relevant across  the  board when  it  comes to  digital platforms. Universal 
 
90 d boyd (2011) White Flight in Networked Publics? How Race and Class Shaped American Teen En-
gagement with MySpace and Facebook. In Race After the Internet, eds. Lisa Nakamura and Peter A. 
Chow-White (New York: Routledge) pp.206-212. 
91 W Kerber and H Schweitzer (2017) Interoperability in the digital economy, Marburg Centre for Insti-
tutional Economy, Macie Paper Series No. 2017/02, pp.15-16. 
- 30 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
services policies strive to ensure a basic service – but not end-to-end con-
nectivity in any possible respect. Interventions into the digital platform oper-
ators’ freedom to choose between closed and open systems lacks justifica-
tion where end users typically engage in multi-homing and thereby ensure 
de facto end-to-end connectivity themselves. Similarly, where multi-homing 
is common, tipping may not be an issue. Even where tipping may be a con-
cern, the imposition of interoperability duties upon digital platforms may im-
ply a significantly more interventionist regime than the interconnection re-
quirement between physical networks. It is, therefore, important to clearly 
distinguish between network interconnection and platform interoperability.92 
There was extensive discussion in the mid-2010s of interconnection of instant mes-
saging services by the European Commission and telecoms regulators, under the 
provisions of the European Electronic Communications Code (EECC, 2018/1972, 
which must be implemented by Member States by 20 December 2020). While the 
provisions of that Code were weakened from the European Commission’s original 
proposal by opposition from some member states,93 it will enable national regulators 
under certain conditions to impose interoperability upon dominant instant messag-
ing platforms (see the scenarios discussion later). The Digital Markets Act will pro-
vide a further opportunity to address these issues.  
Media pluralism and diversity 
Broadcast, cable and satellite TV and radio distributors are required in many Euro-
pean countries to carry specified channels,94 and to give due prominence in elec-
tronic programme guides to certain channels, both to widen the distribution of public 
service broadcast content, and to protect media pluralism and diversity.95 But Ger-
many is the only country yet to consider extending pluralism obligations to major 
online platforms.96 As the European Data Protection Supervisor put it: “[Large online 
platforms] serve as gatekeepers to the internet, able to control the digital public 
space, and determine through secret, proprietary means what people can and can-
not see – whether it is recommended content or products, commercial ads, political 
messages or news items.”97 Helberger notes: 
 
92 Kerber and Schweitzer, fn 91, p.18. 
93 Contrast §59 in the Commission’s proposal with the final §61. Proposal for a Directive of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Electronic Communications Code (Re-
cast), COM/2016/0590 final - 2016/0288 (COD). 
94 L Woods, Must Carry/Must Offer obligations on audiovisual services under EU Law, Harbottle & 
Lewis Insights, 20 December 2019. 
95 B van der Sloot (2012) Walking a Thin Line: The Regulation of EPGs, JIPITEC Vol. 3, pp.138–147. 
96 Helberger, fn 87. 
97 W Wiewiórowski, Sharing is caring? That depends… European Data Protection Supervisor blog, 13 
December 2019. 
- 31 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
alongside immediate communication power (such as networking, networked 
and network-making power), social media also has what I call ‘systemic opin-
ion power’, which is the power to create dependences and influence other 
players in a democracy. In so doing, these platforms change the very struc-
ture and balance of the media market, and thereby directly and permanently 
impact the pluralistic public sphere.98 
The US Stigler report concluded that interoperability “may contribute to reducing 
the gatekeeping power of [dominant] platforms and positively impact the type of 
information that users consume.”99  
A 2020 report from Germany’s National Academy of Science and Engineering called 
for a “European digital ecosystem that is democratically accountable to its citizens. 
A digital ecosystem that observes European values such as transparency, openness 
and privacy protection, even in its technical design, can create a digital public 
sphere that offers fair terms of access and use, strengthens the public debate and 
safeguards the plurality that forms a key part of Europe’s identity.”  
The report identified the importance to this goal of “a technology strategy charac-
terised by modularity, interoperability, openness and transparency that enables 
continuous development and a diverse range of business models.”100 
The British Broadcasting Corporation’s (BBC) Director of Radio (and former UK Cul-
ture Secretary) complained to a UK parliamentary hearing in June 2020 that the BBC 
had been unable to agree deals with Amazon and Google for their ‘smart speakers’ 
to carry BBC coronavirus coverage (while agreeing a deal for Facebook Messenger 
to carry the “BBC Corona Bot” to provide health information about the pandemic). 
He asked whether “we are happy about the biggest organisations in the world, big 
tech companies with their executives essentially [based] in the [United] States, 
combining a monopoly in people’s kitchens and in living rooms,” and suggested us-
ers should be given a choice of voice assistants in future.101 
Helberger concluded: 
The source of the political power of platforms is their ability to wield opinion 
power, whether it is that of their users or politicians, or their ability to influ-
ence public discourse for their own purposes. Without adequate safeguards, 
 
98 Helberger, fn 87, s.3. 
99 Stigler, fn 6, p.144. 
100 H Kagermann, U Wilhelm (Eds.) European Public Sphere: Towards Digital Sovereignty for Europe 
(Munich: acatech – National Academy of Science and Engineering, 2020), p.5. 
101 Mark Sweney, Smart speakers risk creating 'big-tech monopoly' in homes, The Guardian, 16 June 
2020. 
- 32 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
all commitments to neutrality, fairness and non-manipulation are meaning-
less. The sheer possibility of the abuse of this immense power for one’s own 
political goals is in itself a threat to any functioning democracy. Dispersing 
concentrations of opinion power and creating countervailing powers is es-
sential to preventing certain social media platforms from becoming quasi-
governments of online speech, while also ensuring that they each remain one 
of many platforms that allow us to engage in public debate.102 
Privacy and data protection 
Many platform services are provided at the highly attractive price of “free” to us-
ers103 – paid for, of course, by extensive user profiling and targeting with behavioural 
advertising. But the structural obstacles to competition for these services can still 
negatively impact on quality, innovation and choice for users, as well as the oppor-
tunity for European start-ups and larger firms to enter these key global markets. As 
Commissioner Vestager said in 2016: 
Because we know that competition gives consumers the power to demand a 
fair deal. To shop around to find a better price, or a wider choice of products. 
To seek out better quality, whatever that means to them – whether it’s a more 
reliable car, or a social network that protects their private data better.104 
The UK’s Furman review similarly noted: “it is clear that well-functioning competitive 
digital markets have the potential to develop new solutions and increased choice for 
consumers, where privacy and quality of service can be differentiating factors.”105 
The European Parliament’s annual competition report for 2019 “[d]raws the [Euro-
pean] Commission’s attention to acquisitions carried out by foreign monopolies of 
digital data operators, including health, financial and educational data, and to the 
privacy risks involved, which extend far beyond the already damaging effects of 
transactions of this kind on competition” (§33).  
Many academic experts and activists have criticised the lack of enforcement of the 
GDPR since it came into force in May 2018, particularly by the Irish Data Protection 
Commission, responsible for regulating many of the Internet giants’ European es-
tablishments in Dublin. One standards body expert interviewee noted: 
 
102 Helberger, fn 87, s.5. 
103 Crémer et al., fn 3, p.20. 
104 M Vestager, Competition for a Fairer Society, Tenth Annual Global Antitrust Enforcement Sympo-
sium Georgetown, 20 September 2016. 
105 Furman et al., fn 4, p.6. 
- 33 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
The lack of enforcement of GDPR against US giants directly affects the EU in-
dustry's ability to compete. Because DPA chose the lazy way of easy en-
forcement and Ireland chooses to be a crime haven, the competition interest 
is meddled with national economic interest. This preserves the competition 
bias. IMHO, there are three possible resolutions: 
a.  a race to the bottom (killing GDPR) 
b.  a simple division of labour (social networking == US & China vs en-
terprise computing == EU) 
c.  a EU action against tax/crime/data protection havens 
Web tracking is an example of an open and interoperable environment turn-
ing into a cesspool of exploitative practices by both large and small corporate 
actors. 
That doesn't mean that open environments are bad, quite the contrary. But 
they require governance, beyond code and markets.106 
On decentralisation, a standards body expert interviewee noted: “ActivityPub and 
ActivityStreams (AP+AS )are good basis for system similar to FB and Twitter which 
are decentralised. (IndieWeb have their own approach, they are hobbyists, piece-
meal, solve each problem individually. Only reluctantly standardised AP+AS.) It al-
lows you to have any client you want, and more importantly maybe, and where the 
data is stored is under the control of the user. That’s the key fundamental difference. 
And it comes at a cost, because of course centralisation helps in terms of perfor-
mance. It’s much harder when things are fully decentralised. So today on FB or Twit-
ter you want to follow me, your clients can access that server, and you get all your 
friends’ posts from the same source, and it’s very efficient. But if we said each of 
your friend will store the data in different places, your client has to open n connec-
tions, download, depend on each and every one of those servers, and present it to 
you in a form that is suitable. But it does give people control over the data.” 
S/he added: “The challenge of decentralised systems, they tend inherently to be 
harder to operate, to set up. All the companies having a Facebook page, it drives me 
nuts. You see on billboards they gave you a FB page not a web address. People 
have to register on your website to do anything, it creates friction. This is the chal-
lenge we are facing overall. Centralisation reduces friction, makes it very compelling 
to users.” 
A free software developer interviewee noted: 
 
106 W Christl (2020) @WolfieChristl tweet 12:16 20/9/2020. 
- 34 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
The ecosystem should be technically open and you shouldn’t need to have 
permission for your app (and an API key). I do not want to end up with apps 
being services. This is a big issue with API keys. Once as a developer you 
apply for an API key, you need to run your software as a service. It is a step 
forward if you as an individual user can write software to access the services 
you use. If you want a free software ecosystem you need this. That doesn’t 
empower people. I should be able to fork someone’s software, and not reap-
ply, and the more complicated this system is the less likely people will do this. 
It’s a step forward but it remains unfree. (But I can well imagine we end up 
here. But it would be a compromise.) 
API keys as such, but a user should be able to get an API key. I should be 
able to use any software to log in to any service provider. That is a principle 
we need to keep emphasising. We need to separate the client and the server 
side. The server should be neutral to what client I use. That’s what the AC-
CESS Act calls delegation. We should put more focus on the software side of 
that. 
Some academic research has found many messaging users deliberately use non-
interoperability as a mechanism to maintain social boundaries by connecting with 
different groups of partners, friends, family and colleagues via different services.107 
However, that users today often take advantage of a lack of interoperability doesn’t 
tell us how their usage would change with greater interoperability. There are many 
types of platform controls that could give users of existing messaging (and social 
media) better control of their contacts — which would be beneficial for all users for 
platforms to develop further, and could be incentivised by interoperability. The CMA 
concluded: 
We are conscious that there are potential risks associated with the privacy 
of users’ data, if users lose control over their data, and automatic ‘spamming’. 
However, as long as the decision to post content across platforms is user-
initiated and well-informed, including full clarity over permissions, it should 
be possible to address those concerns. Indeed, we note that users are cur-
rently able to cross post content from Instagram to other platforms, such as 
Facebook, Twitter and Tumblr, which indicates that Facebook can design this 
functionality in a manner that protects against those concerns.108 
A significant issue raised by interoperability for data protection is the transfer of 
users’ and their contacts’ data to third party systems, the latter without explicit 
 
107 R Arnold, A Schneider and J Lennartz (2020) Interoperability of interpersonal communications ser-
vices – A consumer perspective, Telecommunications Policy 44, p.4.  
108 CMA, fn 5, Appendix W, p.13. 
- 35 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
consent. Even if end-to-end encryption is in place to protect the contents of mes-
sages, metadata about messages will still be revealed.109  
It would be important to develop detailed data protection rules under the General 
Data Protection Regulation to cover the processing of personal data by third parties 
using interoperability  mechanisms. Civil  society  group EFF  suggests such pro-
cessing should be limited strictly to that needed to support interoperability,110 and 
MEPs Alexandra Geese and Marcel Koloja have called on the Commission “to intro-
duce an obligation for systemic intermediaries with significant market power to 
make available and document tools to allow third-parties to interoperate with their 
main functionalities or to act on an user’s behalf, whereby intermediaries may not 
share, retain, monetize, or use any of the data they receive in the context of interop-
erability activities from third-parties, and intermediaries and third parties must pro-
tect users’ privacy and must respect the GDPR and other relevant Union legisla-
tion”.111 The European Data Protection Board has stated (in the context of the in-
teroperability of European contact tracing apps112): 
The goal of interoperability should not be used as an argument to extend the 
collection of personal data beyond what is necessary. (p.2) 
Interoperability will lead to additional processing and disclosure of data to 
additional entities. As always, data subjects need to be made aware of any 
additional processing of their personal data and the involved parties. The us-
ers should always have a clear understanding of what the use of the appli-
cation entails and should remain in control of their data. (p.2) 
The respective roles, relationships and responsibilities of the joint controllers 
in regards to the data subject will need to be defined and this information 
should then be made available to the data subject. (p.3) 
Any interoperable solution needs to facilitate a way for data subjects to ex-
ercise their rights. Where the exercise of rights is possible, it should not be-
come more cumbersome for the data subjects and it should be clear to whom 
the data subjects should turn to exercise their rights. (p.4) 
 
109 B Greschbach, G Kreitz and S Buchegger (2012) The devil is in the metadata - New privacy chal-
lenges in decentralised online social networks, IEEE International Conference  on Pervasive Compu-
ting and Communications Workshops, PERCOM Workshops, pp. 333-339. 
110 B Cyphers and C Doctorow, A Legislative Path to an Interoperable Internet, Electronic Frontier 
Foundation Deeplinks, 28 July 2020. 
111 Amendment 464 to the Draft report by Alex Agius Saliba (PE648.474v02-00), European Parliament 
Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection, 2020/2018(INL), 18 May 2020. 
112 European Data Protection Board, Statement on the data protection impact of the interoperability 
of contact tracing apps, adopted 16/6/20. 
- 36 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Differences in the set data retention period should not lead to data being 
stored for longer than what is necessary. (p.4) 
Interoperability should not lead to a decrease in data security and the pro-
tection of personal data… This notably concerns security of data in transit for 
the possible interconnection of back-end servers. In particular, measures ad-
dressing security risks related to interoperability that have an impact on the 
rights and freedoms of natural persons must be addressed in the [Data Pro-
tection Impact Assessment]. (p.4) 
In a review of the related “data portability” obligations under the GDPR, Facebook 
noted the views of their stakeholders so far was “a transferring entity may—and 
should—impose  some  baseline privacy and data protection restrictions  around 
transfers even when carrying out the transfer to comply with a portability request. 
But… questions remain about what kinds of conditions are appropriate.”113 Facebook  
suggests there should be clear transparency obligations for the organisation receiv-
ing such personal data. 
Consideration would also be needed as to the situation of platforms subject to the 
GDPR or equivalent foreign protection sharing personal data via interoperability 
mechanisms with other parties that were not. While platforms offering services to 
Europeans are bound by the GDPR wherever they are established, the situation 
would be more complex if a GDPR-covered platform A enabled a platform B (that 
was not) to process personal data relating to a European user accessed on platform 
A, without that user’s explicit consent. The European Data Protection Board notes 
the importance of ensuring such data is not: 
processed in a way that would adversely affect the rights and freedoms of 
the other data subjects… Such an adverse effect would occur, for instance, 
if the transmission of data from one data controller to another, would prevent 
third parties from exercising their rights as data subjects under the GDPR 
(such  as  the  rights  to  information,  access,  etc.). 
 
The data subject initiating the transmission of his or her data to another data 
controller, either gives consent to the new data controller for processing or 
enters into a contract with that controller. Where personal data of third par-
ties are included in the data set another legal basis for the processing must 
be identified. For example, a legitimate interest may be pursued by the data 
controller under Article 6(1)(f), in particular when the purpose of the data 
controller is to provide a service to the data subject that allows the latter to 
process personal data for a purely personal or household activity. The pro-
cessing operations initiated by the data subject in the context of personal 
 
113E Egan, Data Portability and Privacy, Facebook, September 2019, p.10. 
- 37 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
activity that concern and potentially impact third parties remain under his or 
her responsibility, to the extent that such processing is not, in any manner, 
decided  by  the  data  controller… 
 
Conversely, the rights and freedoms of third parties will not be respected if 
the new data controller uses the personal data for other purposes, e.g. if the 
receiving data controller uses personal data of other individuals within the 
data  subject’s  contact  directory  for  marketing  purposes. 
 
Therefore, to prevent adverse effects on the third parties involved, the pro-
cessing of such personal data by another controller is allowed only to the 
extent that the data are kept under the sole control of the requesting user 
and is only managed for purely personal or household needs. A receiving 
‘new’ data controller (to whom the data can be transmitted at the request of 
the user) may not use the transmitted third party data for his own purposes 
e.g. to propose marketing products and services to those other third party 
data subjects…  
Furthermore, it is a leading practice for all data controllers (both the “sending” 
and “receiving” parties) to implement tools to enable data subjects to select 
the relevant data they wish to receive and transmit and exclude, where rele-
vant, data of other individuals. This will further assist in reducing the risks for 
third  parties  whose  personal  data  may  be  ported. 
 
Additionally, the data controllers should implement consent mechanisms for 
other  data subjects involved, to ease data transmission  for those  cases 
where such parties are willing to consent, e.g. if they also want to move their 
data to some other data controller. Such a situation might arise, for example, 
with social networks, but it is up to data controllers to decide on the leading 
practice to follow.114 
Note that the “legitimate interests” justification for processing cannot be used for 
“special category” data under §9 of the GDPR: “personal data revealing racial or eth-
nic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union mem-
bership, and the processing of genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of 
uniquely identifying a natural person, data concerning health or data concerning a 
natural person's sex life or sexual orientation". This would be true of much instant 
messaging and social media data. It might be that a specific legal provision would 
be required under §9(f) to allow processing of such data from a third party.115 
 
114 Article 29 Working Party, fn 41, pp.11—12.  
115 "processing is necessary for reasons of substantial public interest, on the basis of Union or Mem-
ber State law which shall be proportionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence of the right to 
- 38 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Note also the limitation identified by the EDPB of the processing of data transferred 
“for purely personal or household needs.” This would again require legislative atten-
tion, given the likely use of interoperability provisions by legal persons as well as 
individuals, and for activities (e.g. proselytising116) and material (e.g. CCTV footage 
of public areas recorded by individuals117) that might not qualify for this GDPR ex-
emption (Recital 18/§2(2)(c)).  
The interpretive Recital 18 adds: “Personal or household activities could include cor-
respondence and the holding of addresses, or social networking and online activity 
undertaken within the context of such activities. However, this Regulation applies to 
controllers or processors which provide the means for processing personal data for 
such personal or household activities.” So while this provision might protect individ-
ual users’ personal social networking activities, it would not cover the platforms pro-
cessing that data. 
A platform engineer interview commented: it’s important “to protect information 
about what a startup competitor is doing from the large platform. You need to stop 
Facebook etc. from using data about competitor in anticompetitive ways (e.g. mon-
itoring the trajectory of new user sign-ups)”. 
Content moderation 
In both the proposed Digital Services Act package (addressing hate speech, disin-
formation and extremism) and other legislation (such as the proposed Terrorist Con-
tent Regulation118), the EU is addressing problems relating to “content moderation” 
by online platforms – the rules and processes by which platforms remove certain 
“harmful” posts from users, while protecting users’ freedom of expression. 
Interoperability enables a parallel route by which some of these issues can be ad-
dressed – giving users greater choice of different content moderation regimes, even 
 
data protection and provide for suitable and specific measures to safeguard the fundamental rights 
and the interests of the data subject” 
116 Jehovan todistajat, Court of Justice of the European Union, Case C-25/17, 10 July 2018. In the Ad-
vocate General’s opinion, referring to the similar provision in the GDPR’s predecessor Data Protection 
Directive: “proselytising, by its nature, involves entering into a relationship with persons who are, as a 
matter of principle, unknown and do not share the preacher’s faith. Unlike the holding of a record of 
addresses, for example, preaching necessarily leads to a ‘confrontation’ with the world beyond home 
and family unit. The nature of the data collected, including data enjoying enhanced protection under 
Directive 95/46, also supports a clear distinction from the example referred to in recital 12 of Di-
rective 95/46." Opinion of Advocate General Mengozzi, 1 February 2018, §40. 
117 Ryneš v Úřad pro ochranu osobních údajů, Court of Justice of the European Union, Case C-212/13, 
11 December 2014. See also L Woods, Bringing Data Protection Home? The CJEU rules on data pro-
tection law and home CCTV, EU Law Analysis blog, 11 December 2014. 
118 European Parliament Legislative Observatory, Preventing the dissemination of terrorist content 
online, 2018/0331(COD). 
- 39 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
on the same platform (separately from the issue of statutory requirements for plat-
forms to remove illegal content). 
Mastodon illustrates this possibility. Each of its “instances” (servers) may choose its 
own moderation rules, with software tools available to ease the work of instance 
moderators. (In practice, many of the instances choose similar rules.) When new 
users sign up to Mastodon, they are given the choice of instances that match their 
own expressed moderation preferences, as shown in Figure 13. Communities of in-
terest can form around specific instances – a comprehensive review found “tech and 
gaming communities …  quite prominent. Certain topics (e.g. journalism) are covered 
by many instances, yet have few users. In contrast, other topics (e.g. adult material) 
have a small number of instances but a large number of users.”119 Instances choose 
which other instances they connect to – some refuse to connect to instances that 
feature, for example, loose rules around hate speech. 
 
Figure 13 Mastodon helps new users find instances matching their content moderation preferences 
 
119 A Raman, S Joglekar, E De Cristofaro, N Sastry and G Tyson (2019) Challenges in the Decentral-
ised Web: The Mastodon Case, Proc. Internet Measurement  Conference (IMC ’19), October 21–23, 
2019, Amsterdam. 
- 40 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
The instance run by Mastodon’s main developer, Eugen Rochko, has the following 
content rules:120 
The following types of content will be re- Any conduct intended to stalk or harass other 
moved from the public timeline:  users, or to impede other users from utilizing 
●  Excessive advertising  the service, or to degrade the performance of 
●  Uncurated news bots posting from  the service, or to harass other users, or to in-
third-party news sources  cite other users to perform any of the afore-
●  Untagged nudity, pornography and  mentioned actions, is also disallowed, and 
sexually explicit content, including ar- subject to punishment up to and including 
tistic depictions  revocation of access to the service. This in-
●  Untagged gore and extremely  cludes, but is not limited to, the following be-
graphic violence, including artistic  haviors: 
depictions  ●  Continuing to engage in conversation 
with a user that has specifically has 
  requested for said engagement with 
that user to cease and desist may be 
considered harassment, regardless of 
The following types of content will be re-
platform-specific privacy tools em-
moved from the public timeline, and may re-
ployed. 
sult in account suspension and revocation of 
●  Aggregating, posting, and/or dissemi-
access to the service: 
nating a person's demographic, per-
●  Racism or advocation of racism 
sonal, or private data without express 
●  Sexism or advocation of sexism 
permission (informally called doxing 
●  Casteism or advocation of casteism 
or dropping dox) may be considered 
●  Discrimination against gender and 
harassment. 
sexual minorities, or advocation 
●  Inciting users to engage another user 
thereof 
in continued interaction or discussion 
●  Xenophobic and/or violent national-
after a user has requested for said 
ism 
engagement with that user to cease 
and desist (informally called brigad-
 
ing or dogpiling) may be considered 
harassment. 
The following types of content are explicitly 
disallowed and will result in revocation of ac-
cess to the service: 
●  Sexual depictions of children 
●  Content illegal in Germany and/or 
France, such as holocaust denial or 
Nazi symbolism 
●  Conduct promoting the ideology of 
National Socialism 
An early journalist  user reported she found “the predominant culture of masto-
don.social isn't San Francisco techies, it's really more of an LGBTQ-oriented space, 
 
120 E Rochko, mastodon.social Code of Conduct. 
- 41 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
one with a lot of anime avatars and a lot of furries. A veritable multitude of anime 
avatars, but sans Nazis.”121 A recent review found “the decentralized structure of 
Mastodon enables community autonomy”, with the federation becoming “a social 
enterprise in and of itself” due to its open protocol, and that its “horizontal structure 
shifts the site’s scaling focus from sheer number of users to quality engagement and 
niche communities.”122 
Gab, a social media site whose apps were banned from Apple and Google’s stores 
in 2017 due to the presence of “extreme hate speech”, now hosts its own (large) 
Mastodon instance – which is cut off from many other instances. But as the Masto-
don code is available under an open source licence, “there's no functional way for 
Mastodon to shut down Gab. This, of course, was part of the appeal for Gab in the 
first place. In the past, Gab had lost its webhost GoDaddy and had been banned 
from accepting donations via PayPal.”123 
More research is needed on “how federation might encourage hate-speech online 
and ways to manage those groups”, as well as “the extent to which topology, ab-
straction, and scale facilitate problematic online behavior”124 and the impact of in-
teroperability (and possible controls) on the amplification of harmful content. One 
possible approach is to develop specific open source licenses to restrict the use of 
software to propagate extremist content. Another is to block it via software clients 
rather than instances – which might reduce its spread amongst a broader user base 
(although not those who specifically choose software to connect to Gab, or similar 
networks.)125 
 
121 S Jeong, Mastodon Is Like Twitter Without Nazis, So Why Are We Not Using It? Motherboard, 4 
April 2017.  
122 M Liu, RW Gehl and D Zulli (2020) Rethinking the ‘Social’ in ‘Social Media’: Insights into Topology, 
Abstraction, and Scale on the Mastodon Social Network, New Media and Society. 
123 B Makuch, The Nazi-Free Alternative to Twitter Is Now Home to the Biggest Far Right Social Net-
work, Motherboard, 11 July 2019. 
124 Liu et al., fn 122, pp.22-23. 
125 J Naskali (2020) Examination of hard-coded censorship in open source Mastodon clients, Pro-
ceedings of ETHICOMP 2020: Paradigm Shifts in ICT Ethics. 
- 42 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Environmental impact 
 
Figure 14 Muller et al.'s framework model for interoperability maturity in the Building Information Model-
ling lifecycle 
In a literature review, Muller and colleagues noted interoperability can support sus-
tainable (real-world) design, construction, operation, maintenance, and demolition, 
by enabling the exchange of building information between “multidisciplinary teams 
that are geographically distributed (e.g., owners, architects, consultants, contrac-
tors, sub-contractors, suppliers, and engineers)”, including energy and sustainability 
analyses. There are standard data models, ontologies, and encodings for the indus-
try standard Building Information Modeling to enable data and service interopera-
bility  (with  business  and process  interoperability  also  needing  attention).  The 
- 43 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
authors developed the framework model covering all these issues shown in Figure 
14.126 
A computer scientist interviewee similarly noted: 
We should be building future infrastructure such as it’s highly interoperable, 
including new and emergent properties, the disruptive things. It’s not just 
about identifying strategic market status. Legislation should be written to say 
the future of the Internet is the future of interoperable things. I deeply worry 
with what’s happening with IoT, thinking it in terms of sustainability argu-
ments, we’re taking the worst practices of the tech sector, throw everything 
away after three years, what will that do to the planet. We don’t have a single 
standard across Europe for electricity supply, but we have standards on the 
quality of the power supply, 240V. But nations insisted on e.g. square plugs. 
That affects everyone. It’s about the infrastructure. You wouldn’t let startups 
say we want our self-driving car to drive on the right-hand side. IoT needs to 
be in the building regs to get it under control. Then compete on quality of 
product, not our plug is easier to use than your plug. So, I do think there’s a 
general background to this, we shouldn’t be permitting to get to this point. 
People will have to throw away all their tech when they move to a new house. 
And it’s even worse when it gets embedded in the building. Number of things 
so completely wrong with the IoT at the moment. It’s the emergent mayhem 
in that sector. It’s just a complete mess. Much more here about interop being 
the basis for a sustainable economy rather than a very wasteful one. The 
number of IoT device companies Google has just shut down after acquiring 
them, all that tech is on the scrapheap. We’re building all sorts of problems 
here that aren’t economic, but sustainability. 
Digital sovereignty 
There are obvious political issues with democratically unaccountable private powers 
of historically unprecedented size,127 with Amazon, Microsoft, Facebook, Alphabet 
and Apple in mid-2020 together approaching a quarter of the value of the US’s larg-
est 500 listed companies.128 The five companies’ collective 2019 revenues places 
them between the Netherlands and Saudi Arabia, when countries are ranked by 
GDP.129 These companies are all headquartered in a jurisdiction with an extremely 
 
126 M Figueiredo Muller*, F Esmanioto, N Huber, E Rocha Loures, O Canciglieri Jr. (2019) A systematic 
literature review of interoperability in the green Building Information Modeling lifecycle, Journal of 
Cleaner Production, Vol. 223, pp.408—409.  
127 N Smyrnaios (2016) The GAFAM effect: Strategies and logics of the internet oligopoly, Communi-
cation & Languages, Vol. 188(2), pp.61—83. 
128 Lex, Techlash: all talk, Financial Times, 14 June 2020. 
129 Wallach, fn 67.. 
- 44 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
laissez faire approach to regulation – or alternatively, as with Chinese giants such 
as Alibaba, Tencent and Baidu, the world’s most populous authoritarian state.  
 
Table 2: 2018 and 2019 revenues of Apple, Amazon, Alphabet, Microsoft and Facebook. Source: Wallach 
(2020) 
This is a particular issue when these firms control the 21st century “public squares” 
of the Internet, where so much social and political debate now occurs. While the EU 
has responded with  legislation such as the General Data Protection Regulation, 
which also applies to companies in other jurisdictions offering services to or moni-
toring Europeans, this cannot on its own address the increasingly outsized influence 
of trillion-dollar companies on politics and everyday life. Interoperability would allow 
European companies – large and small – to produce alternative tools for Europeans 
to connect to these public squares, as well as their colleagues, friends and family, if 
they so wished. 
Paul Nemitz, a senior European Commission official who played a key role in the 
development of the GDPR, commented in an on-the-record interview: 
Like states, the big tech companies are now so powerful we now need to 
think about the division of power. From the point of view of democracy, if one 
believes humanity and technology’s innovativeness is unlimited, and it leads 
ever more to concentration, we have a huge democracy problem, because 
democracy cannot live with the fact the platform starts as social media, then 
takes over schools and education, then journalism, then research, then onto 
elections… no.  
Then comes the question, how can we support innovation? There are many 
who say the fact these companies systematically either buy up, imitate, or 
push to the side any little flower that comes up that could be an alternative 
or a competitor, is a huge impediment to innovation which is impossible to 
manage with a purely ex post competition tool where you have to spend three 
years on every case. These cannot not be dealt with on a case by case basis. 
- 45 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
How many hundreds of companies have been bought up by them? The com-
panies are good where they are, so European industrial policy has to go to 
other places. Internet of Things – let’s look at that. Something where we can 
start anew. But we cannot imitate what they are doing well. We must do new 
things newer and better, and we must create the conditions for success. 
As European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen wrote, “‘tech sovereignty’ 
… describes the capability that Europe must have to make its own choices, based 
on its own values, respecting its own rules. This is what will help make tech optimists 
of us all.”130 
   
 
130 U von der Leyen, Shaping Europe's digital future, 19 February 2020. 
- 46 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Existing  and planned European interopera-
bility policies 
The EU has a long history of using interoperability as a policy tool to overcome net-
work effects and high switching costs in concentrated markets such as telecommu-
nications and banking, and foresees its use in a wide range of future digital services:  
●  The Access Directive (2002/19/EC) aims to “establish a regulatory frame-
work... for the relationships between suppliers of networks and services 
that will result in sustainable competition, interoperability of electronic com-
munications services and consumer benefits.” (§1) 
●  The Framework Directive (2002/21/EC) requires Member States to encour-
age the use of communications standards where required “to ensure in-
teroperability of services and to improve freedom of choice for users. (§17) 
●  The European Electronic Communications Code (EECC, 2018/1972) aims to 
“implement an internal market in electronic communications networks and 
services that results in the deployment and take-up of very high capacity 
networks, sustainable competition, interoperability of electronic communi-
cations services, accessibility, security of networks and services and end-
user benefits” (§1(2)(a)). It includes provisions on instant messaging (“num-
ber-independent interpersonal communications service”) (§61), which are 
yet to be used by the competent national authorities. In particular, authori-
ties may impose, “in justified cases, where end-to-end connectivity be-
tween end-users is endangered due to a lack of interoperability between in-
terpersonal communications services, and to the extent necessary to en-
sure end-to-end connectivity between end-users, obligations on relevant 
providers of number-independent interpersonal communications services 
which reach a significant level of coverage and user uptake, to make their 
services interoperable”. 
●  The second Payment Services Directive (2015/2366) provides an enabling 
framework for secure, innovative financial services, requiring the European 
Banking Authority to develop “open standards [which] should ensure the in-
teroperability of different technological communication solutions” (Recital 
93). 
●  Competition law enforcement by the European Commission required Mi-
crosoft to provide a choice of web browsers in its Windows operating sys-
tem, and to allow workgroup software to network Windows PCs; and 
Google to provide a choice of default search engine in its Android browser, 
and to allow alternate specialised search engines to bid for inclusion in its 
main results page.  
●  The Digital Future Communication explicitly mentions interoperability as 
part of the policies on 5G and 6G; digital health; eID; supercomputing; quan-
tum technologies; blockchain; secure, pan-European cloud capacities; and 
exchange of electronic health records. 
- 47 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
●  The Communication on A European Strategy for Data states that data in-
teroperability is key for the exploitation of data value, as well as a tool for 
increased competition by making it easier to switch between cloud provid-
ers. 
●  The European Commission is supporting the Member States to ensure their 
coronavirus contact tracing apps are interoperable, enabling travellers to be 
notified following a foreign trip if they were significantly exposed to some-
one who later tested positive. 
●  The commonly-called Platform to Business Regulation (2019/1150) also pro-
vides important underpinnings, relating to transparency and fairness of all 
“intermediation services” and search engines linking businesses and corpo-
rate websites with consumers, including on access to data.131 
The interoperability explicitly foreseen in the Electronic Communication Code be-
tween  number-independent interpersonal  communications services  (aka instant 
messaging) may only be imposed:  
(i) to the extent necessary to ensure interoperability of interpersonal com-
munications services and may include proportionate obligations on providers 
of those services to publish and allow the use, modification and redistribution 
of relevant information by the authorities and other providers, or to use and 
implement standards or specifications listed in Article 39(1) or of any other 
relevant European or international standards; 
(ii) where the Commission, after consulting BEREC and taking utmost account 
of its opinion, has found an appreciable threat to end-to-end connectivity 
between end-users throughout the Union or in at least three Member States 
and has adopted implementing measures specifying the nature and scope of 
any obligations that may be imposed. (§61(2)) 
While some types of interoperability have been imposed ex post (following a Euro-
pean Commission investigation and decision-making process) in specific cases un-
der existing rules, many competition economists judge these detailed and highly 
fact-specific cases too slow (seven years, in some cases), unpredictable, and nar-
row to provide the broader rules needed for effective digital competition.132 Tirole 
notes: “it is slow. A fine on an incumbent for anticompetitive behavior may serve as 
a deterrent for future such behavior, but it does not really help the entrant that went 
belly up in between… Competition policy in the digital age must achieve speedy and 
 
131 Regulation (EU) 2019/1150 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on pro-
moting fairness and transparency  for business users of online intermediation services, OJ L 186, 
11.7.2019, p. 57–79. 
132 Furman et al., fn 4, p.55 
- 48 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
decisive resolution and must be agile to react to new environments and benefit from 
learning‐by‐doing.”133  A standards body expert interviewee commented: 
I find it appalling we still don’t have  standard messaging protocol that is uni-
versally used, and maybe some clients have added features but at least you’d 
be able to communicate with anyone. But currently we have to agree which 
product we want to use. E.g. Slack and Skype don’t co-exist at all. It’s like 
saying I  have a  Motorola  phone and  can communicate  only  with  other 
Motorola users.  
I am saddened to see the trend is very negative, because we are moving 
towards more and more centralised systems. Slack is a very good example. 
Facebook is sort of new, Twitter is sort of new as well. Slack actually builds 
on a protocol which is existing, IRC, and then managed to hijack this system 
by adding features that only their clients initially supported. You could still 
access the information with the standard protocol and therefore standard 
client, but they kept adding more and more on top, so it becomes impossible. 
IRC is pretty decentralised; anyone could set up an IRC server and communi-
cate with any client you liked. But now we are all bound to Slack servers. You 
can have different ones e.g. business, but they have drawn you into their 
environment, which is centralised around Slack.  
It’s very frustrating and scary to see that everything becomes more and more 
centralised, and some of the old systems which were designed in a very de-
centralised way and we take for granted. One of the next things on the list 
might be e-mail. For now, it’s still decentralised, you can use whatever client 
you want. Google has been making Gmail available for everybody. But you 
start to see features that only work with other Gmail users, and this is the 
start of a slippery slope. And the mass of users they have give them a mo-
mentum that is very hard to fight.  
A computer scientist interviewee added: “Nearly all of the original IM systems were 
based on IP, then for reasons people played winner takes all game and stopped 
interoperating. People noticed you could leverage network effects. There is nothing 
on any of these platforms you couldn’t do with a standard thing. Then you get dif-
ferentiation. That comes down to the client. The protocols are standard. Mobile 
phone network, W3C, IETF — this is a system that’s been running for decades. Going 
back to ITU 19th century. Regulators got blinded by this idea of data railway tracks.” 
The recent major reviews of platform competition for the DG Competition, UK gov-
ernment and US Stigler Center have all found the use of investigations followed by 
ex  post remedies  too  slow  to  cope  with  these  fast-moving  technologies  and 
 
133 Tirole, fn 21, pp.6-7. 
- 49 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
markets. The UK Furman review concluded:  “The key limitation of using market in-
vestigations as the legal basis for a pro-competition approach is that its remedies 
are largely static. Binding orders cannot be revised and updated as the nature of 
solutions needed changes… Relying on this model alone, under the powers currently 
available, is not sufficient in digital markets when technologies change but market 
power is durable. Specific rules imposed as a remedy following a market investiga-
tion may quickly go out of date. What is instead needed is an ongoing, dynamic 
counterparty to market participants, adjusting solutions in response to innovations 
and market dynamics.”134 Regulations can set ex ante rules, while still leaving open 
the option for later enforcement of standard competition law.135 
Several governments and legislatures have produced draft competition legislation 
mandating interoperability for large online platforms. Table 3 summarises key ele-
ments: 
  US ACCESS bill (S. 2658)  French  consumers’  free 
choice in cyberspace bill 
Status  Introduced 22/10/19 and referred to Sen- Passed  by  Senate  Feb. 
ate  Committee  on  Commerce,  Science,  2020; awaiting considera-
and Transportation  tion by National Assembly 
Committee  on  Economic 
Affairs 
Applica- “a consumer-facing communications  and  “online  platform operators 
ble to  information services provider” which “gen- whose  activity exceeds a 
erates income, directly or indirectly, from  threshold  of  number  of 
the collection, processing, sale, or sharing  connections defined by de-
of user data” with > 100m monthly active  cree.” 
users in the US 
Specific  “maintain a set of transparent, third-party- “1. The publication of rele-
mandate  accessible  interfaces  (including APIs)  to  vant information; 
facilitate and maintain technically compat-
ible, interoperable communications with a  “2. The authorization of the 
user of a competing communications pro- use,  modification  and  re-
vider.”  transmission  of this  infor-
mation by ARCEP or other 
operators  of  online  plat-
forms” 
 
134 Furman et al., fn 4, p.79 
135 Graef, fn 8, s.3.2. 
- 50 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Stand- FTC, “in consultation with relevant industry  ARCEP may impose “imple-
ardisa- stakeholders, shall establish rules and pro- mentation  of technical  in-
tion  cedures to facilitate the verification of the  teroperability  standards 
validity of requests from users and com- identified by the authority.” 
peting communications providers to obtain 
user data” 
NIST  “shall  develop  and  publish  model 
technical standards by which to make in-
teroperable popular classes of communi-
cations or information services, including— 
(1) online messaging; 
(2) multimedia sharing; and 
(3) social networking.” 
“Any large communications platform pro-
vider  that establishes  and maintains  in-
teroperability  through  an open  standard 
established under subsection (c) shall be 
entitled  to  a  rebuttable  presumption  of 
providing access on fair, reasonable, and 
nondiscriminatory terms.” 
Security  “A large communications platform provider  ARCEP  must  consult  with 
and  pri- shall, consistent with industry best prac- National  Commission  for 
vacy  tices, set privacy and security standards  Informatics and Liberties 
for access by competing communications 
services to the extent reasonably neces- Before imposing interoper-
sary to address a threat to the large com- ability obligations 
munications  platform  or  user  data,  and 
shall  report  any suspected violations  of 
those standards to the [FTC].” 
“A  competing  communications  provider 
that accesses an interoperability interface 
of a large communications platform pro-
vider shall reasonably secure any user data 
it acquires, processes, or transmits.” 
Enforce- General FTC Act powers  The  Minister  and  ARCEP 
ment  may “collect from the oper-
ators  of  online  platforms 
the  information  or  docu-
ments necessary to ensure 
that these persons comply 
- 51 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
with  the  obligations  laid 
down” 
ARCEP may “penalize any 
breaches it finds” 
Table 3: key provisions of draft US and French interoperability legislation 
In assessing the 25-year history of the European telecommunications regulatory 
framework, Cave, Genakos and Valletti concluded: 
Within the period of a quarter of a century or so, the European telecommuni-
cations sector has been radically transformed from a group of state monop-
olies to a set of increasingly competitive national markets. This has been ac-
complished within the framework of a flexible regime of regulation, which 
combines significant deregulatory momentum with detailed implementation 
by national regulatory authorities. Liberalisation under independent regula-
tion was an appropriate response to the technological and economic changes 
at the industry level, as well as the political conditions at the time. It facilitated 
the entry of new firms and increased competition. The rapid diffusion of new 
technologies and new services led to falling prices and much greater take up, 
which had wider beneficial effects on the European economy. It is fair to say 
that, overall, telecommunications markets represent one of the success sto-
ries of EU policy-making in network industries.136 
A standards body expert interviewee noted: 
From an EU legal tech point of view, with a new approach, like we have done 
for e-signatures, where you have an Art. 9 committee that will make a Euro-
pean norm, by ETSI etc. then it can be acknowledged, then taken up in a norm 
saying you need to provide data in a standardised format. That gives the 
industry an incentive to be part of that standardisation because they want to 
have certain data points in there. 
A free software developer interviewee added: 
Having regulators oblige specific standards sounds undesirable (with excep-
tions), as I suspect it would slow things down terribly. Setting high-level re-
quirements on capabilities of software and services sounds better; e.g. de-
manding the ability to connect using 3rd party software, and interact with 
non-members as easily as with members. Companies can pick or create the 
 
136 M Cave, C Genakos and T Valletti (2019) The European Framework for Regulating Telecommuni-
cations: A 25-year Appraisal, Review of Industrial Organization, vol. 55, p.60. 
- 52 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
standards, as long as those fulfil the requirements, which are assessed by a 
regulator; much like net neutrality. 
Perhaps some dominant companies would make compliant but shitty stand-
ards on purpose (thinking of Microsoft’s Office Open XML), so some more 
scrutiny may be required for those. And current incumbents might need extra 
interventions (e.g. splitting them up) to get things rolling.  
 
   
- 53 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Appendix  1  –  Types  of  interoperability and 
example scenarios  
The International Standards Organisation (ISO), in its standard on cloud interopera-
bility, defines the term as “the ability of two or more systems or applications to 
exchange information and to mutually use the information that has been ex-
changed.”137 
Interoperability can be both partial and unidirectional. For example, an instant mes-
saging platform might allow a competitor service to send its users text and images, 
but not video; and not allow its own users to reply. A mobile operating system could 
allow an app to use all the standard features of a smartphone, but not to access 
special security hardware (as in the case of Apple Pay under investigation by the 
European Commission.) These obstacles can be due to the costs of developing in-
teroperable service features; valid quality and security concerns (for which there 
are other protective mechanisms, which still enable interoperability); and straight-
forward business reasons, such as discouraging customers from using competitor 
products.138  
The UK’s Competition and Markets Authority determined: “Given the market position 
of Facebook and the extent to which it benefits from network effects, we think that 
[interoperability] interventions should apply asymmetrically to Facebook in the first 
instance (e.g. Facebook should offer a defined find friends service to users of a 
third-party platform, but rival platforms should not be required [to] reciprocate). The 
balance of considerations is likely to change over time: the fast-evolving nature of 
social platforms means that the [regulator] will be well-placed to judge the right 
forms of interoperability to deliver consumer benefits on an ongoing basis.”139 
An additional distinction is between “syntactic/technical interoperability”, the ability 
for systems to connect and exchange data, and “semantic interoperability”, that 
connected systems share a common understanding of the meaning of data they 
exchange.140 
 
137 ISO/IEC 19941: 2017, p.vi. 
138 Kerber & Schweitzer, fn 91, p.4. 
139 CMA, fn 5, p.374. 
140 Kerber & Schweitzer, fn 91, p.4. 
- 54 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
Vertical and horizontal interoperability 
Vertical interoperability enables a person to freely choose a combination of de-
vices/operating systems, software/apps, and service providers (including search).141 
These are complementary products/services, and so providers have a greater in-
centive to enable interoperability if it can add value to their own offering (unless, of 
course, they also offer their own neighbouring services, and/or profit from charging 
providers for access, such as in smartphone app stores.) For example, with the nec-
essary software support, a user could:  
●  Edit a report on an iPad using the Word app while storing it in Dropbox (this 
is possible today, due to action by Apple, Microsoft and Dropbox).  
●  Follow their news feed on their Android-running Fairphone using the Feedly 
app, logging into Twitter and Facebook (Twitter allows software from other 
organisations to access *some* of its features, allowing users to read their 
timeline and tweet with other tools, but blocks developers from replicating 
its “core user experience or features”. Facebook allows other forms of soft-
ware integration, including posting, but until December 2018 banned com-
petitors from connecting to its APIs to replicate its core functionality142).  
●  Choose a different search engine as a default for their Android web 
browser, or different default browser for their Windows PC (both possible in 
Europe thanks to EU competition enforcement using existing rules).  
●  Use alternative App Stores (possible on Android but not iOS), and payment 
apps (other than Apple Pay) which have access to iPhone’s secure chip (as 
the European Commission’s DG Competition is currently investigating). 
Interoperable products and platforms can be more valuable for consumers, and 
hence firms selling them. Using standardised, interoperable components can reduce 
production costs. However, firms focused on innovative and/or high-quality luxury 
products – such as Apple – may prefer to retain control over components (e.g. 
chargers and cables) and complementary products (such as checking app security), 
especially since this can lead to royalties/commissions, higher profits, and greater 
investment.143 
Horizontal interoperability enables people to use different products and service pro-
viders than the people they interact with.144 Since those are substitute offerings, 
firms may be less willing to voluntarily enable competitors’ access to their user base. 
For example, with the necessary software support: 
 
141 Kerber & Schweitzer, fn 91, p.4. 
142 CMA, fn 5, Appendix W, p.2. 
143 Kerber & Schweitzer, fn 91, p.6 
144 Kerber & Schweitzer, fn 91, p.4 
- 55 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
●  A Telegram user could directly chat with a family WhatsApp group. (Face-
book is already developing the ability for users of its Messenger, WhatsApp 
and Instagram services to message each other. It allowed third-party chat 
software to contact its users from 2010-2015.145)  
●  A Flickr user could follow the pictures posted by their sports team via a pri-
vate account on Instagram. 
●  A university student using TikTok could see videos recommended by their 
flatmates on YouTube. 
●  A Facebook Messenger user could try out Snapchat (multi-homing) while 
still using their profile information and being able to message friends on 
Messenger directly.146 
●  A teacher using Facebook could invite their students’ parents to a class 
event and receive RSVPs, whether parents use Facebook, Google Calendar, 
iCal, or an open source calendar. 
Protocol and data interoperability 
Margrethe Vestager’s 2019 special advisers’ report on digital competition identified 
three types of interoperability: 
1.  Protocol interoperability – “the ability of two services or products to inter-
connect, technically, with one another.” Examples: DG Competition deci-
sions on Microsoft in 2004 (compatibility of Sun workgroup servers) and 
2009 (tying of Internet Explorer to Windows). This mainly enables comple-
mentary services rather than direct substitutes.  
2.  Full protocol interoperability – “standards that allow substitute services to 
interoperate, e.g. messaging systems.” Benefit: “through the imposition of 
interoperability requirements, the benefits of positive network effects can 
be shared among direct competitors. In this perspective, interconnection 
could be an efficient instrument to address concentration tendencies.” But 
“the need for strong standardisation across several competing platforms 
could significantly dampen their ability to innovate and to differentiate the 
type(s) of service(s) they provide” and “the need for coordination between 
the firms affected by the requirement would provide opportunities for collu-
sive behaviour.” This can be dealt with by open standards for core function-
ality in mature systems (see later). 
3.  Data interoperability – “roughly equivalent to data portability but with a 
continuous, potentially real-time, access to personal or machine user data. 
Existing data interoperability mechanisms typically rely on privileged APIs, 
 
145 Zoom support, Facebook and Google To Discontinue XMPP Chat Protocol, undated. 
146 One former official interviewee commented: “On [messaging] tools, there’s more partial substitut-
ability between different tools that allows tool hopping. So generally there’s a lot more competition 
around. That said, there’s clearly still a big pull towards WhatsApp.” 
- 56 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
which provide to a service B the means to access its users’ data through a 
service A’s API, if the users have given authorisation for this transfer of 
data.” (Data interoperability requires at least basic protocol interoperability, 
so data can be requested and provided.) 
Detailed technical and regulatory examples 
The following scenarios provide very specific examples of user benefits deriving 
from various types of interoperability that could be imposed on dominant platforms 
using the current EU regulatory framework, and potential powers under the Digital 
Markets Act. They are focused on messaging and social media platforms within the 
existing EU regulatory framework (GDPR + ePrivacy, consumer protection, elec-
tronic  communications  framework directive,  or  existing  market practices), and 
based on open protocols (standardised and governed using the existing EU regula-
tory framework described later). 
Straightforward within existing regulatory framework 
Example  User benefit  Regulatory mechanism 
Users are  given access  to  Give users practical control  A  stronger  risk-based  ap-
their personal data held by a  over their personal data and  proach to GDPR data portabil-
platform  in  whichever  tool  tools.  ity right (Art.20) by EDPB/na-
they  choose  (independent  tional supervisory authorities. 
from  platforms'  own  ‘data  Enable development of user- Issue further EDPB guidance, 
management’  and  ‘export’  friendly tools to show and ex- enforced  by  national  data 
settings), via a standardised  plain to users what data is  protection authorities, coordi-
API and security mechanisms.   held by platforms.   nated via EDPB. 
“One  click”  data  portability  Help users move/copy data  EC-initiated  standardisation 
(independent from platforms'  between  platforms  (easy  activity. 
own ‘data management’ set- switching/multi-homing  be-
tings) –  user can download  tween providers)   Vestager’s  special  advisers 
and delete data using stand- (p58): "A competition policy 
ard tools, and upload to new  Enable enhanced price com- perspective  would  suggest 
platform; or  authorise new  parison and other tools that  that dominant platforms could 
platform to  directly access  need access to user profiles  be subject to stricter [GDPR 
(and optionally delete) data.   (Open X, eg banking, finance,  portability]”  
communications…) 
“Real-time” data portability. 
Give users a broader scope of  Supports genuine “data port- Minor amendment to GDPR 
personal data that can be ac- ability” and multi-homing.  Art. 20, via DMA, or ePrivacy 
cessed/transferred – inferred,  Regulation. Enforced by na-
and  processed for a  wider  tional data protection author-
ities, coordinated via EDPB. 
- 57 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
range of purposes, on domi-
nant platforms.  
Ability to send private mes- Lets  users  message  their  Decision  under  European 
sages  to  users  (and  user  friends, family and colleagues  Electronic  Communications 
groups) on other platforms,  on  other  messaging  plat- Code  (EECC). Enforced by 
when authorised by  recipi- forms,  without  having  to  national communications au-
ents.   switch or multi-home.  thorities, coordinated via BE-
REC. 
Let  users  participate  in 
groups from  a  single, pre- EC-initiated  standardisation 
ferred messaging app  (e.g.  activity (with consideration of 
avoiding profiling by having  IETF  standards  such  as 
an account with an advertis- SIP/SIMPLE and XMPP.) 
ing-funded platform). 
Free choice of client to man- Ensures genuine choice and  Arguable under Unfair Terms 
age data/privacy and profiling  control for users, rather than  Directive (Graef et al. p.204: 
settings  [eg  MyData.org  giving up their data and rights  “unfairness consists of sub-
model], with tools developed  due to excessively complex  stantive elements (including 
by software companies and  and  opaque  controls  (so- ‘good faith’  and  ‘significant 
civil society/consumer groups  called “dark patterns”).  imbalance’ components to be 
to help manage complex set- assessed at the national level) 
tings.   and formal elements (trans-
parency and information pro-
vision) as contained in Arti-
cles 3–5 of the Directive… fo-
cuses on the average con-
sumer’s capacity to make in-
formed  autonomous  deci-
sions”), or minor update via 
DMA  
Enforced  by  DG  COMP/EU 
digital  market  agency/  na-
tional competition and con-
sumer authorities. 
 
   
- 58 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
New but less controversial scenarios (based on past experience from other sec-
tors) 
Example  User benefit  Regulatory mechanism 
Ability to use different client  Greater user choice, to find  Ex ante interoperability rule in 
software than the app(s) the  tools  that  best  meet  their  DMA  for  large  online plat-
platform provides itself.   needs and values  forms, with enforcement by 
DG COMP/EU digital market 
Don’t allow the bundling of  agency/national  competition 
dominant platform user inter- authorities. 
face and infrastructure - for 
example, let user choose their  The platform should not fa-
own curation/ recommenda- vour (its own) specific apps 
tion  algorithms  from  third  (no self-preferencing, tying, 
party providers.  or privileged APIs) - CMA - 
and must implement proto-
cols/APIs  that  enable  third 
party  developers to  create 
equivalent  functionality  in 
their apps. 
EC-initiated  standardisation 
recognition relating to W3C 
ActivityPub  and  relevant 
messaging standards.  
Ability for user tools to send a  Users would be able  to com- Ex ante rule in DMA for all ser-
standard signal for express- municate  consent/non-con- vices  processing  personal 
ing  tracking  and  targeting  sent  for  data  processing,  data, and/or consent rule in 
preferences  (‘New  DNT’),  avoiding endless cookie no- ePrivacy Regulation, with en-
which can be  managed via  tices and preferences.  forcement by DG COMP/other 
user’s browser or another in- Brussels  digital  market 
dependent intermediary. Ex- agency/national  competition 
ample of “semantic interoper- and data protection authori-
ability”.   ties. 
EC-initiated  standardisation 
and recognition activity relat-
ing to W3C Do-Not-Track and 
its successors. 
Protection of open identities:  Greater user choice, to find  DMA, GDPR update/ guidance 
wherever the closed single  identity tools that best meet  from EDPB, and/or ePrivacy 
sign-on systems (i.e. sign in  their needs and values.  Regulation.  Soft  regulatory 
with Facebook / Google / Ap- tools (eg standardisation and 
ple) are supported, at least  Supports EU data protection  governance) of eIDAS. 
one  open  and  federated 
- 59 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
identity  system  should  be  framework, by reducing leak-
Enforced  by  DG  COMP/EU 
supported as well, including  age of personal data to iden-
digital  market  agency/  na-
eIDAS.  tity providers not focused on 
tional competition and data 
privacy. 
protection authorities. 
New and more challenging scenarios 
Example  User benefit  Regulatory mechanism 
User gets read/write access  Users can choose any tool or  Explicit ex ante DMA rule.  
to feeds produced by users of  platform matching their needs 
other platforms (with their au- and values to read, curate, fil- EC  standardisation recogni-
thorisation) without needing  ter, prioritise, and respond to  tion relating to W3C Activity-
to create their own account.   items in their chosen feeds,  Pub. 
replying to or “liking” items 
from their friends, family and 
Enforced by DG COMP/ other 
colleagues on large platforms. 
EU digital market agency/na-
tional competition authorities. 
Civil society groups can de-
velop tools to help users filter 
 
and prioritise feeds in a way 
that better reflects their val-
ues than standard large plat-
form user interfaces. 
User can access closed mes- Users can choose any tool or  Explicit ex ante DMA rule. 
saging/sharing groups organ- platform matching their needs 
ised on other platforms, with  and values to participate in  EC  standardisation recogni-
permission of those groups’  social groups online, avoiding  tion relating to W3C Activity-
organisers (at users’ own ini- exclusion.  Pub and relevant messaging 
tiative).   standards. 
Enforced  by  DG  COMP/EU 
digital  market  agency/  na-
tional  competition and  au-
thorities.  
A dominant platform should  Users are given free, unbi- Explicit  ex  ante  DMA  rule/ 
inform  users  of  alternative  ased choice of tools they use  Strengthen §6 P2BR for dom-
apps/services whenever it of- to access popular services.  inant platforms  
fers to install its own app/ser-
vices (no self-preferencing),  Users can get access to new  Enforced  by  DG  COMP/EU 
and inform prospective users  components and functionality  digital  market  agency/  na-
about  alternative  intercon- (whether  complements  or  tional competition authorities. 
nected  platforms  when  substitutes)  developed  for 
- 60 - 
 Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation       OpenForum Academy | NOV 2020 
 
 
suggesting they create an ac- large  platforms that  better 
count.  match  different user group 
preferences. 
Development of  new, inde- User’s own choice of  tools  Enabled by  explicit ex ante 
pendent services that make  can filter and prioritise feed  DMA,  updated  GDPR  §20, 
use of users’ profile and be- items  based  on  their,  and  ePrivacy  Regulation, and/or 
havioural and inferred data,  other tool  users’, historical  Data Act rule.  
previously controlled by dom- feedback and preferences. 
inant platforms.  EC-initiated  standardisation 
activity and recognition. 
Developers can  use anony- Users  are  able  to  choose  Enabled by  explicit ex ante 
mized,  aggregated data  of  tools, which can filter and pri- DMA and/or Data Act rule, or 
large groups of other users  oritise feed items based on  strengthening of P2BR §9.  
and/or  statistical  models  very large amounts of data 
trained  by  dominant  plat- and  models  from dominant  EC-initiated  standardisation 
forms to improve their ser- platforms (e.g. about popular- activity and recognition. 
vices.  ity of millions of different web 
pages and media clips). 
 
- 61 - 
  
   
0 Interoperability as a Tool for Competition Regulation 
2
 
0 Ian Brown 
2
 
 
 
V
O
This paper is published with the OpenForum Academy, 
N
which  is  an  independent  programme  established  by 
OpenForum Europe. It has created a link with academia 
in order to provide new input and insight into the key is-
sues which impact the openness of the IT market. Central 
to the operation of OpenForum Academy are the Fellows, 
each selected as individual contributors to the work of 
OFA. 
 