PhilosStud
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-020-01521-z
Legal proof and statistical conjunctions
Lewis D. Ross1
(cid:2)TheAuthor(s)2020
Abstract A question, long discussed by legal scholars, has recently provoked a
considerable amount of philosophical attention: ‘Is it ever appropriate to base a
legal verdict on statistical evidence alone?’ Many philosophers who have consid-
eredthisquestionrejectlegalrelianceonbarestatistics,evenwhentheoddsoferror
are extremely low. This paper develops a puzzle for the dominant theories con-
cerningwhyweshouldeschewbarestatistics.Namely,thereseemtobecompelling
scenarios in which there are multiple sources of incriminating statistical evidence.
As we conjoin together different types of statistical evidence, it becomes increas-
inglyincredibletosupposethatapositiveverdictwouldbeimpermissible.Isuggest
that none of the dominant views in the literature can easily accommodate such
cases, and close by offering a diagnosis of my own.
Keywords Proof paradox (cid:2) Legal proof (cid:2) Statistical evidence (cid:2) Blue Bus problem (cid:2)
Legal epistemology (cid:2) DNA (cid:2) Philosophy of law
1 Introduction
A question, long discussed by legal scholars, has recently provoked a considerable
amount of philosophical attention: ‘Is it ever appropriate to base a legal verdict on
statistical evidence alone?’ The dominant view is that merely statistical evidence
& LewisD.Ross
L.ross2@lse.ac.uk
1 DepartmentofPhilosophy,Logic,andScientiﬁcMethod,LondonSchoolofEconomics,
LakatosBuilding,PortugalStreet,Holborn,London,UK
123L.D.Ross
cannot provide a proper basis for a legal verdict, even when the odds of error are
extremely low.1
Here are some classic cases—sometimes referred to as ‘proof-paradoxical’
scenarios2—which illustrate the intuitive case against imposing sanctions on the
basis of bare statistics:
BlueBus.Abusnegligentlycausesinjurytoapedestrian,butitisnotknownwhich
companythebusbelongsto.Ontheroutewheretheaccidentoccurred,theBlue
BusCompanyruns75%ofthebuses.Thereisnofurtherinformationavailableto
settlewhichcompanythebusbelongsto.[AdaptedfromTribe1971].
Gatecrasher. The organizers of the local rodeo decide to sue John for
gatecrashing their event. Their evidence is as follows: John attended the
Sunday afternoon event—he was seen and photographed on the main ranks
duringtheevent.Noticketswereissued,soJohncannotbeexpectedtoprove
that he bought a ticket with a ticket stub. However, while 1000 people were
counted inthe seats, only300paid for admission. [Presentation adaptedfrom
Blome-Tillmann forthcoming; original case due to Cohen 1977]
Prisoners. One hundred prisoners are exercising in the prison yard. Ninety-
nine of them suddenly join in a planned attack on a prison guard; the
hundredthprisonerplaysnopart.Thereisnoevidenceavailabletoshowwho
joined in and who did not. [Adapted from Redmayne 2008]
The‘standard’intuitionisthatitwouldnotbeappropriateinthese casestoimpose
civil or criminal sanctionson the basisof the inculpatory statisticalevidence. Such
intuitions raise issues with important theoretical and practical ramiﬁcations for the
law. The question of how to treat bare statistics impinges upon debates about the
nature oflegalproofitself,3whetheritisacceptabletoconvictsomeone ofacrime
simply on the basis of DNA evidence,4 how we should treat epidemiological
evidence,5 and the impermissibility of demographic proﬁling.6 And these cases are
not as artiﬁcial as one might initially suppose: the Blue Bus case has found close
analogues in real case-law.7
1 Manyviewsarecategorical.However,someextantviewsallow,oraresilentabout,theuseofbare
statisticsincertainrestrictedcircumstances.IprovideacomprehensiveliteraturesurveyinSect.4.Fora
succinct overview of contemporary debate, see Ross (2020a). Pardo (2019) provides a helpful
introductiontotheproofparadoxalongsideotherlegalparadoxes.
2 Foraplethoraofotherexamples,seeGardiner(2018).
3 Somesupposethataversiontobarestatisticsthreatens‘legalprobabilism’,theideathatproofrequires
establishing a claim to a given level of probability. For contrasting perspectives, see Haack (2014),
HeddenandColyvan(2019)andSmith(2020).However,onecanarguablyrejecttheuseofbarestatistics
withoutrejectinglegalprobabilism:wecanjustifytenetsofevidencelawthatexcludeorrestrictcertain
classesofevidencewithoutappealingtoanyparticularviewofthenatureoflegalproof.
4 Forexample,seeRv.Lashley[2000]EWCA88;WilsonvDPP2017IESC54;StatevToomes191
S.W.3d122,129forrepresentativecasesfromdifferentjurisdictions.
5 SeeRoss(ms)fordiscussion.
6 E.g.seeBolinger(2018)foranexplicitconnectionbetweentheBlueBuscaseandissuessurrounding
racialproﬁling.DiBelloandO’Neill(2020)providefurtherdiscussion.
7 E.g.seeKaminskyv.HertzCorporation,288N.W.2d426.
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
Theaimofthispaperistodevelopapuzzleforthedominantviewthatweshould
reject bare statistics in the courtroom. The puzzle is that there seem to be
compellingscenariosinwhichtherearemultipleincriminatingsourcesofstatistical
evidence. As we conjoin together different types of statistical evidence, it becomes
increasingly incredible to suppose that a positive verdict would be impermissible.
This suggests that whatever is wrong with the evidence in familiar proof-
paradoxicalcasescannotsimplybeexplainedbygesturingatthestatisticalnatureof
theevidenceinvolved.Todeepenthepuzzle,Ishowthatfourdominantapproaches
in the literature struggle to draw a principled distinction between regular proof-
paradoxical scenarios and those involving statistical conjunctions. I close by
outlining my own view on what explains the intuitive difference between these
cases,drawingontheempiricallysupported‘storymodel’oflegalfact-ﬁnding,and
offer some reﬂections on where this leaves the state of the wider debate.
2 Civil law
Let’s begin with civil law cases, canonicallyrepresented by the Blue Bus scenario.
Given that the operative standard of proof in civil law is the ‘balance of
probabilities’ (sometimes called ‘preponderance of the evidence’), a reluctance to
impose sanctions here is prima facie puzzling: surely it is more probable than not
that the Blue Company caused the accident? Even though, conceptually, it seems
liketheevidenceshouldstraightforwardlysatisfytherelevantstandardofproof,itis
widely held that intuition baulks at this conclusion. Hence, there is apparently
something amiss with the prospect of using mere statistics to settle a civil case.8
Iwanttosuggestthatourintuitionsaboutthelegalimpotenceofpurelystatistical
evidence are not stable when we introduce multiple sources of statistical evidence.
The end result will be a case in which the total body of evidence seems to remain
purely statistical, but in which sanctioning the Blue Company is compelling.
ConsiderthefollowingvariationonBlueBus,involvingoneadditionalsourceof
statistical evidence.
Blue Bus2: A bus causes injury to a pedestrian, but it is not known which
company the bus belongs to. On the route where the accident occurred, the
BlueCompanyruns75%ofthebusesandtheRedCompany25%ofthebuses.
Fresh tyre-marks are found at the scene of the accident that an investigator’s
uncontested report states were caused by the offending vehicle. All parties
agree these could only be made by a certain brand of bus tyre. A recent
insurance application form shows that 90% of the Blue Company buses have
that brand of tyre, while only 5% of Red Company buses do.
The inculpatory evidence in this case remains purely statistical—the ﬁnding of the
tyre-marks is only relevant insofar as presented alongside the reference-class (all
buses) and probability (90%) linking these marks to the Blue Company. The
8 Fordissenttohostilitytowardsstatisticsinthecivildomain,seeKrauss(2020).
123L.D.Ross
impermissibility of holding the Blue Company liable is surely less obvious in this
variation. After all, we must remember that choosing not to sanction leaves the
injured pedestrian without compensation. Still, you may not be convinced that the
evidence is yet strong enough for sanction. Nonetheless, it is apparent that we can
continue devising additional sources of statistical evidence and adding them to the
case. Consider a third variation:
Blue Bus3: A bus causes injury to a pedestrian, but it is not known which
company the bus belongs to. On the route where the accident occurred, the
BlueCompanyruns75%ofthebusesandtheRedCompany25%ofthebuses.
Fresh tyre-marks are found at the scene of the accident that an investigator’s
uncontested report states were caused by the offending vehicle. All parties
agree these could only be made by a certain brand of bus tyre. A recent
insurance application form shows that 90% of the Blue Company buses have
the implicated brand of bus tyre, while only 5% of Red Company buses do.
Moreover, police ﬁnd a bus hubcap on the road immediately after the crash.
Only 2% of the Red Company buses were recorded as having the implicated
brand of hubcap, while 96% of Blue Company buses have it.
Suppose there is no known correlation between having the implicated hubcap and
tyre, and that neither party adduces evidence about how many buses belonging to
each company have both. Would it be impermissible to rule against the Blue
Companyonthebalanceofprobabilities,leavingthevictimoftheaccidentwithout
compensation? I think that this is hard to accept. However, if you are not yet
convinced, we can repeat the same strategy, continuing to Blue Busn, conjoining
ever more sources of inculpatory statistical evidence. The end result would be a
bodyofevidenceaboutwhichadefendinglawyercouldforcetheconcessionthatit
was all merely statistical, but where it becomes extremely difﬁcult to suppose,
especially since proof-paradoxical cases never involve exculpatory evidence being
offered,thatthecaseshouldnotwinthedayonthebalanceofprobabilitiesstandard
ofcivilproof.Tomaintainuniformhostilitytostatisticalevidence,youwouldhave
toholdthatthereisnovariationoftheBlueBuscaseinthisveinthatcouldlicense
ﬁnding against the Blue Company. Such a position, leaving the victim of a
negligently-caused accident uncompensated in order to preserve hostility to
statistical evidence is difﬁcult to motivate.
3 Criminal law
To begin the discussion of criminal law, we need to ﬁrst brieﬂy dwell on the
connection between the debate on bare statistical evidence and DNA proﬁling.
When evaluating DNA evidence, courts rely entirely on a statistical estimate,
provided by a forensic scientist, concerning the probability that the incriminating
sample (blood, semen, hair, etc. found at a crime-scene) belongs to the accused
person. The reason that a statistical estimate is provided rather than an outright
assertionofamatchisthatitiswell-understoodthat,giventhelimitationsofDNA
samplingtechniques,thereisalwaysthechanceofarandommatch.Inotherwords,
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
giventhelevelofdetailprovidedbyDNAproﬁlingtechniques,itispossiblethatthe
allele-characteristics of the incriminating sample, while very similar to those
belonging to the accused, may in fact belong to some other person. Extremely
improbable although it may be, apparent DNA matches can turn out to be pure
coincidences.
With this in mind, it is not unusual for there to be cases that ﬁt the following
mould:
DNA:Someoneissexuallyassaultedinasecludedpark.Theycannotprovide
an account of the attacker’s appearance. DNA evidence from the crime
matchesthatofsomeoneonﬁleforsomeunrelatedreason.Theincriminating
evidenceisthefollowing:aforensicscientistestimatesthechanceoftheDNA
notbelongingtothatpersontobe1intenmillion.[AdaptedfromRoss2020b]
How should we react to such cases? There is currently no consensus on this
question. Both courts and legal scholars have been much more sympathetic to the
legitimacy of cold hit convictions than philosophical commentators.9 Within the
philosophicalliterature,anumberoftheoristshaveexplicitlyextendedtheirgeneral
antipathy towards bare statistical evidence to endorse an outright rejection of cold
hit DNA convictions, and suspicion of conviction in such cases follows implicitly
frommanyextantviews.10Iwillreturntotheseviewsbelowinmoredepth.Firstly,
however, I want to demonstrate that, just as with the civil law, there are statistical
conjunctioncases inthecriminal lawthatmakeforbearingfromconvictionhardto
accept. Consider a conjunction of a standard ‘proof-paradoxical’ case introduced
earlier, and an apparent DNA proﬁle match.
Prisoners & DNA: 100 prisoners are exercisingin the prison yard. Extremely
grainy CCTV footage shows that 99 of them attack and kill the guard. The
100th prisoner played no role in the assault and could have done nothing to
stop it. From the footage it is impossible to distinguish which prisoners were
involved. The 99 murderers escape in one direction and, some time later, the
100th prisoner escapes in a different direction. One prisoner is recaptured.
Upon testing, it is found that his DNA matches the most dominant DNA
proﬁle found on a discarded switch-blade at the scene of the murder. The
forensic scientist estimates the chance of a random match as 1 in ten million.
Ithinkitishardtoacceptthatitwouldbeimpermissibleforajurytoconvictinsuch
acase.Again,though,intuitionsmayvary.Nonetheless, aswiththecivilcase,itis
9 SeeRoth(2010)forawide-rangingdiscussionofthelaw.Itisworthstressingthatthecase-lawisnot
unequivocal. On the philosophical side of the debate, Ross (2020b) and Papineau (2020) offer some
dissentfromphilosophicalscepticismaboutbarestatisticsincriminallaw,whileDiBello(2019)offersa
decision-theoreticargumentthatvindicatesconvictioninDNAcases,butnotinshort-oddsproofparadox
cases.
10 Forexample,seetheworkofDuncanPritchardandMartinSmith.Whenweexamineotherextant
viewsbelowinSect.4,itwillbeapparentwhymanypopulartheoriesareimplicitlyhostiletocold-hit
DNAconvictionseveniftheiroriginalproponentsdonotconsiderthem.
123L.D.Ross
entirely possible to continue the general strategy of conjoining further sources of
statistical evidence to strengthen the case against the accused.
While some such further variations in the vein of Prisoners & DNA would
doubtless be far-fetched, there are conceivable examples that would draw upon
entirely familiar sources of evidence. Consider the following quote from two
leading legal scholars about other types of forensic evidence such as ﬁngerprints:
All forensic identiﬁcation methods are probabilistic in nature. Traditional
forensic examiners, such as ﬁngerprint examiners, may treat their matches as
unique, but as many have pointed out, such declarations of individualisation
areﬁctive.TheGaltonpointsofaﬁngerprint,thecharacteristicsofaperson’s
handwriting and the striations of a ballistics match all have underlying
population statistics, just like a DNA genotype […]. The fact that the
defendant’s ﬁngerprint, handwriting or gun ‘matches’ makes it more likely
that the defendant was the source, but the inference is still probabilistic.
[Cheng and Nunn 2016: 118]
Itisworthstressingthatnotalltypesofforensicevidencearecurrentlypresentedin
court in the same statistical way as apparent DNA matches. Fingerprint evidence,
for instance, is usually presented in a non-statistical way—an expert identiﬁer uses
their experience and intuition to testify as to whether two samples, in their view,
upon examining similarities in ridge-patterns, were made by the same person.11
However,thispracticehascomeinforafairdegreeofcriticism.Thesubjectivityof
ﬁngerprint examination, according to some commentators, compares disfavourably
with the rigorous modelling techniques used to generate DNA match estimates.
Moreover, some high-proﬁle false positives provide grounds to suppose that such
qualitative presentations are much less reliable than is often supposed. This debate
is not my primary concern here. Rather, I simply want to note that one reasonable
waythatithasbeensuggestedthatwerespondtosuchchallengesistoadvocatethat
ﬁngerprint evidence should instead be presented in quantitative way, more in line
with the way that a forensic scientist treats DNA evidence—namely by offering a
statistical estimate about the probability of the incriminating sample matching the
prints of the suspect.12 While we do not yet have widely agreed upon statistical
models concerning the likelihood of random ﬁngerprint matches, there has been
work in this direction and it is entirely conceivable that such a statistical estimate
could become the norm for presentingﬁngerprintevidence,taking intoaccountthe
estimated possibility of a random match.13
If this is a conceivable courtroom practice, as it surely is, then this raises the
possibility of statistical conjunction cases involving DNA, ﬁngerprints, and other
forms of forensic evidence arrayed together to make an insurmountable case for
11 See,forexample,Zabell(2005)orEvettandWilliams(2015)formethodologicaldiscussion.
12 Zabellibid.provideswide-rangingdiscussionofthelimitationsofﬁngerprintevidenceandhowthe
practicessurroundingitmightbeimproved.
13 E.g.see Zhuetal.(2007)foronesuchattempt.Asfaras Iunderstandthemodel,thechanceofa
randommatchwasestimatedat1in400,000.Thisispurelyillustrativeformyargument,nothingdepends
ontheexactﬁgures.
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
conviction, even though they are being presented in a purely statistical way.14 I
leave the exact details of these cases to the reader’s imagination—but, surely, it is
hard to accept that the conjunction of such evidence, including ﬁngerprints and
DNA, could never appropriately undergird a criminal conviction. The upshot is a
simple one: if we accept that some cases involving conjoined sources of statistical
evidence can license sanction, we cannot simply suppose that the statistical nature
oftheevidence involved iswhatexplainsintuitivereluctancetosanctionintypical
proof-paradoxical cases.15
4 Four diagnoses of the proof paradox
The intuitive bad-standing of bare statistics, widely highlighted by philosophers
commentating on the law, can seemingly be disrupted upon considering cases
involving multiple sources of statistical evidence. In these cases, the imposition of
sanctionsseemstoberathercompelling.Letusnowturntoconsiderthetheoretical
importance of this ﬁnding.
Thedebatesurroundingstatisticalevidenceinthelawcontainsastrikinglacuna:
thereisnowidelyagreedstatementofwhatmakesevidence‘merelystatistical’.For
example, one recent paper, coming at an advanced point in the dialectic between
two competing theories, states:
Howdowe,then,deﬁnestatisticalevidence?Wedon’t.We—again,inaway
that’s consistent with the theoretical literature on statistical evidence—start
with the examples. They clearly capture something intuitively important. We
then try to understand the relevant phenomena better. If we’re fortunate, we
mayendupwithadeﬁnition,orananalysis.Orwemaynot[…]wemayneed
tosettleforan‘‘Ican’tdeﬁneit,butIknowitwhenIseeit’’attitude.[Enoch
and Spectre 2019: 184]
The assumption in my discussion so far has been that taking one piece of
uncontroversially statistical evidence—where the incriminating element consists
only in the probability of the defending party possessing some inculpatory
characteristicrelativetosomereference-class—andconjoiningitwithanotherpiece
ofuncontroversiallystatisticalevidence,stillleavesuswithatotalbodyofevidence
which remains merely statistical.
Onepossibilityisthatabodyofevidenceinvolvingmultiplesourcesofstatistics
possesses some normatively important property which elevates it above the merely
statisticalevidencefoundinregularproof-paradoxicalcases.Itiscertainlytruethat
insomelocalcontexts,multiplesourcesofstatisticalevidencecanhaveadistinctive
14 Di Bello (forthcoming) provides helpful discussion of ﬁngerprint evidence in relation to the proof
paradoxandMartinSmith’sdiagnosisofwhyweshouldeschewbarestatistics.
15 Itisworthmentioningthatitwouldbestrangeifahostilitytobarestatisticsledtotheperversetactical
incentiveinthecourtroomwherebyforensicevidencecouldrightfullyleadtoaconvictionifpresentedin
aqualitativewaybuttheverysameevidencecouldnotrightfullyleadtoaconvictionifpresentedina
quantitativeway.
123L.D.Ross
justiﬁcatory effect—for instance, having multiple sources of statistical evidence
may reassure us that the incriminating evidence does not exist merely due
to malpractice (e.g. police misconduct) or incompetence (e.g. forensic contamina-
tion). But this cannot be the whole story. After all, in cases like the Blue Bus
scenario, incompetence and malpractice are not at issue. They can even be
stipulated out of the case. What we need is a more general explanation for why
intuitions seem to differ between the multiple-source cases outlined above and the
more familiar proof-paradoxical scenarios with which we started the paper. I will
now consider four dominant theories aiming to explain what is wrong with relying
upon bare statistics and will suggest that none of them can offer a straightforward
explanationforwhycasesinvolvingmultiplesourcesofstatisticalevidenceseemto
call for different treatment.
The four types of theory I will consider are the following:16
1. Epistemic diagnoses argue that bare statistics fail to confer some important
epistemic property—e.g. justiﬁcation, knowledgeability, safety, etc.—onto
legal verdicts.
2. Moral and justice-based approaches argue that relying on bare statistics
frustrates non-epistemic normative constraints on evidence law: e.g. back-
wards-looking considerations such as respect for autonomy or due process, or
forward-looking considerations- such as ensuring legal rules have the proper
incentivising effect.
3. Likelihoodtheoriesargue thatlegal proof shouldbe understoodinterms ofthe
comparative likelihoodofcompeting accounts,ratherthan interms ofabsolute
probabilities.
4. ‘Phase change’ approaches argue that bare statistical evidence becomes
acceptable only when the chance of error crosses some threshold of extreme
improbability.
4.1 Epistemic approaches
Epistemic approaches to the proof paradox aim to identify some epistemic
deﬁciency in bare statistical evidence. There are now a number of such theories,
appealing to the absence of different epistemic properties. It is beyond a single
paper to critique the details of each epistemic view in addition to discussing other
theories, so I will here take a more general approach. I will outline and focus on a
motivating analogy characteristic of epistemic views: the comparison between the
proof paradox and lottery cases. A consideration of this motivating analogy will
justify some scepticism about whether epistemic views can explain the difference
between regular proof-paradoxical cases and those involving statistical
conjunctions.
16 Theseapproachesmayoverlap.Forinstance,onemightarguethatthereasonthatcertainepistemic
properties are important is because rules promoting them align with the proper moral constraints on
evidencelaw.Indeed,asdiscussedbelow,Enochetal.(2012)reliesonpreciselythisidea.
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
Epistemologistshavelongbeenconcernedwithstatisticalevidenceintheformof
‘lottery propositions’, with an orthodoxy being that the highly probabilifying
evidence supporting the proposition ‘I will lose a fair and large lottery’ fails to
confer certain epistemic propertiesonto abeliefinthatproposition.Forinstance,it
hasbeenpopulartosupposethat,evenifitisstupendouslylikely,onecannotknow
that one’s lottery ticket is a loser (e.g. Williamson 2000), while others suggest that
one lacks certain types of justiﬁcation to believe that one’s ticket is a loser (e.g.
Smith2016).Thisisapuzzlingphenomenoninitsownright:ifIcan’tknowthatI
will lose a ten million ticket lottery, how can I claim to know many ordinary
propositions about which I may be fallible? There has been a great deal of
sophisticated work devoted to exploring the ramiﬁcations of lottery cases for
normative epistemological theorising.
It has been widely noted by proponents of epistemic approaches to the proof
paradoxthatthesescenarios bear astriking resemblance tolotterycases.While the
evidence we have in unadorned proof-paradoxical scenarios is highly probabilify-
ing, there nonetheless seems to be something unsatisfactory about endorsing it by
issuingapositivelegalverdict,justaswhiletheevidencewehavethatwewilllose
a large fair lottery is highly probabilifying, there seems to be something
unsatisfactory about (say) asserting or claiming to know that you have lost. Given
the similarity between proof-paradoxical cases and lottery scenarios, a number of
leading epistemologists have attempted to explain the inadequacy of statistical
evidence in the law with recourse to epistemic properties typically thought to be
absent in lottery cases.17 Some explanations appeal directly to the absence of
knowledge (e.g. Moss 2016; forthcoming, Blome-Tillmann 2017, Littlejohn 2018)
or certain types of justiﬁcation (e.g. Smith’s 2018 normic theory of justiﬁcation),
while others appeal to epistemic properties that have been defended as conditions
for having knowledge or justiﬁcation such as: sensitivity (e.g. Enoch et al. 2012),
safety(Pritchard2015;2018,Pardo2018),ortheeliminationofrelevantalternative
error-possibilities(Gardiner2020).Withinthiswork,theanalogywithlotterycases
is often an explicit part of the argumentation.18
Totheextentthatepistemicapproachesaremotivatedbyaguidinganalogywith
lottery cases, they appear to face a difﬁcult task to legitimise sanction in statistical
conjunction cases.
Firstly, epistemic approaches obviously cannot appeal to the fact that mistakes
are less likely in statistical conjunction cases. After all, from the perspective of
epistemologicaltheorising,itisnotusuallytakentomatterifthechanceofwinning
a lotteryis merely low or extremely low.19 For example, whethera lottery has 100
tickets or 1,000,000 tickets is not often supposed to make a difference when it
comes to the various epistemic properties found in diagnoses of the impotence of
17 SeeBackes(2019)foradiscussionoftheotherdirection:usinglegalcasesasevidencefortheoriesin
epistemology.
18 Inadditiontothepaperscitedin-text,seeBuchak(2014)foranearlyinﬂuentialendorsementofthis
analogy.
19 Forempiricalstudyofattitudestowardslotterypropositionsunderdifferentconditions,seeEbertetal.
(2018).
123L.D.Ross
statistical evidence: even the evidence provided by a truly massive lottery will not
make the belief that one has a losing ticket sensitive (one would have the same
belief even if one had a winning ticket), safe (there is a close counterfactual
possibility in which one has won), it will not eliminate a salient error-possibility
(i.e.thatonehasawinningticket),andnorwillitprovidenormicjustiﬁcationtothe
beliefthatonehasalosingticket(itwouldnotbeabnormalinthesenseofrequiring
special explanation if one had a winning ticket). And, standardly, nor would one
know that one had a losing ticket just by playing a very large lottery.
A more plausible response would emphasise the epistemic signiﬁcance of there
beingmorethanonesourceofevidenceinthestatisticalconjunctioncases.Thereis,
after all, no doubt that having more than one source of evidence is typically an
epistemically good-making feature of a belief. However, as we are stipulating that
the additional evidence remains purely statistical, it is in fact no easy task for
epistemic views to explain why there is a qualitative difference between cases
involving one inculpatory statistic and multiple inculpatory statistics. To see this,
consider that is possible to derive familiar epistemic results about the absence of
knowledge—and all of the other epistemic properties mentioned—by considering
scenariosinvolving multiple lotteries(i.e. Ido notknow thatI won’t win lottery1,
lottery 2, or lottery 3). As John Hawthorne explains, our intuitions about multiple
lotteriesmayinitiallydifferfromthosewehaveaboutmorefamiliarcasesinvolving
asinglelottery,butthesearehardtodefendwhensubjectedtosustainedreﬂection:
It is relatively easy to get ourselves in the frame of mind where we reckon
ourselvestoknowthatwewillnotwintheNewYorkStatelotteryeachofthe
nextthirtyyears(evenifweexpecttobuyaticketeachyear).Justaskpeople.
They will happily claim to know that that will not happen. Now of course,
with a little cognitive effort, that attitude can be disrupted. Suppose, using
normal statistical calculations, the chance of winning the New York Lottery
eachofthenextthirtyyearswas1inn.Wemightpointouttosomeonethatif
he had a ticket in one great big lottery with n tickets, he would not reckon
himselfabletoknowhewouldloseinthatcase.Intuitionswouldthenswitch.
[Hawthorne 2003: 20]
Hawthorne’s point can be seen even more clearly if we compare huge single
lotteries with repeated iterations of smaller lotteries. It would be puzzling, if not
implausible, if our best epistemological theory had the result that we cannot gain
(say) knowledge that we have lost a lottery involving ten million players, but
thought that we could know that we have lost three consecutive lotteries each only
involving100players.Enteringmultiplelotteriesofdifferingsizesdoesprovideus
with different sources of statistical evidence concerning lottery-relevant proposi-
tionssuchas‘Iwillneverwinthelottery’or‘Iwon’tbeamillionairenextFriday’.
However,fromtheepistemicperspective,whetherwehaveenteredonesinglelarge
lottery, or multiple lotteries, seems to amount to a distinction without a difference.
The apparent epistemic insigniﬁcance of distributing the statistical chance of error
among multiple events seems to remain true even if we imagine that these chancy
eventsaresomewhatdifferentfromeachother—e.g.‘lottery1’isanationallottery,
‘lottery 2’ is the church rafﬂe, and ‘lottery 3’ is a workplace drawing of lots.
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
The combination of these two issues—(i) that the size of the lottery does not
explain the absence of various epistemic properties in lottery beliefs, and (ii) the
apparent insigniﬁcance of whether the statistical evidence is contained within one
source or split into multiple sources—makes the statistical conjunctions cases a
particularly sharp puzzle for epistemic diagnoses of the proof paradox insofar as
they are motivated by the guiding comparison with lottery cases.
However, it may be the case that some epistemic theories have greater potential
to explain the difference between single and multiple-source statistical evidence
cases than others. For example, some approaches, such as the sensitivity theory,
seem to have little ﬂexibility in attempting to treat the cases differently. The
sensitivitytheoryrequiresthatweonlyissueverdictsonthebasisofevidencethatis
suchthatwewouldnothaveissuedtheverdicthaditbeenmistaken.Itisdifﬁcultto
see how this condition could be met in, for example, Blue Bus3. Consider the
possibility that a Red Bus had in fact caused the accident: the evidence would
remainunchanged,insensitivetothetruth,andstilloverwhelminglyfavourholding
the Blue Company liable. Other theories involve a formal apparatus that allows
them more room to manoeuvre. For instance, the normic justiﬁcation and safety
theories draw on a world-ranking framework in which there is no technical
impossibility in claiming that while a verdict based on one piece of statistical
evidenceisunsafeornormicallysupported,averdictbasedontwo(ormore)pieces
of evidence is safe ornormically supported.Thedifﬁculty for these theories is that
theywouldnotregardtheanalogousbeliefina‘multiplelottery’scenariotobesafe
or normically supported. What we are owed is an explanation for why the legal
cases outlined in this paper are epistemically different from multiple lottery cases,
when the evidence involved in each seems to be fundamentally very similar.
Insum,allepistemictheoriesseemtostrugglewithstatisticalconjunctioncases.
But some may have more theoretical resources with which to respond than others.
Giventhattherivaltheorieshavehithertobeenattemptingtoexplainthesamedata-
points—andallclaimtobeabletodoso—considering statisticalconjunction cases
will be a useful spur to further adjudicate between the merits of competing
epistemic theories.
4.2 Approaches concerning morality and justice
Diagnoses of the proof paradox concerning morality and justice can be usefully
separated into backwards and forward-looking theories.
Let’s begin with the former, the backwards-looking views, which roughly
suggest that relying on bare statistics violate certain duties that we have to
defending parties. These theories, while insightful relative to certain scenarios, do
not help us tell apart regular cases from those involving statistical conjunctions.
One inﬂuential version of a backwards-looking view originated in the work of
DavidWasserman,arguingthatproof-paradoxicalcasesfailtorespecttheautonomy
of the defending party.20 Wasserman’s diagnosis was originally aimed at the
20 Wasserman’sautonomyviewhasbeenusefullycritiquedanddevelopedbyPundik(2008).
123L.D.Ross
Gatecrasher scenario, which was among the earliest proof-paradoxical cases
discussed by legal scholars. On Wasserman’s account, treating the individual
attendeesimplyasamemberofareference-class‘‘ignoresthedefendant’scapacity
todivergefromhisassociatesorfromhispast,therebydemeaninghisindividuality
and autonomy’’ (Wasserman 1992: 942–3). Appealing to autonomy is one way to
vindicate the aversion to treating defending parties simply as members of a
reference-class; it would be more autonomy-respecting to use evidence that is, in
some way, individualised to the conduct of the person in question.
It is far from clear whether the autonomy-based story provides a plausible
account of the intuitive reluctance to sanction in the unadorned Blue Bus case. For
instance, as is pointed out in Pundik (2008: 318), in such cases we bring a legal
claim against the bus company rather than an individual driver. Given that the
company autonomously chose to run n number of buses on a given route, it is
unclear as to how holding them liable on the basis of statistics speaking to their
market-sharefailstotreatthecompanyasanautonomousagent.However,ifsucha
verdict does fail torespect the autonomy of the buscompany,then it is hard tosee
how this failure would not also be a feature of attributing liability in the more
compelling Blue Bus3 scenario. After all, by using statistical information about the
frequency of certain tyres and hubcaps, we also rely on a reference-class. As such,
whichever way the proponent of an autonomy-theory goes on the Blue Bus case,
theylackaclearwaytodistinguishthestandardversionfromthemorecompelling
statistical conjunction variant.
A second type of backwards-looking view, due to Alexander Nunn, argues that
we can explain our reluctance to sanction in proof-paradoxical cases by properly
considering what is demanded by the right of due process.21 On Nunn’s account, a
central prohibitionthatdueprocess requirescompatibilityintheargumentsusedto
justify imposing sanctions. To make this concrete, consider the prospect of
convicting two separate persons of a ‘lone gunman’ crime. Even if the evidence
against the two was, for whatever reason, compelling, there would be something
perverse aboutconvictingbothofthem.Nunn’sdiagnosisisthattheperversitylies
inusingmutuallyincompatibletheories—afterall,bothcouldn’thavebeenthelone
gunman—to convict. The novelty of Nunn’s approach is to go further and extend
this idea to proof-paradoxical cases, suggesting that the perverse results of a
(hypothetical) simultaneous conviction of the entire inculpated population explains
why we ought not rely on bare statistics in certain cases. Nunn writes:
[I]fthesamenakedstatisticalevidencecouldbeusedtoconvictanyrandomly
selectedmemberofapopulation,andthesimultaneousconvictionoftheentire
population would constitute a due process violation (due to the mutually
exclusive nature of the crime) then the conviction of even one of those
individuals constitutes a due process violation. [Nunn 2015: 1427]
However, as Nunn himself states, the due process defence is unavailable in all
proof-paradoxicalcases.Forexample,Nunnexplicitlyconcedesthathisdueprocess
21 Nunn(2015:1418–1421).
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
defence cannot explain what is problematic about sanction in the unadorned Blue
Buscase.ThisisbecausethereisnoguaranteeoferrorifweimagineiteratedBlue
Bus cases—there is no factual impossibility (only sheer improbability) in the
prospect of being correct every single time if we held a Blue Bus responsible for
thousands of accidents on the basis of statistical evidence alone. Hence, as the due
processdefencecannotexplainwhywegoawryintheregularBlueBuscase,itwill
not help us discern the difference between it and those cases involving statistical
conjunctions—there is equally no guarantee of error in the prospect of iterated
sanction in cases such as Blue Bus3.
Before moving on I should be clear that both of these backwards-looking
approaches may well be good diagnoses of speciﬁc scenarios.22 However, neither
Wasserman nor Nunn’s view provides an explanation for what is different about
cases involving statistical conjunctions from regular proof-paradoxical scenarios.
Let’s move on to forward-looking theories. The best known forward-looking
theory, developed by Enoch et al. (2012), and the one on which I focus, appeals to
the role of legal incentives.23 It is nearly platitudinous that a central role for both
civil and criminal law is to incentivise and disincentivise different types of
behaviour. From this observation, it is natural to suppose that we can consider the
proper verdicts in proof-paradoxical scenarios in light of their (dis)incentivising
effects.24
To illustrate the incentive approach, consider the Gatecrasher case. The
incentive-based approach enjoins us to ask whether the following biconditional is
true:‘onlyifIgatecrash,willIbesanctionedforgatecrashing’.Ifbarestatisticsare
enoughtocarrytheday,thiscomesoutfalse—theattendeewillbepunished,given
the existence of enough gatecrashers in the audience, regardless of whether they
gatecrash or not. This incentivise structure is perverse insofar as rules against
gatecrashing should disincentivise people from doing it. A similar story could be
toldabouttheBlueBuscase:werethecompaniesinvolvedawareoftheirrespective
market-share, they would be aware that their chance of being held liable in certain
cases would be unrelated to their actual conduct.
Whatdoestheincentiveviewsayaboutcasesinvolvingstatisticalconjunctions?
In a separate paper, Enoch and Fisher (2015) argue that their incentive-based
approach vindicates the prevailing legal practice of allowing convictions on the
basis of bare DNA evidence but rightly rejects relying on other types of naked
statistics.So,theirview,atleastbytheirownlights,promisestolicensesanctionin
22 Althoughathoughtimplicitinmuchoftherecentphilosophicalliteratureseemstobethatprovidinga
uniﬁedexplanationcoveringallproof-paradoxicalcasesisadesideratuminsofarasthecasesallseem
structurallysimilar,forourpurposesweneedexpressnoviewonwhetherthisiscorrect.
23 Forfurtherdevelopmentofthisview,seeEnochandFischer(2015)andEnochandSpectre(2019).
24 A technical note: Enoch, Spectre and Fisher’s incentive view is a hybrid view that combines an
epistemicconditionconcerningsensitivitywithforward-lookingconsiderationtodowithincentives.Ina
nutshell,theideaisasfollows:thereasonthatthelawshouldcareaboutmakingepistemicallysensitive
judgements—theyexplicitlywarnagainstepistemic‘fetishism’—isbecauseitpromotestherightsortof
legalincentives.Elsewhere,EnochandSpectre(2019)clarifythattheincentivecomponentoftheviewis
central and the epistemic component peripheral—if another epistemic condition turned out to better
capturethecases,thenitshouldbesubstitutedforsensitivity.
123L.D.Ross
the Prisoners & DNA case. However, what about the civil law cases? Take a
momenttoreconsiderBlueBus3.Clearlyitisconceivable,giventhatthereareonly
twocompaniescompetingforagivenlocale,thatthepartiesmaybeaware—ifonly
in very general terms—of which companies tend to use which brand of tyres and
hubcaps.Supposethattheyweresoaware.Ifthiswerethecase,thenthescenariois
in fact similar to the unadorned Blue Bus case insofar as the companies involved
could be aware that, in a certain class of case, their chance of being held liable
wouldbeunrelatedtotheiractualconduct.Thiswouldmeanthattheincentive-view
cannotdifferentiatetheunconvincingBlueBuscasefromthestatisticalconjunction
variant either.
ThenaturalresponseisthatBlueBus3issimplysucharecherche´casethat,forall
practical purposes, it has no incentivising or disincentivising effect. While this is
plausibleasfarasitgoes,relyingonthisresponsebegsthefollowingquestion:ifwe
can disregard scenarios such as Blue Bus3 because they are marginal, should we
reallyaccepttheideathattheunadornedBlueBuscaseissufﬁcientlycommonsoas
to have a substantial incentive-changing effect? Certainly, standard rules about
negligent driving incentivise companies to avoid negligence on the pain of
sanction—bus companies should encourage their employees to drive carefully to
avoid being held liable for accidents. However, do we think that this general
incentivisingeffectisreallydisruptedbythepossibilityofproof-paradoxicalcases?
I am sceptical. We can put the worry as a choice between two options, neither of
which is immediately promising for explaining what is different about statistical
conjunction cases. Either the relevance of incentives is purely theoretical—i.e. not
contingent on empirical assumptions about whether the potential for perverse
incentive-schemes actually has any substantial behavioural effect—in which case
BlueBusandBlueBus3areonparandtheviewcan’tdistinguishbetweenthem.Or
the relevance of incentives is empirical and must be plausibly linked to the actual
psychologyofactors intherelevantscenarios,e.g.thepsychologyofbuscompany
CEOsdecidingonsafetystandards,—inwhichcaseitisdoubtfulthatthepossibility
of any proof-paradoxical case really has any substantive effect on to how agents
tend to act.25 This is not a knock-down argument against the incentive view, but it
shows that itfacessomedifﬁcultquestions—and requires further elaboration—ifit
is to accommodate cases involving statistical conjunctions.
4.3 Likelihood theory
The likelihood theory is a revisionary approach to legal proof that, according to its
proponents, has the beneﬁt of explaining our reluctance to sanction in unadorned
proof-paradoxical scenarios. The central claim of the likelihood theory is we often
fall prey a speciﬁc error when thinking about legal proof: namely, we focus on the
absoluteprobabilitiesofsomethingoccurringratherthanlookingatthecomparative
25 Thisisnottosaythatarefusaltorelyonbarestatisticsisneversigniﬁcantfromtheperspectiveof
incentives.Forexample,itplausiblymattersforincentivisingcertainbehaviourwhetherornotwecanuse
epidemiological statistics to establish employer liabilityfor negligentlycaused diseases that wouldbe
otherwiseimpossibletoprove.SeeRoss(ms)forfurtherdiscussion.
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
likelihoodofcompetingaccountsinlightoftheobservedevidence.26Refocusingon
comparativelikelihoodratherthanabsoluteprobabilitiesismorefaithfultotheway
thattrialsareconductedinpracticeinsofarasbothpartiestoalegaldisputetypically
advance their own version of events—the job of the fact-ﬁnder is to compare the
relative plausibility of the competing claims. The applicability of the likelihood
theoryiseasiesttoseewithrespecttothecivil‘balanceofprobabilities’standardof
proof: a claim will be proven on the likelihood approach to proof when, given the
observedevidence,itissimplycomparativelymorelikelythantheopposingclaim.
(A formal statement of the increased likelihood requirement applied to the civil
standardwouldrunasfollows:ﬁndforthepursueriffPr(E/H1)/Pr(E/H2)[1where
Eistheevidenceadduced,H1isthepursuer’sstory,andH2isthedefender’sstory).
How does the likelihood theory help us diagnose the reluctance to sanction in
standard proof-paradoxical cases? Take a concrete example, the Blue Bus case.
While absolute probabilities seem to favour holding the Blue Company liable,
suppose that we instead compare the comparative likelihood, given the cited
statisticalevidence,oftwocompetingaccounts:(i)thatitwasaBlueBus,(ii)thatit
wasaRedBus.Thestatisticalevidenceisequallycompatiblewitheitheraccount—
indeed,itwouldmakenodifferencewhatsoevertotheunderlyingstatisticswhether
(i) or (ii) obtained. So, according to proponents of the likelihood theory of proof,
merely statistical evidence (compared with, say, an eye-witness report) does not
make any substantial difference to the comparative likelihood of either account.
Thereismuchthatisinsightfulinthelikelihoodapproach,butitdoesnotseemto
accommodate the thought that sanction is acceptable in cases involving statistical
conjunctions.For,supposethattheBlue Companylawyer advancedaveryspeciﬁc
rebuttal in the Blue Bus3 scenario: viz. they suggest that the bus that caused the
crash was a Red Company bus that: (1) was on the route at the time, (2) had the
implicatedhubcap,and(3)hadtheimplicatedtypeoftyres.Indeed,thisisprecisely
the account—perhaps the only tenable rebuttal—that a defending lawyer would
advance.Inthiscase,theobservedevidenceisjustascompatiblewiththataccount
as it is with the alternative account on which it was a Blue Bus with each of the
aforementionedproperties. Thelikelihood theory thus predicts thatthere is no case
against the Blue Company even in cases involving multiple sources of statistical
evidence so long as a speciﬁc account is available consistent with the statistical
evidence. The same feature of the likelihood theory that enables it to deal with
familiar proof-paradoxical scenarios render it unable to make accommodation for
similar cases involving statistical conjunctions.
4.4 Phase change theory
A ﬁnal theory, which I call ‘phase change’ theory after a paper due to Cheng and
Nunn (2016), argues that statistical evidence involving very high probabilities is
26 SeeworkduetoCheng(2012)and,morerecently,inaslightlydifferentvein,bySullivan(2019).I
focusonCheng’sapproachinthissection.
123L.D.Ross
different in kind from the much shorter odds found in the unadorned Prisoners,
Gatecrasher, and Blue Bus cases.
Cheng and Nunn develop a version of the phase change theory which is neither
purely psychological nor predicated on any particular theory of legal proof.27
Rather, they show that highly probabilifying evidence such a DNA match is
mathematically different from regular proof-paradoxical cases: when we perform
logistic regression on such evidence we ﬁnd that, as the chance of an incorrect
matchtransitionsfrom1intenmillionto1in100millionandbelow,thechanceof
error within a given population sharply diminishes. On their view, ‘‘[this] phase
change justiﬁes treating DNA as different in kind.’’28
Let’s accept, for sake of discussion, Cheng and Nunn’s mathematical assump-
tions: at around 1 in ten million chance of error, probabilifying evidence starts to
undergoaqualitativechangethatdistinguishesitfromstatisticalevidenceinvolving
shorter odds. The ‘phase change’ theory deals straightforwardly with criminal law
statisticalconjunctioncasesinvolvingcertaintypesofforensicevidence,becauseit
says that reliance on statistical evidence involving such long odds as we ﬁnd in
DNA proﬁling cases are different in kind from more familiar proof-paradoxical
cases where the odds of error are only in the order of 1/100. However, the phase
change theory does not seem to capture the fact that it seems intuitively
acceptable to sanction in the civil law statistical conjunction cases discussed
earlier. Suppose we take the chance of a ‘random match’ in Blue Bus3 to be the
chanceofagivenbushappeningtobeaRedCompanybus,operatingonthegiven
route, with the implicated tyres, and the implicated hubcaps. The chance of this
occurringisonlyintheorderof1/4000.29WhilethechanceoferrorinBlueBus3is
certainlymuchlowerthanintheunadornedBlueBuscase,itisnowherenearthe1
in ten million required for the hypothesised ‘phase change’. As such, the phase
change theory, although a compelling way to legitimise DNA cases and perhaps
other types of forensic evidence, cannot explain the difference between unadorned
proof-paradoxicalcasesandthoseinvolvingstatisticalconjunctionsbelowthephase
change threshold.
5 Error and storytelling
Let’sbrieﬂyrecap.Thereisanentrenchedhostilitytobasinglegalverdictsonbare
statisticswithinthephilosophicaland(settingasideDNAevidence)legalliterature.
This paper has explored cases involving multiple sources of statistical evidence.
Thesecasesseemtoprovideacompellingbasisforacivilﬁndingofliabilityand,at
leastwhensomeoftheevidenceisforensic,foracriminalconviction.Ihaveargued
that four prominent types of theory struggle to explain the relevant difference
27 MythankstoEdwardChengforclariﬁcatorycorrespondence.
28 2016:117.
29 1/4(thechanceofaredbusontheroute)*5/100(thechanceofaredbushavingX)*(2/100)the
chanceofaredbushavingY).
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
between cases of multiple-source statistical evidence and more familiar proof-
paradoxical scenarios.
I want to close by discussing a ﬁnal strategy that we might use to explain the
difference between the two types of case discussed in this paper: namely, to reject
the intuitions to the effect that statistical conjunction cases are relevantly different
from regular proof-paradoxical scenarios. Indeed, I think that we may be able to
offerasortoferrortheoryabouttheapparentdifferenceinourintuitions.However,
soIwillclaim,ifweacceptthiserrortheory,thisraisesanevenmorefundamental
worry:itgivesusreasontodoubtourintuitionsabouttheoriginalproof-paradoxical
scenarios too.
A widely discussed paradigm concerning the evaluation of legal evidence is
Pennington and Hastie’s ‘story model’.30 The story model, focusing on how jurors
make decisions, is an empirically supported hypothesis that supposes legal fact-
ﬁndingtobedrivenbyanexerciseinnarrativeconstruction.Accordingtothestory
model,jurorsattemptto‘‘imposeanarrativestoryorganizationontrialinformation,
in which causal and intentional relations between events are central.’’31 In a
nutshell,legalfact-ﬁnderslookforstoriesthatﬁttheevidence.Whenwecanreadily
construct a narrative on the basis of evidence adduced, where necessary drawing
supplementary causal inferences in order to do, and when that story is inculpatory,
weareprimedtoﬁndinfavourofsanctioningthedefendingparty.Inarelatedand
complementary stream of research, psychologists who have examined the ‘Wells’
effect’—the phenomenon of juror reluctance to rely on bare statistics, named after
Gary Wells’ and collaborators’ initial study—have tested different psychological
explanations for this reluctance. One explanation appeals to ‘ease of simulation’:
legal fact-ﬁnders prefer sanctioning on the basis of non-statistical evidence to
statistical evidence because the former makes it more demanding to construct
mental scenarios indicating innocence, and vice versa concerning guilt.32 For
example, a descriptive eye-witness is more evocative than a mere statistical report,
and it is harder to imagine scenarios inconsistent with an eye-witness account than
with a bare statistical report.
This empirical research naturally suggests a reason for why cases involving
statistical conjunctions seem more compelling to us, namely because: (i) they
generate an easy-to-simulate inculpatory narrative in the mind of the assessor, and
(ii) they make it more demanding to simulate an exculpatory narrative. Let me
explain.
Regularproof-paradoxicalcases are generally lacking innarrativestructure:e.g.
they simply tell us that it was likely that the bus was blue, or that the gatecrasher
lacked a ticket, and that is all there is to it. Conversely, the extra complexity of
statistical conjunction cases makes them more evocative, and require us to take
morestepstoimaginethatthedefendingpartywasnotatfault.TakeBlueBus3.In
30 SeePenningtonandHastie(1991,1992,1993)forarepresentativesampleofpapersoutliningboththe
theoreticalandempiricalsupportforthestorymodel.
31 Ibid.(1992:189).
32 SeeWells(1992)fortheoriginalstudyandNeidermeieretal.(1999)forfurtherempiricalworkin
supportoftheeaseofsimulationhypothesis.
123L.D.Ross
theversiondiscussed,thereisstatisticalevidenceconcerningnotonlythefrequency
ofbusesonaroute,butalsoconcerningahubcapfoundatthescene,andtyremarks
foundontheroad.Thisisripefortheimpositionofanarrativestructure;itiseasyto
imagine a blue bus causing a crash, that bus making marks on the road, and a
hubcap belonging to that bus coming off and rolling into the bushes. It is easy to
imagineanexusofphysicalcausalitythatexplainsalloftheadducedevidencejust
by imposing a temporal narrative structure onto the evidence. Moreover, rejecting
thatnarrativetakesmorecognitiveeffortthantheoriginalBlueBuscase.Wemust
assume that not only has one improbable coincidence occurred, but three, or more,
atdifferentpointsinthestory.This,Ithink,makesforacentraldifferencebetween
cases involving statistical conjunctions and those involving only one source of
evidence. We treat the former as a compelling story, the rejection of which would
requiretheeffortfuladoptionofascepticalstanceatmultiplepointsofthenarrative.
This makes error seem like amuch moredistant possibility than incases involving
single-sourcestatisticalevidence,andprimesustoﬁndagainstthedefendingparty.
Thisamountstoanentirelypsychologicaldiagnosisofwhywearemoreinclined
to ﬁnd sanction acceptable in statistical conjunction cases. The harder question is
this: what is the normative relevance of this psychological account? I suggest that
ourpsychologicaldiagnosiscanfacilitateanargumentforasortoferrortheory,i.e.
theclaimthatourintuitionsaboutstatisticalconjunctioncasesshouldnotbetrusted.
Suppose we begin,naturally enough, from a veritistic perspective—what relevance
does narrative and ease of simulation have for getting to the truth? Certainty, the
ease of imposing narrative structure onto evidence and simulating an exculpatory
scenario can be a helpful heuristic for truth. The mind has a general facility for
discerning the plausible from the implausible. However, in other cases, the role of
evocativenarrativesingeneratingjudgementsofplausibilityandimplausibilitycan
amounttoacognitivebias.TaketheintuitiveshiftinessnotedbyHawthorneearlier,
thatpeopleareinitiallymoreinclinedtosaythattheyknowtheywon’twinmultiple
smaller lotteries but not that they won’t win a single giant lottery where the
probabilityofwinningisidenticaltowinningmultipletimesinarow.Theprospect
of winning the lottery multiple times in a row is an evocative and incredible-
sounding story—it appears implausible to the imagination, and involves accepting
that multiple incredible things will happen in a row. So, we are apt to discount the
possibility and reject the attribution of knowledge. But, from the perspective of
veritistic judgement, we should evidently not treat that possibility any differently
from the judgement about losing the single larger lottery. To do otherwise is to be
led astray by the imagination and fall prey to a type of bias. Framed this way, we
might worry that the same bias is manifesting itself when we ﬁnd statistical
conjunctioncasesmorepersuasivethanthoseinvolvingasinglesourceofevidence.
While these thoughts are somewhat preliminary, we can see the outlines of an
error theory that would recommend the following conclusion: to the extent that
intuitions about statistical conjunction cases differ from unadorned proof paradox-
ical scenarios, they should not be trusted—rather, if we are concerned with
accuracy,wewouldbebetteroffdiscountingthefactthatthestatisticalevidenceis
dispersed over multiple sources. If we accepted such a theory, then one might
suppose that the theories discussed earlier in the paper actually face no issues with
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
statistical conjunction cases. Indeed, we might suppose that it is actually a mark in
theirfavouriftheytreatsingleandmultiple-sourcebarestatisticsonpar.According
tothiserrortheory,onceweunderstandtheaetiologyoftheintuitionsinvolved,we
should not be perturbed about refusing to sanction even in cases involving the
conjunction of many different types of statistical evidence.
However, this error theory is in fact double-edged. The same psychological
diagnosis that undermines intuitions about statistical conjunction cases can also
undermine intuitions about the original proof-paradoxical scenarios. A standard
lesson drawn from the proof paradox is that there is a disfavourable contrast
betweenbarestatisticalevidence(bad)andfamiliarnon-statisticalevidencesuchas
eye-witness testimony (good). It is easy to see why relying on the error theory
outlinedaboveisproblematicforthosewhowishtoupholdourintuitionsaboutthe
original proof paradox. Unlike bare single-source statistics, eye-witness accounts
are narratively rich and it is cognitively demanding to generate consistent
exculpatory accounts. The very same idea, that we should not allow the ease of
simulation heuristic to lead us astray when evaluating evidence from a veritistic
perspective, can also be used to call into question the disfavourable contrast
betweenstatisticalandnon-statisticalevidence.So,totheextentthatanerrortheory
canchallengeintuitionsaboutcasesinvolvingstatisticalconjunctions,theintuitions
about the original proof paradox are open to challenge on the same basis.
To close, it is worth pointing out that one might attempt to ﬁnd some
considerationthatcouldvindicatetreatingnarrativelyrichevidencedifferentlyeven
ifourintuitionsaboutitaredrivenbyapotentiallybias-inducingheuristic.Oneeasy
but perhaps not altogether satisfying reason for the law to prefer narratively rich
evidence follows from the importance ofthe perception offairnessin the law. One
role for any legal system is to inspire public conﬁdence in its workings. This
explains, for example, why cases can be overturned for being decided in an
apparently biased way even if it is accepted that there was in fact no actual bias
tainting the decision.33 If we can simply note that a normal observer does ﬁnd
sanction reasonable in statistical conjunction cases but not in unadorned proof-
paradoxicalscenarios,thenthiscreatesitsownreasontotreatthecasesdifferently.
Appearances matter in the law, even if we cannot provide an underlying theory to
vindicate the difference between the unadorned proof paradoxical cases and those
involving statistical conjunctions. This is perhaps a somewhat conservative and
quietistresponsetothepuzzleoutlinedinthispaper.Ifwewantabettersolution,we
must throw down the gauntlet to those hostile to bare statistics—what is different
about cases involving multiple sources of statistical evidence?34
33 One of the most striking examples in modern times is R v Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary
Magistrate,expartePinochetUgarte(No2)[2000]1AC147.TheextraditionofAugustoPinochetfrom
theUnitedKingdomtoSpainwassetasidebecausethespouseofoneofthejudgeshadlinkstoAmnesty
International,anintervenerinthecase.
34 Anonymous reviewers and Dario Mortini provided instructive written feedback on this paper—my
thankstothem.
123L.D.Ross
OpenAccess ThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,
whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongas
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commonslicence,andindicateifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdpartymaterialinthis
articleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicence,unlessindicatedotherwiseinacreditline
tothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicenceandyourintended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Backes, M. (2019). Epistemology and the law: Why there is no epistemic mileage in legal cases.
PhilosophicalStudies.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-019-01337-6.
Blome-Tillmann,M.(2017).‘Morelikelythannot’—Knowledgeﬁrstandtheroleofstatisticalevidence
incourtsoflaw.InG.Carter&B.W.Jarvis(Eds.),Knowledgeﬁrst—Approachesinepistemology
andmind(pp.278–292).Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress.
Blome-Tillmann,M. (forthcoming). Statisticalevidence, normalcy, andthe gatecrasher paradox. Mind
129(514),563–578.
Bolinger,R.J.(2018).Therationalimpermissibilityofacceptingracialgeneralizations.Synthese.https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-1809-5.
Buchak,L.(2014).Belief,credence,andnorms.PhilosophicalStudies,169(2),1–27.
Cheng,E.K.(2012).Reconceptualizingtheburdenofproof.YaleLJ,122,1254.
Cheng,E.K.,&Nunn,G.A.(2016).DNA,BlueBus,andphasechanges.TheInternationalJournalof
Evidence&Proof,20(2),112–120.
Cohen,L.J.(1977).TheProbableandtheProvable.Oxford:ClarendonPress.
Di Bello, M. (2019). Trial by statistics: Is a high probability of guilt enough to convict? Mind, 128,
1045–1084.
Di Bello, M. (forthcoming). Proof Paradoxes and Normic Support: Socializing or Relativizing?Mind
fzz021.
Di Bello, M., & O’Neil, C. (2020). Proﬁle evidence, fairness, and the risks of mistaken convictions.
Ethics,130(2),147–178.
Ebert, P. A., Smith, M., & Durbach, I. (2018). Lottery judgments: A philosophical and experimental
study.PhilosophicalPsychology,31(1),110–138.
Enoch, D., Spectre, L., & Fisher, T. (2012). Statistical evidence, sensitivity, and the legal value of
knowledge.Philosophy&PublicAffairs,40(3),197–224.
Enoch, D., Spectre, L., & Fisher, T. (2015). Sense and ‘sensitivity’: Epistemic and instrumental
approachestostatisticalevidence.StanfordLawReview,67,557.
Enoch,D.,Spectre,L.,&Fisher,T.(2019).Sensitivity,safety,andthelaw:ReplytoPardo.LegalTheory,
25,178–199.
Evett,I.,&Williams,R.(2015).AreviewofthesixteenpointﬁngerprintstandardinEnglandandWales.
JournalofForensicIdentiﬁcation,65(4),557–580.
Gardiner,G.(2018).Legalburdensofproofandstatisticalevidence.InD.Coady&J.Chase(Eds.),The
Routledgehandbookofappliedepistemology.London,England:Routledge.
Gardiner, G. (2020). The reasonable and the relevant: Legal standards of proof. Philosophy & Public
Affairs,47,288–318.
Haack, S. (2014). Evidence matters: Science, proof, and truth in the law. New York: Cambridge
UniversityPress.
Hawthorne,J.(2003).Knowledgeandlotteries.Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress.
Hedden, B., & Colyvan, M. (2019). Legal probabilism: A qualiﬁed defence. Journal of Political
Philosophy,27,448–468.
Krauss,S.(2020).Againsttheallegedinsufﬁciencyofstatisticalevidence.FloridaStateUniversityLaw
Review,47.https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440138.
123Legalproofandstatisticalconjunctions
Littlejohn,C.(2018).Truth,knowledge,andthestandardofproofincriminallaw.Synthese.https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11229-017-1608-4.
Moss,S.(2016).Probabilisticknowledge.Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress.
Moss,S.(forthcoming).Knowledgeandlegalproof.InOxfordstudiesinepistemology(Vol.7).Oxford:
OxfordUniversityPress.
Niedermeier,K.,Kerr,N.,&Messe,L.(1999).Jurors’useofnakedstatisticalevidence:Exploringbases
andimplicationsoftheWellseffect.JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology,76(4),533–542.
Nunn, A. (2015). The incompatibility of due process and naked statistical evidence. Vanderbilt Law
Review,68(5),1407.
Papineau,D.(2020).Thedisvalueofknowledge.Synthese.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02405-4.
Pardo,M.S.(2018).Safetyvs.sensitivity:Possibleworldsandthelawofevidence.LegalTheory,24,
50–75.
Pardo,M.S.(2019).Theparadoxesoflegalproof:Acriticalguide.BostonUniversityLawReview,Vol.
99,2019;UofAlabamaLegalStudiesResearchPaperNo.3293023.
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1991). A cognitive theory of juror decision making: The story model.
CardozoLawReview,13,519.
Pennington,N.,&Hastie,R.(1992).Explainingtheevidence:Testsofthestorymodelforjurordecision
making.JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology,62(2),189–206.
Pennington,N.,&Hastie,R.(1993).Thestorymodelforjurordecisionmaking.InR.Hastie(Ed.),Inside
thejuror:Thepsychologyofjurordecisionmaking(pp.192–221).,Cambridgeseriesonjudgment
anddecisionmakingCambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Pritchard,D.(2015).Risk.Metaphilosophy,46(3),436–461.
Pritchard, D. (2018). Legal risk, legal evidence and the arithmetic of criminal justice. Jurisprudence,
46(3),436–461.
Pundik, A. (2008). Statistical evidence and individual litigants: A reconsideration of Wasserman’s
argumentfromautonomy.TheInternationalJournalofEvidence&Proof,12(4),303–324.
Redmayne,M.(2008).Exploringtheproofparadoxes.LegalTheory,14(4),281–309.
Ross,L.D.(2020a).Recentworkontheproofparadox.PhilosophyCompass.https://doi.org/10.1111/
phc3.12667.
Ross,L.D.(2020b).Rehabilitatingstatisticalevidence.PhilosPhenomenolRes.https://doi.org/10.1111/
phpr.12622.
Roth,A.(2010).Safetyinnumbers—DecidingwhenDNAaloneisenoughtoconvict.NYULawReview,
85,1130.
Smith,M.(2016).Betweenprobabilityandcertainty:Whatjustiﬁesbelief.Oxford:OxfordUniversity
Press.
Smith, M. (2018). When does evidence sufﬁce for conviction? Mind. https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/
fzx026.
Smith, M. (2020). Against legal probabilism. In J. Robson & Z. Hoskins (Eds.), Truth and trial.
Abingdon:Routledge.
Sullivan,S.P.(2019).Alikelihoodstory:Thetheoryoflegalfact-ﬁnding.UniversityofColoradoLaw
Review,90,1.
Tribe,L.(1971).Trialbymathematics:Precisionandritualinthelegalprocess.HarvardLawReview,
84(6),1329–1393.
Wasserman,D.T.(1992).Themoralityofstatisticalproofandtheriskofmistakenliability’.Cardozo
LawReview,13,935.
Wells,G.L.(1992).Nakedstatisticalevidenceofliability:Issubjectiveprobabilityenough?Journalof
PersonalityandSocialPsychology,62,739–752.
Williamson,T.(2000).Knowledgeanditslimits.Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress.
Zabell,S.L.(2005).Fingerprintevidence.JournalofLawandPolicy,13(1),143–179.
Zhu, Y., Dass, S. C., & Jain, A. K. (2007). Statistical models for assessing the individuality of
ﬁngerprints.IEEETransactionsonInformationForensicsandSecurity,2(3),391–401.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
mapsandinstitutionalafﬁliations.
123