Pre-print book chapter, to be published in: 
Analysing Organised Crime, Financial Crime and Criminal Justice: Theoretical Concepts and 
Challenges, Routledge Spring 2021 
 
 
Unexplained Wealth Orders and the Right Not To Self-Incriminate 
Dr Marnie Lovejoy1 
Introduction 
In April 2016, shortly after the Panama Papers exposed the dubious dealings of the offshore finance 
industry and its links to the UK2, the government released the Action Plan for anti-money laundering 
and counter-terrorist finance.3 The Action Plan announced the need to create: 
“aggressive  new  legal  powers  (…)  to  enable  the  relentless  disruption  of 
criminals and terrorists”.4 
These aggressive legal powers include Unexplained Wealth Orders (UWOs), which were introduced to 
the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 through the Criminal Finances Act 2017.5 The aim of UWOs is to 
facilitate the recovery of illicit assets, where the authorities are unable to use other freezing or 
recovery tools because of their inability to obtain evidence.6 UWOs are an instrument of compulsion. 
They compel a person to provide information about the origin of targeted assets, in cases where the 
court suspects the value of the assets to be disproportionate to the person’s known legitimate 
income.7 To lie or to give misleading statements under this compulsion is a criminal offence8 and non-
compliance results in the legal presumption that the assets are recoverable in civil proceedings.9 The 
design of this new legal instrument follows an international trend to target criminal assets in rem 
rather than prosecute criminal conduct in personam.10 However, such instruments are controversial. 
They  are  intrusive  and  circumvent  procedural  safeguards  commonly  applicable  in  criminal 
proceedings.11 The common argument that such safeguards should not apply to these modern 
                                                           
 Principal Lecturer, Associate Head, Portsmouth Law School, University of Portsmouth. 
2 International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, ‘The Panama Papers: Exposing the Rogue Offshore 
Finance Industry’ < https://www.icij.org/investigations/panama-papers/> accessed 17 August 2020. 
3 Home Office and HM Treasury, ‘Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance’ (Home 
Office/HM Treasury 2016). 
4 ibid, 3. 
5 Proceeds of Crime Act, ss 362A-326I (England, Wales and Norther Ireland); Proceeds of Crime Act 
(investigations: Scotland), ss 326A-326I (Scotland). 
6 Explanatory Notes to the Criminal Finances Act, paras 12-13.  
7 Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s 362B(3). 
8 ibid, s 362E. 
9 ibid, s 362C(2); civil recovery proceedings are covered in Part 5 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 and are 
based on the fact that assets originate from unlawful conduct. 
10 For example: Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group on Asset Recovery, ‘Model Provisions on In 
Rem Forfeiture’ (24 August 2011); Swiss Federal Law on freezing and recovering illicit assets of politically 
exposed persons, SR 161.1.; European Commission, ‘Commission staff working document,  
Analysis of non-conviction based confiscation measures in the European Union’ (12 April 2019). 
11 J Hendry and C King, ‘How far is too far? Theorising non-conviction-based asset forfeiture’ 11 (2015) IJLC 
396, 406; C King, ‘Using civil processes in pursuit of criminal law objectives: a case study of non-conviction-
based asset forfeiture’ 16 (2012) IJEP 337 f.  instruments because they are tools of administrative or civil law, is not entirely convincing considering 
the criminal law connotation of the issue as well as the severe potential consequences for the affected 
person.12 The design and application of UWOs appears, at least prima facie, to infringe several fair trial 
guarantees: the presumption of innocence, the principle of legality, the principle of equality of arms 
and as an instrument of coercive compulsion certainly the right not to self-incriminate.13 
This chapter will focus on last principle of the above. The right not to self-incriminate, if indeed 
applicable in UWO proceedings, could be violated at various stages. Firstly, the fact that a person is 
compelled under threat of a fine or imprisonment to provide potentially incriminating information is 
per se problematic.  Secondly, questions will arise in relation to the use of information obtained in this 
manner, either in criminal14 or civil proceedings, but also in relation to potential negative inferences 
drawn from a refusal to answer an UWO.15 Because of the limited scope of a book chapter, the 
following analysis will mainly focus on problems regarding the right not to self-incriminate at the 
investigation stage and will not discuss the problems in relation to the use of coercively obtained 
information or negative inferences drawn from non-compliance to such an order at a later trial stage. 
In domestic courts, the application of the privilege against self-incrimination16 in UWO proceedings 
has been discussed to a limited extent in the Hajiyeva case.17 However, the judicial assessment in this 
case did not extend to a detailed analysis of Strasbourg case law on the principle deriving from Article 
6 of the European Convention on Human Rights. In order to evaluate the future success of UWOs as a 
truly innovative legal tool, such an analysis is crucial. Only if the use of UWOs can withstand legal 
challenges before the European Court of Human Rights, will these new investigatory powers ultimately 
be able to serve their purpose of facilitating the fight against financial crime. 
Functioning of Unexplained Wealth Orders under sections 396A to 396I Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 
The Criminal Finances Act 2017 introduced UWOs as new investigatory powers by amending Chapter 2 
of Part 8 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. In an ex parte hearing18, without notice to the respondent, 
the High Court can issue an UWO on application of a law enforcement authority19 if the following 
requirements are met20: Firstly, the person holding the targeted assets is either a politically exposed 
person (PEP) from a non-EEA country21 or there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person 
is or was involved in serious crime22. Secondly, the value of the targeted assets is above the threshold 
                                                           
12 Home Office and HM Treasury (n 3), 22. 
13 H D Lodge, Criminal Finances Act 2017, A Guide to the New Law (The Law Society 2017), 55. 
14 S 362F Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 offers a ‘use immunity’, e.g. statements gathered through an UWO 
cannot be used in criminal proceedings. The value of this provision in relation to the right not to self-
incriminate is discussed below. 
15 For problems relating to negative inferences see Murray v United Kingdom (1996) 22 EHRR 29. 
16 The discussion was, however, limited to the civil procedure privilege under s 14 of the Civil Evidence Act 
1968. Although there are overlaps between s 14 Civil Evidence Act 1968 and the principle under Article 6 
European Convention of Human Rights, the guarantees are not identical, see Gold Nuts Ltd v Revenue and 
Customs Commissioner [2016] UKFTT 82 (TC), [2016] S.T.I 1342. 
17 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva [2018] EWHC 2534 (Admin), 1 WLR 5887; Hajiyeva v National Crime 
Agency [2020] EWCA Civ 108, 1 WLR 3209. 
18 Lodge submits that the fact that UWOs are issued in ex parte hearings might to be challenged in the future, 
see Lodge (n 13), 45 and 55.  
19 The National Crime Agency; Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs; The Financial Conduct Authority; the 
Director of the Serious Fraud Office; the Director of Public Prosecutions, see Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s 
362A(7). 
20 Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s 362B. 
21 ibid, ss 362B(4)(a) and 396B(7). 
22 ibid, s 362B(4)(b); serious crime is defined under s 362B(9). of £50,00023 and the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the known 
sources of the respondent’s lawfully obtained income would have been insufficient for the purpose of 
enabling the respondent to obtain the property.24  This is a surprisingly low evidential threshold, 
particularly since the respondent does not have the opportunity to challenge the evidence prior to the 
issuing of the UWO.25 The person targeted by an UWO will receive notice that an UWO was issued 
only ex post and will be given a period to respond to the request.26 The order will request the 
respondent to set out the nature and extent of their interest in the property, how they obtained the 
property, details of the settlement, if property is held by the trustees of a settlement and any other 
information in connection with the property.27  
To give false or misleading statements to an UWO, either knowingly or recklessly, is a criminal 
offence.28. Non-compliance to an UWO has the effect that the targeted property is presumed to be 
recoverable under Part 5 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002.29 What heightens the concerns in relation 
to the right not to self-incriminate at the investigation stage is that the first UWO was issued with a 
penal warning attached to it.  Although such a consequence is not set out in the statutory provisions 
covering UWOs, under the current use of this legal instrument, a compelled person can be held in 
contempt of court for disobeying an UWO and can face a fine or imprisonment. The following penal 
notice was attached to the UWO against Zamira Hajiyeva:  
“If you disobey this order you may be held to be in contempt of court and 
may be imprisoned, fined or have your assets seized.”30 
This warning is further specified under the important notes to the order: 
“Further or alternatively, any person who disobeys the Unexplained 
Wealth Order, or knows of either order and does anything which helps or 
permits another to breach the terms of the same, may be held to be in 
contempt  of  court  and  may  be  imprisoned,  fined  or  have  their  assets 
seized.”31 
The consequences set out in the statutory provisions together with the practice of attaching a penal 
notice to a UWO have therefore a twofold impact on a respondent who refuses to provide information 
about the targeted assets because it might be incriminatory. Firstly, they can be held in contempt of 
court and face a fine or imprisonment in committal proceedings and secondly, their targeted assets 
are presumed be recoverable in civil proceedings. Especially the threat of penal sanctions for 
disobedience to an UWO seems to encroach on the right not to self-incriminate. It allows authorities 
to obtain potentially incriminating evidence from a suspect through coercion, whilst they themselves 
are either not willing or unable to obtain the evidence in a different way.32  It could be argued that the 
purpose of UWOs is not to gather evidence for future criminal or civil actions against a person, but to 
                                                           
23 ibid, s 362B(1)(b). 
24 ibid, ss 326(3) and 326(6); criticism to this central test in Lodge (n 13), 46-48. 
25 Lodge (n 13), 46-47. 
26 Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s 362A(6). 
27 ibid, s 362A(3). 
28 ibid, s 362E. 
29 ibid, s 362C. 
30 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [89].  
31 ibid [90].  
32 Explanatory Notes to the Criminal Finances Act, para 12; the right not to self-incriminate might also be 
engaged if information obtained through a UWO is later used in criminal proceedings or if negative inference is 
drawn from the refusal to answer a UWO, but this is outside of the scope of this book chapter.  start purely in rem recovery proceedings of specific assets.33 However, the following analysis will show 
that this argument might be flawed. It fails to take into consideration the strong criminal law 
connotation of UWOs and it could lead to a situation where high profile criminals are being offered a 
de facto immunity for their crimes.  
The woman who infamously spent £16.3 million in Harrods in ten years 
On the 27 February 2018 the National Crime Agency (NCA) obtained the first ever UWO, which 
targeted a Knightsbridge property that was bought for £11.5 million by Vicksburg Global Inc, a British 
Virgin Island company, controlled by Zamira Hajiyeva.34  Hajiyeva, who infamously spent £16.3 million 
in the department store Harrods in ten years,35 is the wife of Jahangir Hajiyev.36  He was the former 
chairman of the state-owned International Bank of Azerbaijan and was sentenced to 15 years in prison 
in Azerbaijan in 2016 for charges of fraud, embezzlement, and misappropriation of public funds.  In 
2016, Hajiyeva herself was apparently arrested in absentia by Azeri authorities and was briefly 
detained in 2018 in the UK, based on a request for extradition.37 In September 2019, the Magistrates’ 
Court blocked her extradition on the grounds that she would not receive a fair trial in Azerbaijan.38  
The UWO against Hajiyeva was based on the assumption that her husband is a PEP within the 
definition of the law and that there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that Hajiyev’s lawful income 
from his role as chairman of the bank would have been insufficient to obtain the targeted property. 
According to the NCA, Hajiyeva herself did not have any independent income either and mainly relied 
on her husband’s provision. 39 An interesting fact that was not mentioned in the judgement is that the 
Home Office granted Zamira Hajiyeva a Tier 1 investor visa in return for a seven-figure investment in 
UK bonds and shares in 2010.40 Apparently, the origin of the funds available to this couple were not 
suspicious to the authorities at that time, even though Hajiyev was the chairman of the International 
Bank of Azerbaijan and therefore a PEP.   
In July 2018, Hajiyeva applied to the High Court to have the UWO against her discharged on eight 
grounds:  According to Hajiyeva’s submissions, Mr Hajiyev was not a PEP within the meaning of the 
law; the NCA had mischaracterised the respondent's role when persuading the court that the income 
requirement in the act was met; the NCA had been wrong to place reliance on Mr Hajiyev's conviction 
in a non-EEA country; the NCA had not established the income requirement to the relevant standard; 
the order ought to be discharged by virtue of the penal warning wrongly attached to it; the order 
offended the respondent's right to peaceful enjoyment of her possessions under article 1 of the First 
Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; the order 
offended the privilege against self-incrimination and spousal privilege under s 14 Civil Evidence Act 
1968; and given all the circumstances of the case, the court ought not to have exercised its discretion 
to make the order.41 
                                                           
33 Home Office and HM Treasury (n 3), 22. 
34 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [10-20]. 
35 ibid [83]. 
36 ibid [11]. 
37 ibid [17-20]; Hajiyeva v National Crime Agency (n 17) [9]. 
38 Hajiyeva v National Crime Agency (n 17) [9]. 
39 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [57]. 
40 Sean O’Neill, ‘Attracting the megarich while keeping out illicit money’ The Times (London, 11 October 2018). 
41 Hajiyeva v National Crime Agency (n 17). Of particular interest here is Hajiyeva’s argument that the order violated her privilege against self-
incrimination under s 14 Civil Evidence Act 1968.42 The High Court as well as the Court of Appeal 
dismissed this ground firmly, but their arguments were limited to the civil guarantee under this 
provision and did not take into account Strasbourg case law on Article 6 of the European Convention 
on Human Rights. The High Court held that the UWO did not violate the privilege against self-
incrimination,43 because this privilege only applies as regards to criminal offences under the law of 
any part of the UK.44 According to Supperstone J, there was no real and appreciable risk in the present 
case that Hajiyeva or her husband would be prosecuted for such offences in the UK.45 The court further 
submitted that if they were prosecuted in the UK, the offences would comprise qualifying offences 
under the Fraud Act 2006 for which the privilege against self-incrimination has been excluded by s 
13(1) Fraud Act 2006.46 The court also stated that with the creation of UWOs, Parliament effectively 
abrogated the privilege against self-incrimination to that extent.47 In December 2019, the Court of 
Appeal dismissed an appeal by Hajiyeva and reiterated Supperstone J’s submissions in relation to the 
privilege under s14 CEA 1968.48  
Hajiyeva has not been granted leave to bring the case to the Supreme Court and at the time of writing 
it is not known if Hajiyeva intends to bring this case to the Human Rights Court in Strasbourg.49 Since 
the issuing of this first UWO, this new legal instrument has been used a number of times again with 
variable success.50 The legal issue of a potential infringement of the right not to self-incriminate has, 
however, not yet been raised again. The following analysis is therefore a first attempt to examine 
whether UWOs at the investigation stage are reconcilable with the guarantees under the criminal limb 
of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  
The right not to self-incriminate under Strasbourg case law 
The right not to self-incriminate, although generally acknowledged to lie at the heart of the notion of 
a fair trial, is not expressly set out in the European Convention on Human Rights.51 The Court describes 
the principle and its rationale in the case of Saunders v UK as follows: 
“Their rationale lies, inter alia, in the protection of the accused against 
improper  compulsion  by  the  authorities  thereby  contributing  to  the 
avoidance of miscarriages of justice and to the fulfilment of the aims of 
Article 6 (…). The right not to incriminate oneself, in particular, presupposes 
that the prosecution in a criminal case seek to prove their case against the 
accused without resort to evidence obtained through methods of coercion or 
                                                           
42 ibid (n 17) [45-56]; the following discussion is limited to the right not to self-incriminate and does not take 
into consideration potential spousal privileges.  
43 Civil Evidence Act 1968, s 14. 
44 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [107]. 
45 ibid [108]. 
46 ibid [113]; this argument is flawed, as Hajiyeva is more likely to be prosecuted for money laundering 
offences in the UK than for fraud offence, see below. 
47 ibid [110-112].   
48 Hajiyeva v National Crime Agency (n 17) [45-56]. 
49 J Ames, ‘Zamira Hajiyeva: McMafia banker’s wife could lose her £15m home after court defeat’ The Times 
(London, 6 February 2020). 
50 National Crime Agency v Hussain et al [2020] EWHC 432 (Admin), [2020] 1 W.L.R. 2145; National Crime 
Agency v Baker [2020] EWHC 822 (Admin), [2020] 4 WLUK 113. 
51 European Court of Human Rights, ‘Guide on Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights’ 
(Updated on 30 April 2020) <https://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Guide_Art_6_criminal_ENG.pdf> accessed 
25 August 2020, para 184. oppression in defiance of the will of the accused. In this sense the right is 
closely linked to the presumption of innocence contained in Article 6 para. 2 
of the Convention.”52 
It is clear from this statement that the right not to self-incriminate applies within the realm of criminal 
law only and it seems to be the view of the domestic courts that UWO proceedings are located outside 
of the criminal law territory and therefore outside of the scope of this principle.53 However, the extent 
of the application of the criminal limb of Article 6 of the Convention depends on the existence of a 
criminal charge in the autonomous sense of this term54, not its formal domestic classification.55 A 
review of Strasbourg case law on this issue is therefore pivotal and the following analysis shows that 
the High Court and the Court of Appeal might have set aside concerns in relation to the right not to 
self-incriminate too prematurely in the Hajiyeva-case.56 Funke v France57 is one of the key Strasbourg 
cases  on  the  question  whether  a  conviction  for  refusing  to  provide  potentially  incriminating 
information violates the right not to self-incriminate under the criminal limb of Article 6. It therefore 
offers a good starting point for this study.  
The key case of Funke v France 
Funke, was suspected of tax offences, but was never formally charged and tax proceedings against 
him were never opened. He was, however, compelled by French custom officers, under threat of fines 
and imprisonment, to produce statements of overseas bank accounts, which they suspected existed.58 
Funke refused to comply with this request and was later convicted in proceedings for disclosure of 
documents. Funke claimed that his criminal conviction for the refusal to comply with the compulsion 
violated his right to a fair trial.59 The French government objected to this using the argument that no 
criminal proceedings had ever been opened against Funke and the criminal limb of Article 6 should 
therefore not apply.60 The court dismissed this objection because Funke did not complain about the 
actual tax proceedings, but the disclosure of information proceedings in which he had been convicted 
for a refusal to produce potentially incriminating bank statements upon compulsion by custom 
officers. The court concluded the question of a potential infringement of Funke’s right to remain silent 
as follows: 
“The Court notes that the customs secured Mr Funke’s conviction in 
order to obtain certain documents which they believed must exist, although 
they were not certain of the fact. Being unable or unwilling to procure them 
by some other means, they attempted to compel the applicant himself to 
provide the evidence of offences he had allegedly committed. The special 
features of customs law (…) cannot justify such an infringement of the right 
of  anyone  "charged  with  a  criminal  offence",  within  the  autonomous 
meaning of this expression in Article 6 (art. 6), to remain silent and not to 
                                                           
52 Saunders v United Kingdom (1997) 23 EHRR 313 [68]. 
53 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [108]. 
54 The ECtHR assesses the existence of a criminal charge according to the ‘Engel criteria’: the classification in 
domestic law, the nature of the offence and the severity of the penalty that the person concerned risks 
incurring, see Engel et al v the Netherlands (1979-80) EHRR 706.  
55 Although the classification in domestic law is the starting point, this criterion is not decisive unless an 
offence is classified as criminal, see European Court of Human Rights (n 51) para 19. 
56 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [104-116]; Hajiyeva v National Crime Agency (n 17) [45-56]. 
57 Funke v France (1993) 16 EHRR 297. 
58 ibid. 
59 ibid [38]. 
60 ibid [39]. contribute to incriminating himself. There has accordingly been a breach of 
Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).”61 
A comparison of the situation in Funke to the UWO proceedings reveals interesting parallels. As 
mentioned above, a respondent to an UWO who disobeys the order, e.g. remains silent, faces a fine 
or imprisonment in committal proceedings because UWOs are issued with a penal warning attached 
to them.62 A person targeted by an UWO is, therefore, compelled under the threat of penal sanctions 
to  provide  potentially  incriminating  evidence.63  The  crucial  point,  however,  is  that  Funke  was 
considered to be charged with a criminal offence in the autonomous meaning of the expression, 
whilst, at least in the case of Hajiyeva, the domestic courts did not consider that criminal proceedings 
in the UK were anticipated. Supperstone J clearly stated that: 
“(…)  I do not consider that the evidence discloses a real and appreciable 
risk that Mrs Hajiyeva or her husband will be prosecuted for offences in the 
UK. (…) Accordingly the threshold test for the privileges to apply has not 
been satisfied.”64  
According  to  the  Convention  jurisprudence,  the  existence  of  a  criminal  charge  is  assessed 
autonomously and can be defined as the official notification given to an individual by the competent 
authority of an allegation that the affected person has committed a criminal offence. This is the case 
if the situation of the suspect has been substantially affected by actions taken by the authorities as a 
result of a suspicion against them.65 The European Court of Human Rights has held in previous cases 
that a charge exists in the autonomous sense, not only when a person is arrested or formally charged 
with an offence, but already when a person is questioned about their involvement in a criminal 
offence, even if they are treated as a mere witness.66 
In the case of Hajiyeva, the High Court used the threshold test for the application of the privilege in 
civil procedures,67 e.g. whether there was a real and appreciable risk that Hajiyeva or her husband 
would be prosecuted for offences in the UK and concluded that this threshold had not been reached. 
In other words, the court implied that Hajiyeva was, at the time of issue of the UWO, not charged with 
an  offence  because  neither  were  criminal  proceedings  at  that  time  pending,  nor  were  they 
anticipated.68 This argument might be formally correct because no criminal proceedings had ever been 
opened against Hajiyeva in the UK. However, substantially this situation does not seem to be as clear. 
The strong criminal law connotation of UWOs has to be taken into consideration when assessing this 
issue.69  It cannot be ignored that UWOs are based on the suspicion that the known lawful sources of 
the respondent’s income have been insufficient to acquire the targeted property. In other words, the 
authorities suspect that the targeted property has been acquired unlawfully. A respondent to an UWO 
is, therefore, suspected of holding criminal property. What seems to have been overlooked is that this 
constitutes in itself a criminal offence in the UK. Under s 329 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 a 
person commits an offence if they acquire, use or possess criminal property. It would therefore not 
                                                           
61 ibid [44]. 
62 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [89-90]. 
63 Either statements or documents can be requested through UWOs. 
64 ibid [115]. 
65 Deweer v Belgium App no 6903/75 (ECtHR, 27 February 1980) [42-46]. 
66 Heaney and McGuinness v Ireland (2000) 22 EHRR 12; Kalēja v Latvia App no 22059/08 (ECtHR, 5 October 
2017). 
67 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [108]. 
68 ibid. 
69 E.g. Bendenoun v France App no 12547/86 (ECtHR, 24 February 1994) [47]. be fanciful to describe UWO proceedings as proceedings in which a person is questioned about their 
suspected involvement in a criminal offence – namely money laundering. Even though the questioning 
does not take place in the usual criminal justice setting, but in proceedings that are at least formally 
classified to be civil in nature. In front of this background, it would not be surprising either if the 
European Court of Human Rights would come to the conclusion that a person affected by a UWO could 
in certain circumstances, at least substantially, be considered as charged with a criminal offence. 
The argument against such a conclusion would be that UWOs are purely in rem instruments; they are 
intended to target property and not persons and they were not designed to imply guilt. This argument 
is sustainable in situations where UWOs are used to target ‘abandoned’ illicit assets, acquired or held 
by criminals that are not currently within the jurisdiction of the UK and that are for whatever reason 
not available for prosecution in the UK.70  However, the design of UWOs is much broader. UWOs can 
be used if the holder of the targeted property is in the UK. It is even possible that UWOs are issued 
against illicit assets that stem from crimes that were committed entirely in the UK.71 It is difficult to 
support the view that UWOs only target property and not the holder of property in situations, where 
a respondent to an UWO effectively holds criminal property in the UK and is physically ‘available’ to 
prosecution authorities. This person is under suspicion of having committed a criminal offence as 
described above, otherwise an UWO would be baseless. It is not realistic in such a scenario to treat 
the respondent to an UWO as a mere third party as they themselves will have likely committed an 
offence.72 
The High Court submitted in the Hajiyeva case that neither Hajiyeva nor her husband were facing 
criminal proceedings in the UK,73 but it cannot be argued that a respondent to an UWO would never 
face criminal prosecution in the UK. Such an assumption would indeed lead to highly undesirable 
consequences.  It would mean that a respondent to an UWO enjoys de facto immunity from criminal 
prosecution for money laundering offences committed in the UK because they were targeted by an 
UWO before proceedings were opened. The use of UWO proceedings would allow them, to relinquish 
their property to the authorities and therewith buy themselves out of criminal responsibility. Surely, 
this cannot be within the spirit this new legal instrument and it is surely not within the public interest 
that large scale financial crimes are not being prosecuted and criminals are not being held criminally 
accountable. UWOs should be a measure of last resort where orthodox prosecution would fail, but 
not an alternative settlement that allows high profile criminals to escape justice.  
For these reasons, there seems to be a realistic prospect that the European Court of Human Rights 
could rely on its findings in Funke v France74 and conclude that under certain circumstances a person 
affected by a UWO has to be considered charged with a criminal offence even though no formal 
prosecution has yet been opened. In certain circumstances, criminal proceedings must be anticipated. 
Otherwise, UWOs would offer a blank de facto immunity to all respondents. This means that UWOs 
could fall under the scope of the criminal limb of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human 
Rights and the right not to self-incriminate would apply.  
                                                           
70 For example because the person is in a country with which mutual legal assistance or extradition is doomed 
to fail or the person is dead.  
71 E.g. in relation to a respondent that has been involved in serious crime, Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s 
362B(4)(b)(i): “the respondent is, or has been, involved in serious crime (whether in a part of the United 
Kingdom or elsewhere)”. 
72 E.g. Acquiring, using or possessing criminal property under s 329 Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. 
73 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [108]. 
74 Funke v France (n 57). Post-Funke cases 
There are several other cases that followed the Funke judgement75 and concluded that Respondent 
States have violated the applicant’s right not to self-incriminate in prosecutions for failure to provide 
information, even though the applicant was not formally charged with a criminal offence and it seems 
reasonable to assume that the Funke judgement76 would influence a judicial assessment of UWO 
proceedings as well. In Heaney and McGuinness v Ireland77, the applicants were arrested in relation to 
terrorist offences and compelled under threat of penal sanctions to provide a full account of their 
movements. Even though they were not formally charged with a criminal offence, the fact that they 
were arrested and questioned in relation to an IRA bombing meant for the Strasbourg Court that they 
were at least suspected of having been involved in a criminal offence and therefore substantially 
charged in the autonomous sense of the term.78 In Marttinen v Finland79, the applicant refused to 
provide information about his assets in a debt enforcement enquiry relying on his right not to self-
incriminate. The applicant was subject to correlating pre-trial investigations for debtor’s fraud, which 
were frozen at the time of the compulsion. The Finish Supreme Court argued in this case that: 
“The purpose of the powers of enforcement authorities to oblige the 
debtor to provide an account of his property, and of the coercive means 
available to ensure compliance with this obligation, is to make enforcement 
more efficient. Although it is possible to impose a threat of a fine to secure 
compliance  with  the  obligation  to  give  the  information  requested  in 
connection with the enforcement inquiry, and a sentence may be ordered on 
a person concealing information or giving false information, the debtor is 
not, when complying with his or her obligation to give information on his or 
her property for the purposes of enforcement, a person charged with a 
criminal offence within the meaning of Article 6 of the Convention, to whom 
the rights of the accused would apply.”80 
The European Court of Human Rights did not agree with this submission and held that Marttinen, 
should be considered charged in the autonomous sense of the expression. According to the Strasbourg 
Court it is not a requirement for the application of the principle that the allegedly incriminating 
evidence obtained through coercion was actually used in a criminal trial.81  
There are however cases with a similar set of facts in which the Strasbourg Court has denied the 
application of the right not to self-incriminate in investigation procedures because it considered the 
applicant not to be charged with a criminal offence. Although these cases seem to contradict Funke 
prima facie, they can be distinguished based on their facts. In Weh v Austria82, Weh’s car was caught 
by a speed camera exceeding the speed limit and proceedings against an unknown driver were 
opened. Weh was required by the state authorities to provide the identity of the driver at the time of 
the speeding incident. Weh inaccurately stated that the driver was a person living in the state of Texas 
in the USA. He was later fined for providing inaccurate information.83 The Strasbourg Court held in this 
                                                           
75 ibid.  
76 ibid.  
77 Heaney and McGuinness v Ireland (n 66). 
78 ibid [41-59]. 
79 Marttinen v Finland App no 19235/03 (ECtHR, 21 July 2009). 
80 ibid [21]. 
81 ibid [58-66]. 
82 Weh v Austria (2005) 40 EHRR 37. 
83 ibid [11-23]. case that the right not to self-incriminate had not been violated. The case was, according to the Court, 
distinguishable from cases like Funke84 or Heaney and McGuinness85 because the criminal proceedings 
against the applicant were less likely: 
“In Funke and in Heaney and McGuinness (…) criminal proceedings 
were anticipated, though they had not been formally opened, at the time the 
respective  applicants  were  required  to  give  potentially  incriminating 
information.  In Funke the  customs  authorities  had  a  specific  suspicion 
against the applicant, in Heaney and McGuinness the applicants had been 
arrested  on  suspicion  of  terrorist  offences.  In  the  present  case  the 
proceedings for speeding were conducted against unknown offenders, when 
the authorities requested the applicant under section 103 § 2 of the Motor 
Vehicles Act to disclose who had been driving his car on 5 March 1995. 
There  were  clearly  no  proceedings  for  speeding  pending  against  the 
applicant and it cannot even be said that they were anticipated as the 
authorities did not have any element of suspicion against him.”86 
Later cases in relation to the procurement of a driver’s identity by compulsion show that the 
distinguishing characteristics from Funke v France87 in these cases are not so much, as suggested in 
Weh88, the degree of likelihood of the criminal proceedings, but the degree of the compulsion used. 
In O’Halloran and Francis v UK89, the Strasbourg Court set out, citing Brown v Stott90, that the 
compulsion in such cases flowed from the fact that all who own or drive motor cars know that by doing 
so they subject themselves to a regulatory regime to protect public safety and they therefore accept 
certain  responsibilities  including  the  present  compulsion.91  The  court  further  set  out  that  the 
compulsion in this case was narrow, because it only required the affected person to provide the 
authorities with the identity of the driver. Interesting for the assessment of UWOs is the following 
statement of the court in this case: 
“The information is thus markedly more restricted than in previous 
cases, in which applicants have been subjected to statutory powers requiring 
production of “papers and documents of any kind relating to operations of 
interest  to  [the]  department” (see Funke, cited above,  §  30),  or 
of “documents, etc., which  might  be  relevant  for the assessment  of 
taxes” (see J.B. v. Switzerland, cited above, § 39).”92 
It seems likely from this statement that the Strasbourg Court would consider the compulsion used in 
UWO proceedings to be less restricted than the one in Weh or O’Halloran and Francis.93 As mentioned 
above, UWOs require the respondent to provide extensive information about the targeted assets: 
namely, to set out the nature and extent of their interest in the property, how they obtained the 
property, details of the settlement, if property is held by the trustees of a settlement and any other 
                                                           
84 Funke v France (n 57). 
85 Heaney and McGuinness v Ireland (n 66). 
86 Weh v Austria (n 83) [52-53]. 
87 Funke v France (n 57). 
88 Weh v Austria (n 83). 
89 O’Halloran and Francis v United Kingdom (2008) 46 EHRR 21. 
90 Brown v Stott [2001] 2 WLR 817. 
91 O’Halloran and Francis v United Kingdom (n 90) [57]. 
92 ibid [58]. 
93 O’Halloran and Francis v United Kingdom (n 90). information in connection with the property.94 This is not comparable with the procurement of the 
identity of the driver of ones car at a specific moment in time and the compulsion does not derive 
from a regulatory framework that supports public safety, but from a suspicion that money laundering 
offences have been committed. 
In the case of Fayed v UK95, administrative investigation proceedings by inspectors of the Department 
for Trade and Industry (DTI)96 were considered to be outside of the application of the criminal limb of 
Article 6. The Court described these proceedings as follows: 
“[Their] purpose (…) was to ascertain and record facts which might 
subsequently be used as the basis for action by other competent authorities - 
prosecuting, regulatory, disciplinary or even legislative (…).97 
“Acceptance  of  the  applicants'  argument  would  entail  that  a  body 
carrying out preparatory investigations at the instance of regulatory or other 
authorities  should  always  be  subject  to  the  guarantees  of  a  judicial 
procedure set forth in Article 6(1) by reason of the fact that publication of 
its findings is liable to damage the reputation of the individuals whose 
conduct is being investigated. Such an interpretation of Article 6(1) would in 
practice unduly hamper the effective regulation in the public interest of 
complex  financial  and  commercial  activities.  In  the  Court's  view, 
investigative proceedings of the kind in issue in the present case fall outside 
the ambit and intendment of Article 6(1) (…).98 
This raises the questions whether, the Strasbourg Court could per analogiam consider that UWO 
proceedings are also fact finding procedures or preparatory proceedings outside of the scope of the 
criminal procedure guarantees of Article 6. However, some characteristics of UWOs make such an 
analogy difficult. UWOs are not used to investigate complex corporate or financial issues. They, in fact, 
do not require any investigatory work as such. UWOs simply compel the respondent, under threat of 
a fine or imprisonment, to explain how they have obtained the targeted property. 99 It is not because 
of the complexity of the issue that UWOs are used, but because enforcement agencies are unwilling 
or unable to obtain this information, or evidence relating to this information, themselves.100  A second 
point that cannot be neglected is that DTI investigations are used to establish a set of facts. These 
facts might well be just descriptive and neutral in value. This is different with UWOs – if a respondent 
does not have the right to remain silent to an UWO, their answer will inevitably either be exculpatory 
or incriminating.101 
The above shows that it is reasonable to believe that because of the strong criminal law connotation 
of UWOs and the degree and nature of the compulsion used, the Strasbourg Court could find that 
under certain circumstances a respondent to a UWO should be considered charged with a criminal 
offence in the autonomous meaning of the term. This would mean that UWOs, if they are issued with 
                                                           
94 Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s 362A(3). 
95 Fayed v United Kingdom (1994) 18 EHRR 393; the same reasoning was later followed in Saunders v United 
Kingdom (n 52). 
96 Based on s 432(2) Companies Act 1985. 
97 Fayed v United Kingdom (n 96) [61]. 
98 ibid [62]. 
99 Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s362A(3). 
100 Explanatory Notes to the Criminal Finances Act, paras 12. 
101 Because the compulsion through UWOs is not used to assess a person’s tax liability, it can also not be 
compared to the case of Allen v United Kingdom (2002) 35 EHRR CD289.  a penal warning attached to them, might violate the right not to self-incriminate under the criminal 
limb of Article 6 of the Convention. This would, however, not the case if Parliament lawfully abrogated 
the right not to self-incriminate, as the High Court submitted in the Hajiyeva case.102  
Valid abrogation of the right not to self-incriminate in UWOs proceedings 
According to the High Court, Parliament abrogated the privilege against self-incrimination by creating 
the legal instrument of UWOs.103 Whether such an abrogation is compatible with the Convention, 
depends firstly on whether the right not to self-incriminate is an absolute or a qualified right and 
secondly, if the right is qualified, whether the infringement is justified.  The Strasbourg Court did not 
find it necessary in the case of Saunders v the United Kingdom to decide whether the right not to self-
incriminate was absolute or not.104  However, the Court stated that it did not accept the Respondent 
State’s argument that the public interest in the investigation and punishment of corporate fraud could 
justify a marked departure of the basic principle of fair procedure.105 Post-Saunders, the Court’s 
position seems to have shifted not only in terms of the definition of the right not to self-incriminate, 
but also on the issue whether it can be balanced against public interest grounds.  In other words, the 
Court seems to accept that in certain circumstances the legislator can validly abrogate the right not to 
self-incriminate.106  
The case of Jalloh v Germany was concerned with a person being forced to produce real evidence. 
Through forceful administration of an emetic substances, the applicant regurgitated a small bag of 
cocaine.107 The Court clearly distinguished this case from cases such as Funke v France108 or JB v 
Switzerland109, where the right not to self-incriminate was violated in the sense that a suspect was 
compelled to produce a potentially incriminating documents rather than other forms of real evidence 
that are usually not covered by the principle.110 However, the Court also set out to what extent an 
infringement could be considered lawful. Interestingly, and seemingly in departure from its statement 
in Saunders111, the Court engages in a balancing test between public interest factors and the violated 
right:  
“In order to determine whether the applicant’s right not to incriminate 
himself  has  been  violated,  the  Court  will  have  regard,  in  turn,  to  the 
following factors: the nature and degree of compulsion used to obtain the 
evidence;  the  weight  of  the  public  interest  in  the  investigation  and 
punishment of the offence in issue; the existence of any relevant safeguards 
in the procedure; and the use to which any material so obtained is put.”112 
                                                           
102 National Crime Agency v Hajiyeva (n 17) [110-112]. 
103 ibid [110-112]. 
104 Saunders v United Kingdom (n 52) [74]. 
105 ibid. 
106 For a detailed discussion of this shift, see A L-T Choo, The Privilege Against Self-Incrimination and Criminal 
Justice (Hart 2013), 62 f. 
107 Jalloh v Germany (2007) 44 EHRR 32. 
108 Funke v France (n 57). 
109 JB v Switzerland App no 31827/96 (ECtHR, 3 May 2001). 
110 Jalloh v Germany (n 108) [113]. 
111 Saunders v United Kingdom (n 52). 
112 Jalloh v Germany (n 108) [117]. In the following case of O’Halloran and Francis v the United Kingdom113, in which the applicants were 
compelled to reveal the identity of the driver of their car, the Court reiterated these factors, but 
dropped the public interest element once again: 
“In the light of the principles contained in its Jalloh judgment, and in 
order to determine whether the essence of the applicants’ right to remain 
silent and privilege against self-incrimination was infringed, the Court will 
focus on the nature and degree of compulsion used to obtain the evidence, 
the existence of any relevant safeguards in the procedure, and the use to 
which any material so obtained was put.”114 
In light of these cases it seems evident that the right not to self-incriminate is not an absolute right. 
However the Court’s assessment of when an infringement is justified and whether public interest 
factors are decisive is inconsistent. It is therefore difficult to assess at this point whether the 
Strasbourg Court would accept that Parliament has lawfully abrogated the right not to self-incriminate 
by creating UWOs. Clearly the investigation of financial crimes and the recovery of illicit funds are in 
the public interest. However, the degree of compulsion exercised through UWOs is, as discussed 
above, undeniably high.115   
Statutory ‘use immunity’ and potential infringements of the right not to self-incriminate 
UWOs can only be used under the statutory safeguard that statements in response to such order 
cannot be used in evidence against the respondent in criminal proceedings.116  This ‘use immunity’ is 
a feature that the legislator has often attached to statutory compulsion powers after the Strasbourg 
decision of Saunders v UK117 and it will clearly give some weight in the Court’s assessment whether 
UWOs infringe on the very essence of the right not to self-incriminate.118  However, whether this ‘use 
immunity’ is capable of curing all of the discussed concerns in relation to the right not to self-
incriminate is doubtful.  It should not be overlooked that the European Court of Human Rights made 
it clear that it is not a requirement for a violation of the right not to self-incriminate that the evidence 
obtained has actually been used in criminal proceedings: 
 “The Court points out that in previous cases it has expressly found that 
there is no requirement for allegedly incriminating evidence obtained by 
coercion to be actually used in criminal proceedings before the right not to 
incriminate  oneself  applies.  In  particular,  in  the  case  of Heaney  and 
McGuinness v. Ireland (no. 34720/97, §§ 43-46, ECHR 2000-XII) it found 
that the applicants could rely on Article 6 §§ 1 and 2 in respect of their 
conviction and imprisonment for failing to reply to questions, even though 
they were subsequently acquitted of the underlying offence. Indeed, in the 
case of Funke v. France (cited above, §§ 39-40), the Court found a violation 
of the right not to incriminate oneself even though no underlying proceedings 
were brought, and by the time of the Strasbourg proceedings none could 
be.”119 
                                                           
113 O’Halloran and Francis v UK (n 90). 
114 ibid [55]. 
115 See above, discussion of UWO in light of Funke v France (n 57). 
116 Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s 362F. 
117 Saunders v United Kingdom (n 52). 
118 Choo (n 107), 34 f. 
119 Marttinen v Finland (n 80) [64]. Academics have also raised concerns to what extent ‘use immunity’ could cure potential problems 
that compulsion powers create in relation to the right not to self-incriminate. Choo concluded that the 
availability of ‘use immunity’ would protect the privilege against self-incrimination at least to the 
extent of the immunity granted, but he seems sceptical about whether ‘use immunity’ will dissipate 
concerns deriving from the actual use of compulsion powers rather than the use of evidence obtain 
by compulsion: 
“The availability of ‘use immunity’ to a person would mean (…) that, to 
the extent to which immunity is guaranteed, the provision of information by 
him or her can no longer ‘reasonably lead to, or increase the likelihood of, 
the prosecution of that person for a criminal offence’. Thus the privilege 
against self-incrimination would, by definition, be protected to that extent. It 
would be naïve, however, to believe that any concerns generated by legal 
compulsion  to  provide  potentially  self-incriminatory  information  will 
dissipate to the extent to which ‘use immunity’ is available to protect the 
privilege. After all, it might be considered undignified for a person to be 
compelled, on pain of a criminal sanction, to provide information revealing 
criminal wrongdoing even though there is no possibility of this being used 
against him or her in a subsequent trial. Such compulsion might be regarded 
as objectionable in itself and, as a practical matter, might well produce 
information that proves to be of indirect assistance to the authorities.”120  
The discussion above has shown that UWOs might potentially violate the right not to-self incriminate 
at an investigation stage already, if the Strasbourg Court comes to the conclusion that a respondent 
to an UWO is charged in the autonomous sense of the expression. The concern raised in this chapter 
relates to the compulsion itself rather than the use of evidence obtained through it. It is not 
unreasonable to think that the Strasbourg Court could draw on the parallels to the Funke121 case and 
conclude that UWOs, independent of the use of the gathered evidence, violate the right not to self-
incriminate in its very essence.  This violation would not be cured by the availability of a use immunity.  
Concluding thoughts and recommendations 
According to the above analysis, there is a reasonable possibility that the European Court of Human 
Rights could find that UWOs in their investigation stage do violate the right not to self-incriminate 
because a person affected by such an order could, in certain circumstances, be considered charged 
with a criminal offence under the autonomous meaning of the expression. It is difficult to predict 
whether the Court would accept that Parliament has abrogated the right not to self-incriminate to a 
lawful extent by creating UWOs or whether the available ‘use immunity’ granted is a sufficient 
safeguard to dissipate concerns in relation to this right. 
The two main problems of UWOs are the following: firstly, they are issued with a penal warning 
attached to them, which means that a respondent could face criminal sanctions for a refusal to provide 
potentially incriminating information and secondly, that because of their design, their scope is broad 
and seems to overshoot the original target. UWOs should be measures of ultima ratio that step in 
where orthodox prosecution fails, but they cannot be used as an alternative settlement for high profile 
money laundering cases.  Otherwise, authorities would grant a de facto immunity to respondents to 
UWO, which cannot be in the public interest. The following recommendation would limit the scope of 
                                                           
120 Choo (n 107), 35. 
121 Funke v France (n 57). UWOs to more reasonable range and would not only address the issues mentioned in relation to the 
right not to self-incriminate but bring the legal instrument back in line with its initial rationale. 
The concerns in relation to the right not to self-incriminate are heightened by the fact that the order, 
in practice, is issued with a penal warning. It seems that Parliament did not intend such a consequence. 
According to the statutory provisions, the only consequence for non-compliance to an UWO is that 
the targeted property is presumed to be recoverable in civil recovery proceedings.122 To extend the 
consequences for non-compliance does not only seem unnecessary, but it potentially undermines the 
future success of this innovative legal instrument be creating potentially defeating issues in relation 
to the right not to self-incriminate. 
Secondly, UWOs were designed to step in where orthodox prosecution fails, not for mere convenience 
of enforcement agencies. Their use is justified, for example, where criminal property is in the UK, but 
the holders are outside of the jurisdiction, potentially in a country with which mutual legal assistance 
proceedings are doomed to fail because of political of factual reasons. However, the statutory 
provisions do not include such a caveat. UWOs can be issued if the respondent is in the UK. There is 
no reason why in these circumstance criminals should not face orthodox prosecution. UWOs should 
not  have  the  perverted  effect  of  allowing  criminals  to  avoid  criminal  responsibility  simply  by 
relinquishing property targeted by UWOs. This cannot be within the spirit of this legal tool. The 
legislator should therefore add as a legal requirement for issuing UWOs that the holder of the targeted 
property is outside of the jurisdiction of the UK and that mutual legal assistance and extradition will 
not be successful because of political or factual reasons or that the respondent is not available for 
prosecution for other reasons.   
Finally, there seems to be a desperate need for a cultural change in relation to illicitly acquired assets 
of high net worth individuals that are invested in UK property. What is frankly disturbing in the case 
of Zamira Hajiyeva is that ten years ago, she was granted a Tier 1 investor visa by the Home Office in 
return for a seven figure investment in UK bonds and shares.  How is it possible that politically exposed 
persons with extraordinary wealth are being courted by government in this way? How is it possible 
that the legal professionals involved in the conveyance of the property, later targeted by an UWO, did 
not suspect that the funds used were illicit? How is it possible that the bank granting a mortgage to 
the Hadjiyev’s had no reservations to do so? It seems that draconian measures, such as unexplained 
wealth orders, would not be necessary if there was a genuine commitment not to allow the UK to 
become a safe haven for illicit funds.  
 
                                                           
122 Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, s 362C.  