 
‘Sex’ and Religion after Bostock† 
Sachin S. Pandya 
Marcia McCormick 
Introduction 
This paper reviews the U.S. Supreme Court’s opinion in Bostock v. Clayton County.1 There, the Court 
held that by barring employer discrimination against any individual “because of such individual’s . . . 
sex,” Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 also bars employment discrimination because an individual 
is gay or transgender. The paper then speculates about how much Bostock will affect how likely lower 
court judges will read other “sex” discrimination prohibitions in the U.S. Code in the same way, in part 
based on a canvass of the text of about 150 of those prohibitions.  The paper also discusses the religion-
based defenses that defendants may raise in response under Title VII itself, the Religious Freedom 
Restoration Act, and the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. And the paper suggests how 
Bostock’s effect will likely vary with the influence of Trump-appointed federal judges.  
I.  The Opinion 
Bostock involved three lawsuits, all of which raised the question of whether Title VII’s prohibition on 
employer sex discrimination covers discrimination against gay or transgender individuals. In Bostock, 
Gerald Bostock worked for Clayton County, Georgia, as a child welfare advocate. When he joined a gay 
softball league, he was fired. In Zarda v. Altitude Express, Donald Zarda worked for Altitude Express as a 
skydiving instructor in New York City. Days after Zarda mentioned to a female customer that he was gay, 
he was fired. In EEOC v. R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes, Aimee Stephens, a transgender woman, 
worked for R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes in Michigan as a funeral director. Stephens, assigned the 
male sex at birth and then-presenting as a man, was fired when she told her boss that, after returning from 
vacation, she would be Aimee and would present as a woman. Bostock and Zarda had sued their former 
employers, alleging, among other claims, that they had been fired for being gay in violation of Title VII’s 
prohibition on employer sex discrimination. In Stephens’s case, the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC) sued, alleging that by firing Stephens, Harris Funeral Homes had violated Title 
VII’s prohibition on employer sex discrimination.2 
The Supreme Court, in a 6-3 majority opinion by Justice Neil Gorsuch, ruled that by barring employer 
discrimination against any individual “because of such individual’s . . . sex,” section 703(a)(1) of Title 
 
† © 2020 Sachin S. Pandya and Marcia McCormick. This work is available after publication under a CC-BY-NC-
ND 4.0 license. 
 Professor of Law, University of Connecticut (http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7387-1307). 
 Professor of Law, Saint Louis University, marcia.mccormick@slu.edu. 
1 Bostock v. Clayton Cty. Bd. of Comm’rs, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020). 
2 Bostock v. Clayton Cty. Bd. of Comm’rs, 723 F. App’x 964 (11th Cir. 2018); Zarda v. Altitude Express, Inc., 883 
F.3d 100 (2d Cir. 2018); E.E.O.C. v. R.G. &. G.R. Harris Funeral Homes, Inc., 884 F.3d 560 (6th Cir. 2018). 
  
VII also bars employment discrimination because an individual is gay or transgender.3 Justices Samuel 
Alito and Brett Kavanaugh opined in dissent.4 
The Court in Bostock described its task as determining “the ordinary public meaning” of section 703(a)(1) 
when Congress enacted Title VII in 1964.5 Both then and now, section 703(a)(1) declares it unlawful for 
an employer to “fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against 
any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because 
of such individual’s . . . sex.”6 Bostock started by assuming arguendo that the term “sex” refers “only to 
biological distinctions between male and female.”7 Then, Bostock relied on two other features of section 
703(a)(1)’s text. 
First, the phrase “because of” denoted “the ‘simple’ and ‘traditional’ standard of but-for causation.”8 That 
test, together with the term “discriminate” (already read to require an intentional difference in treatment) 
implies that “an employer who intentionally treats a person worse because of sex—such as by firing the 
person for actions or attributes it would tolerate in an individual of another sex—discriminates against 
that person in violation of Title VII.”9 
Second, Bostock relied on the references to the “individual” in section 703(a)(1)’s text. On its own, 
Bostock observed, the term “discriminate” might be read to refer to “the employer’s treatment of groups 
rather than individuals, to see how a policy affects one sex as a whole versus the other as a whole. . . . So 
how can we tell which sense, individual or group, ‘discriminate’ carries in Title VII?” Bostock’s answer: 
“The statute . . . tells us three times . . . that our focus should be on individuals, not groups: Employers 
may not ‘fail or refuse to hire or . . . discharge any individual, or otherwise . . . discriminate against any 
individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of 
such individual’s . . . sex.’ § 2000e–2(a)(1) (emphasis added).”10 
From this “ordinary public meaning” of section 703(a)(1)’s text, Bostock inferred that an employer 
“violates Title VII when it intentionally fires an individual employee based in part on sex. It doesn’t 
matter if other factors besides the plaintiff’s sex contributed to the decision. And it doesn’t matter if the 
employer treated women as a group the same when compared to men as a group.”11 
In turn, this meant that section 703(a)(1) required employers to treat “[a]n individual’s homosexuality or 
transgender status [as] not relevant to employment decisions. That’s because it is impossible to 
discriminate against a person for being homosexual or transgender without discriminating against that 
individual based on sex.”12 To show this, Bostock ran through many hypotheticals. For example, suppose 
an employer has two employees, one male and the other female. Both are attracted to men and are 
otherwise identical. If the employer fires the male employee because he is attracted to men, the employer 
discriminates against him for traits or conduct it accepts from the female employee. Similarly, if an 
employer has two employees who are female, but fires one because she was identified as male at birth, 
but keeps the other who was identified as female at birth, the fired “employee’s sex plays an unmistakable 
 
3 Bostock, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020) 
4 Id. at 1754 (Alito, J., with whom Thomas, J., joins, dissenting); id. at 1822 (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting). 
5 Id. at 1738. 
6 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(1); Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, § 703(a)(1), 78 Stat. 241, 255. 
7 Bostock, 140 S. Ct. at 1739 (so assuming “because nothing in our approach to these cases turns on the outcome of 
the parties’ debate [on this issue], and because the employees concede the point for argument’s sake”). 
8 Id. 
9 Id. at 1740. 
10 Id. 
11 Id. at 1741. 
12 Id. 
  
and impermissible role in the decision.”13 Where “sex” is a but-for cause, it does not matter that other 
factors may also have played a role in the decision.14 Bostock also stressed that because the ordinary 
public meaning of section 703(a)(1)’s text was unambiguous, it did not matter that, because of that text’s 
breadth, Congress in 1964 may not have foreseen that it would apply to protect gay and transgender 
individuals.15 
II.  The Bostock Effect 
How much will Bostock affect what the lower courts do? Justice Alito, for one, wrote that he was 
“virtually certain” that Bostock would have “far-reaching consequences,” citing the “over 100 federal 
statutes [that] prohibit discrimination because of sex.”16 We also believe that Bostock will make lower 
courts more likely to read other sex discrimination bans in the U.S. Code to protect gay and transgender 
individuals. But unlike Justice Alito, we have less confidence and more caveats about how much more 
likely. 
Bostock’s core premise is that if a statute focuses on the individual and prohibits sex discrimination as 
section 703(a)(1) of Title VII does, it necessarily prohibits discrimination against anyone for being gay or 
transgender. This premise readily extends to bisexual, heterosexual, and cisgender individuals, among 
others, because discriminating against any such individual on that basis also necessarily makes relevant 
whether that individual is taken to be a man or a woman. 
Yet, Bostock depends on concluding that, for any particular U.S. Code ban on sex discrimination, its text, 
like section 703(a)(1), points to (1) a focus on the individual, not the group, and (2) a relationship 
between the discrimination and “sex” must satisfy no more than the traditional but-for cause standard. 
That means that Bostock has escape hatches: Find instead that the statutory text indicates a focus on the 
group and not the individual. Or find instead that the statutory text indicates something more stringent 
than but-for cause. 
Alternatively, a judge could find that the text’s “ordinary public meaning” is ambiguous on these two 
issues, and then turn to extra-textual considerations, such as substantive canons of construction, deference 
doctrines, or arguments about statutory purpose, to reach a different conclusion.17 Suppose judges can 
plausibly disagree (with negligible risk of professional embarrassment) about whether a sex 
discrimination ban’s text is ambiguous on these two issues. A judge may sincerely think the text is 
ambiguous in this way. A judge may deliberately call it ambiguous as a pretext to get Bostock out of the 
way to rule according to that judge’s ideological or other preferences. Or a judge, though trying to set 
aside those preferences, may unwittingly tend to take that text as ambiguous in cases where doing so lines 
 
13 Id. at 1741-42. 
14 Id. at 1742. On this point, Bostock argued that its reasoning was consistent with Title VII precedent. Id. at 1743-44 
(discussing Phillips v. Martin Marietta Corp., 400 U.S. 542 (1971); Los Angeles Dep’t of Water & Power v. 
Manhart, 435 U.S. 702 (1978); and Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75 (1998)). 
15 Bostock, 140 S. Ct. at 1749-52. 
16 Id. at 1778 (Alito, J., dissenting). 
17 Compare Bostock, 140 S. Ct. at 1749 (Title VII’s legislative history, though relevant for reading “ambiguous 
statutory language”, has “no bearing” here, because “no ambiguity exists about how Title VII’s terms apply to the 
facts before us”) with id. at 1763 (Alito, J., dissenting) (“The Court’s excuse for ignoring everything other than the 
bare statutory text is that the text is unambiguous and therefore no one can reasonably interpret the text in any way 
other than the Court does. . . . [T]o say that the Court’s interpretation is the only possible reading is indefensible.”). 
  
up with those preferences. In any case, there is no accepted objective way to test whether a judge has 
erred in declaring the text ambiguous enough,18 apart from at least five Supreme Court Justices saying so. 
Accordingly, we expect Bostock’s effect to vary in part with how hard it is for lower court judges to write 
an opinion concluding that the statute’s text unambiguously focuses on the individual or the group and 
requires no more than but-for cause. Sometimes, the text plausibly cuts only one way. For example, 
consider the Title VII sex discrimination provisions not at issue in Bostock. Much as they denote a focus 
on the individual in section 703(a)(1), the terms “any individual” and “such individual’s” function in the 
same way in section 703(a)(2),19 as do similar uses of “any individual” and close variants under section 
703’s parallel provisions for employment agencies,20 labor organizations,21 training programs,22 among 
others.23 What’s more, textualism lets judges rely on semantic canons of construction, including the one 
that says that the same terms within the same Act should be read to carry the same meaning.24 Thus, 
because Bostock reads section 703(a)(1) to focus on the individual, lower courts are likely to read the 
similar provisions in the rest of section 703 in the same way. After all, in the few instances in section 703 
when it intended to refer to groups, Congress used the term “group.”25 
III.  Applying Bostock outside Title VII 
What about Bostock’s effect on “sex” discrimination provisions elsewhere in the U.S. Code?26 To roughly 
sketch that effect, we started with Appendix C of Justice Alito’s dissent in Bostock. There, Justice Alito 
purported to list the “over 100 federal statutes [that] prohibit discrimination because of sex” to support his 
view that “[w]hat the Court has done today––interpreting discrimination because of ‘sex’ to encompass 
discrimination because of sexual orientation or gender identity––is virtually certain to have far-reaching 
consequences.”27 
Unfortunately, because Appendix C does not indicate how Justice Alito or his staff identified the statutory 
provisions he listed, we could not reproduce it independently. For convenience, instead of taking our own 
census of the U.S. Code’s “sex” discrimination provisions, we relied on Appendix C anyway. But we 
focused on the statutory subsection, not the statutory section, as the unit of analysis. Thus, where 
Appendix C cited a provision that contained a “sex” discrimination prohibition in more than one of its 
subsections, we treated each subsection as a separate observation. Then, we further identified (1) the text 
denoting the requisite relationship between the discriminatory conduct and “sex” (e.g., “because of … 
sex,” “on the basis of . . . sex”); and (2) the text denoting who it protected from illegal discrimination 
(e.g., “individual,” “employee”). 
 
18 Brett M. Kavanaugh, Fixing Statutory Interpretation, 129 HARVARD LAW REVIEW 2118, 2134–2144 (2016); 
Ward Farnsworth, Dustin F. Guzior & Anup Malani, Ambiguity about Ambiguity: An Empirical Inquiry into Legal 
Interpretation, 2 JOURNAL OF LEGAL ANALYSIS 257 (2010). 
19 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(2). 
20 See id. § 2000e-2(b). 
21 Id. § 2000e-2(c)(1) (“any individual”); id. § 2000e-2(c)(2)(“any individual”, “such individual’s”); id. § 2000e-
2(c)(3) (“an individual”). 
22 Id. § 2000e-2(d) (“any individual”). 
23 E.g., id. § 2000e-2(f) (exemption for actions “with respect to an individual who is a member of the Communist 
Party of the United States”). 
24 E.g., Gustafson v. Alloyd Co., 513 U.S. 561, 570 (1995). 
25 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(j) (not requiring employer to grant “preferential treatment to any individual or to any 
group”); id. § 2000e-2(n)(2)(B) (“members of a group”). 
26 E.g., Adams ex. rel. Kasper v. School Board, 968 F.3d 1286, 1305 (11th Cir. 2020) (applying Bostock to Title IX 
of the Civil Rights Act, 20 U.S.C. § 1681(a)). 
27 Bostock v. Clayton County, 140 S. Ct. 1731, 1778 (2020) (Alito, J., dissenting); see id. at 1791-1796 (Appendix 
C). 
  
The resulting dataset initially consisted of 187 observations. We dropped provisions that Justice Alito had 
cited in Appendix C but in fact used the term “gender” rather than “sex”. We screened out provisions that, 
on their own, were statutory congressional findings, or statements of policy or principles, on the premise 
that, though useful for interpretation, they alone carry no independent force of law. We also dropped 
provisions that simply incorporated by reference another sex discrimination provision in the U.S. Code, in 
State law, or more generally referred to other laws that prohibited sex discrimination. We also excluded 
Title VII, section 703. The resulting final dataset had 151 observations. 
Table 1 summarizes how the text in these provisions denote the relationship between discriminatory 
conduct and “sex”. 
Table 1 
Text Type  Frequency 
on the basis of … sex  57 
on the ground of … sex  19 
because of … sex  18 
based on … sex  8 
on account of … sex  8 
on the grounds of … sex  7 
without regard to … sex  6 
on the basis of race, sex, or ethnic groups  4 
based upon … sex  3 
because of the borrower’s sex  3 
by reason of … sex  2 
of a particular … sex  2 
because of the person’s sex  1 
entirely neutral as to the … sex … of  1 
made or based upon difference in … sex  1 
not solely be based on the … sex … of  1 
of a specified … sex  1 
on account of his or her … sex  1 
on account of the … sex … of  1 
on the basis of … sex … of  1 
on the basis of … sex, opposite sex  1 
on the basis of that person’s … sex  1 
shall not consider the … sex … of  1 
take into account … the … sex … of  1 
take sex into account  1 
without distinction as to … sex  1 
As Table 1 suggests, most of the sex discrimination provisions in the U.S. Code use language similar to 
“because of . . . sex” in section 703(a)(1) of Title VII. In turn, Bostock treats “because of” in section 
703(a)(1) to mean “by reason of” or “on account of,” all equivalent ways in which Congress can denote 
  
the traditional but-for cause standard. Bostock itself also described its holding in a way that suggests that 
“because of such individual’s . . . sex” and “on the basis of . . . sex” are interchangeable.28 Thus, Bostock 
makes it more likely that lower courts will read the text of the other sex discrimination statutes in the 
same way that Bostock read section 703(a)(1) of Title VII. 
Bostock, however, also pointed to how different statutory language might have led the Court to infer 
differently. For example, Congress might have added the word “solely” to “indicate that actions taken 
‘because of’ the confluence of multiple factors do not violate the law” or used the phrase “‘primarily 
because of’ to indicate that the prohibited factor had to be the main cause of the defendant’s challenged 
employment decision.”29 
This part of Bostock makes it easier for judges reading other sex discrimination statutes with these 
features to distinguish Bostock away. For example, when Congress immunized owners of ammonium 
nitrate facilities from civil liability for refusing to sell ammonium nitrate to “any person” based on a 
good-faith “reasonable belief” that the person wants to use it “to create an explosive device to be 
employed in an act of terrorism,” Congress added that the required “reasonable belief . . . may not solely 
be based on the . . . sex . . . of that person.”30 Because of the word “solely” in this provision, a lower court 
is now more likely to find the requisite “reasonable belief” even though the owner in part refused to sell 
because the person was gay or transgender.31 
Bostock also turned on section 703(a)(1)’s focus on the individual, not the group. Accordingly, Table 2 
summarizes how the text of the other sex discrimination provisions in the U.S. Code denote the type of 
actors to be protected from sex discrimination. 
Table 2 
Type Protected  Frequency 
Person  49 
Unspecified  20 
Membership  11 
director, officer  7 
Individual  7 
Students  4 
Borrower  3 
Children  3 
Citizen  3 
Persons  3 
Applicant  2 
borrower, applicant  2 
Employee  2 
Employees  2 
 
28 Bostock, 140 S. Ct. at 1753 (“today’s holding—that employers are prohibited from firing employees on the basis 
of homosexuality or transgender status”) (emphasis added). 
29 Id. at 1739 (citations omitted). 
30 6 U.S.C. § 488f (emphasis added). 
31 For a provision with text cutting the other way, see 28 U.S.C § 994(d) (US Sentencing Commission “shall assure 
that the guidelines and policy statements are entirely neutral as to the . . . sex . . . of offenders”) (emphasis added). 
  
Individuals  2 
member, participant  2 
Members  2 
office in the corporation  2 
officer, employee  2 
amateur athletes, coaches, trainers, managers, administrators, and officials  1 
applicant households  1 
child, family of the child  1 
Citizens  1 
defendant, victim  1 
employees, applicants  1 
employees, students  1 
individual, position held by individual  1 
individual, officer, employee, agent, director  1 
individual, person  1 
Offenders  1 
officer, employee, applicant  1 
People  1 
person, persons  1 
person, small business concern  1 
person, class of persons  1 
person; owner, officer, director, or employee of such person  1 
Personnel  1 
Refugees  1 
Residents  1 
sources of qualified applicants  1 
staff position  1 
visa refusals  1 
As Table 2 suggests, these sex discrimination provisions in the U.S. Code vary more in the way the text 
identifies who is protected than that text denotes the causation standard. 
First, some provisions protect an “individual” from sex discrimination, either as a direct object 
(discriminating against “any individual”) or as the subject of the sentence (no “individual” shall be 
discriminated against). Bostock stressed section 703(a)(1)’s uses of the word “individual” as “tell[ing] us 
. . . that our focus should be on individuals, not groups.”32 And Bostock suggested how different statutory 
text might have led the Court to infer otherwise.33 
But not every textual difference matters. For example, we bet that lower courts will read Bostock as 
coming out no differently even if section 703(a)(1) had used the plural “individuals” instead of the 
 
32 Bostock, 140 S. Ct. at 1740. 
33 Id. at 1740-41. 
  
singular “individual.” The reason: The Dictionary Act provides that, for any “Act of Congress,” unless 
“context” indicates otherwise, “words importing the singular include and apply to several persons, parties, 
or things” and “words importing the plural include the singular.”34 In turn, the term “context” in the 
Dictionary Act has been read to mean “the text of the Act of Congress surrounding the word at issue, or 
the texts of other related congressional Acts.”35 As a result, when Bostock reasoned that section 703(a)(1) 
focused on the individual, not the group, it would not have taken the plural form “individuals” as 
indicating a focus on the group over the individual. Besides, the “context”—here, the other words in 
section 703—cut the other way. In section 703, when Congress wanted to refer to the group, it used the 
word “group.”36 
Second, most of the sex discrimination provisions in the U.S. Code protect any “person” from sex 
discrimination, either as a direct object (discriminating against “any person”) or as the subject of the 
sentence (“No person” shall be discriminated against). In the U.S. Code, the default reading of “person” 
requires focusing on the individual and on some kinds of non-corporeal entities that law treats, in some 
measure, as if they act in the world as an individual could. Again, the reason is the Dictionary Act, which 
provides that, for any “Act of Congress, unless context indicates otherwise,” the word “‘person’ . . . 
include[s] corporations, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, societies, and joint stock companies, 
as well as individuals.”37 Missing from this list: the term “group,” which Congress has used when 
defining “person” elsewhere in the U.S. Code.38 Here, in the context of sex discrimination, the word 
“person” squarely focuses on the individual, not the group, absent more textual cues to the contrary.39 
Third, in a few subsections in Title 12 of the U.S. Code, sex discrimination provisions exist that use the 
word “groups.” For example, in disposing of assets as an appointed conservator or receiver, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) must act in a manner that “prohibits discrimination on the basis of 
race, sex, or ethnic groups in the solicitation and consideration of offers.”40 
Does this provision focus on the group and not the individual? If “race,” “sex,” and “ethnic” are 
adjectives that all modify “groups,” then perhaps the statute focuses on groups alone. If so read, a lawyer 
could wield Bostock to make it less likely that this sex discrimination provision covers gay or transgender 
individuals, because it covers sex groups, and thus can be read to let the FDIC treat actual and prospective 
offerers comparably as groups of men and women. As writers of the English language, we are skeptical of 
this reading. It implies that “race” here is an adjective, while ordinary English usage prefers “racial” 
(adjective) to “race” (noun) when describing a group (“racial group” over “race group”). Besides, we 
can’t find the phrase “sex groups” in the current U.S. Code or, for that matter, in any volume of the 
 
34 1 U.S.C. § 1. 
35 Rowland v. California Men’s Colony, Unit II Men’s Advisory Council, 506 U.S. 194, 199 (1993). 
36 See supra n. 25. 
37 1 U.S.C. § 1. 
38 E.g., 7 U.S.C. § 2702(b); 12 U.S.C. § 3752(7); 15 U.S.C. § 8702(15); 22 U.S.C. § 2797c(a)(8)(A); 22 U.S.C. § 
8531(4)(a); 42 U.S.C. § 2014(s); 52 U.S.C. § 30101(11). 
39 While whomever can disfavor someone because of the sex assigned to that human being, in ordinary English-
language writing, no one typically assigns companies and corporations a sex. Apple, Inc. and ExxonMobil are 
neither male nor female. Still, Congress sometimes writes sex discrimination provisions also to protect a non-
corporeal entity, as well as human beings related to a non-corporeal entity, in some way. E.g., 50 U.S.C. § 
4842(a)(1)(B) (requiring regulations prohibiting any “United States person” who, intending to support a foreign 
country’s boycott against any country “friendly” to the U.S., discriminates “against any United States person on the 
basis of . . . sex . . . of that person or of any owner, officer, director, or employee of such person”); 15 U.S.C. § 
633(b)(1) (Small Business Administration “shall not discriminate on the basis of sex . . . against any person or small 
business concern applying for or receiving assistance from the Small Business Administration”). 
40 12 U.S.C. § 1821(d)(13)(E)(iv). 
  
Statutes at Large.41 On the other hand, if only “ethnic” modifies “groups” (“ethnic groups,” a phrase 
Congress has used elsewhere42), then the subsection’s text alone leaves it unclear whether to focus on the 
individual only, the group only, or both depending on case context or statutory purpose. 
Fourth, what about provisions that identify the direct object of the illegal sex discrimination by a more 
particular category, such as “employee,” “applicant,” “member” or seeker of “membership,” “students,” 
or “citizen”? Again, context matters a lot. For example, in Title 36 of the U.S. Code, Congress created 
some national organizations for military veterans and, in so doing, often provided that the requirements 
for “membership” in, or to serve as “director” or “officer” of, such an organization “may not discriminate 
on the basis of . . . sex.”43 Writers of English would typically use those words to refer to how an 
organization treats someone who wanted to join it, or to serve as one of its directors or officers—a focus 
on the individual. Accordingly, a lawyer wielding Bostock can credibly argue that a court must read “the 
basis of . . . sex” to cover otherwise eligible gay and transgender individuals who want to join, say, the 
Air Force Sergeants Association. If other textual cues indicate that this sex discrimination provision 
focuses on the group, however, then a judge is more likely to distinguish Bostock and read the statute to 
let the Association disfavor any particular individual who wants to join for being gay or transgender, so 
long as that Association treats men and woman comparably as groups when deciding who gets in.44 
Finally, what about a provision that does not identify who it protects against sex discrimination (labeled 
in Table 2 as “unspecified”)? Bostock’s effect on these provisions is simply uncertain. We expect that 
lawyers who want to wield Bostock will search for words surrounding the provisions—be they in the 
same section, related sections, or in provisions of different yet related Acts of Congress—to present as a 
basis for inferring a focus on the individual, not the group alone. In turn, Bostock’s effect depends not 
only on those surrounding words, but also how likely a court is inclined to declare the statutory text 
ambiguous nonetheless, and if so, all the other statutory interpretation arguments to which a court may 
then resort, either on its own or at a lawyer’s urging. Still, if a court concludes, for whatever reason, that 
the provision focuses on the individual, then, thanks to Bostock, a court is more likely to read that sex 
discrimination provision to also cover gay and transgender individuals. 
IV.  Religion Defenses after Bostock 
After Bostock, some employers are more likely to raise religion-based defenses to Title VII liability for 
discriminating against gay or transgender individuals. In dicta, Bostock pointed to three legal sources for 
such defenses: Title VII itself, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, and the First Amendment.45 Let’s 
consider each in turn. 
A.  Title VII: Religion Organization Exemptions 
Title VII affords several exemptions from liability, two of which cover employers who are religious 
organizations. Under section 702(a), Title VII does not apply to any “religious corporation, association, 
educational institution, or society with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to 
 
41 We searched the Westlaw database of the current U.S. Code Annotated (“TE(‘sex groups’)”) and the Hein Online 
database of all the volumes of the U.S. Statutes at Large (“sex groups”). Both searches yielded zero results. 
42 E.g., 42 U.S.C. § 247b-4(c)(2) (“racial and ethnic groups”). 
43 E.g., 36 U.S.C. §§ 20204(b), 20205(c) (Air Force Sergeants Association). 
44 Cf. 36 U.S.C. § 220522(a)(9) (amateur sports organization is eligible to be recognized as national governing body 
only if governing board “members are selected without regard to . . . sex, except that, in sports where there are 
separate male and female programs, it provides for reasonable representation of both males and females on the board 
of directors or other governing board”). 
45 Bostock v. Clayton County, 140 S. Ct. 1731, 1754 (2020). 
  
perform work connected with” that organization’s activities.46 And under section 703(e), Title VII does 
not declare it illegal for an educational institution “to hire and employ employees of a particular religion” 
if it is at least substantially “owned, supported, controlled, or managed by a particular religion” or a 
particular religious organization, or if the educational institution’s “curriculum . . . is directed toward the 
propagation of a particular religion.”47 In other words, religious organizations, and the schools close 
enough to them, need not fear Title VII liability for discriminating against an individual because that 
individual is of a different religion.48 
After Bostock, if a gay or transgender individual brings an otherwise winning Title VII sex discrimination 
claim, how likely is an employer to escape Title VII liability with one of these exemptions? In his Bostock 
dissent, Justice Alito worried that these exemptions, as read by the lower courts, “provide only narrow 
protection.”49 
A lot initially depends on whether the defendant-employer qualifies as “a religious corporation, 
association, educational institution, or society” or as a school closely affiliated with one. To decide this, 
lower courts have pointed to, among other factors, whether the employer is a non-profit or for-profit 
entity.50 If an employer does qualify as a religious organization, then the exemptions are expansive, 
because Title VII defines “religion” to include “all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as 
belief,”51 and because section 702(a) applies even if the employee performed only secular activities.52 For 
example, courts have held that Title VII exempts a religious organization that fires an employee for 
becoming pregnant after extramarital sex, provided that organization prove that it fired her because 
extramarital sex is inconsistent with its “particular religion.”53 Thus, religious employers are likely to 
invoke these exemptions to defeat Title VII sex discrimination liability, arguing that the employer’s 
“particular religion” requires conforming gender expression to the sex assigned at birth or limiting sexual 
intimacy to the opposite sex, and thus discriminating against a gay and transgender individual because of 
religion. 
B.  Religious Freedom Restoration Act 
The Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) may provide another defense in some cases. Under 
RFRA, the federal government “shall not substantially burden a person’s exercise of religion” unless the 
government shows that applying “the burden to the person” furthers a “compelling governmental interest” 
 
46 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-1(a). 
47 Id. § 2000e-2(e)(2). 
48 Section 703(e) of Title VII also exempts any employer, religious organization or not, that discriminates “on the 
basis of . . . religion . . . in those certain instances where religion . . . is a bona fide occupational qualification 
reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise.” Id. § 2000e-2(e)(1). 
49 Bostock, 140 S. Ct. at 1781 (footnote omitted). 
50 E.g., Spencer v. World Vision, Inc., 633 F.3d 723, 724 (9th Cir. 2011); LeBoon v. Lancaster Jewish Cmty. Ctr. 
Ass’n, 503 F.3d 217, 226 (3d Cir. 2007); see also EEOC Compliance Manual § 12-II(C)(1)(2020). 
51 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j). 
52 Compare Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, § 702, 78 Stat. 241, 255 (“of its religious activities”) with 
Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972, Pub. L. No. 92-261, § 3, 86 Stat. 103, 103-04 (amending section 702: 
“of its activities”). 
53 See generally Darian B. Taylor, Validity, Construction, and Application of Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C.A. 
§§ 2000e-1(a), 2000e-2(e)(2)) Exempting Activities of Religious Organizations from Operation of Title VII Equal 
Employment Opportunity Provisions, 6 A.L.R. FEDERAL 3D Art. 6, §§ 19–20 (2015 & Supp. 2020) (compiling 
cases). 
  
and is the “least restrictive means” to further that interest.54 The term “person” in RFRA includes a 
closely-held for-profit corporation.55 
In Bostock, the Court noted in dicta that because RFRA “displac[es] the normal operation of other federal 
laws, it might supersede Title VII’s commands in appropriate cases.”56 After Bostock, suppose a gay or 
transgender individual brings an otherwise winning Title VII sex discrimination claim. In response, the 
defendant-employer, a corporation, raises a RFRA defense, arguing that Title VII “substantially 
burden[s]” its exercise of “religion” by imposing civil liability for acting consistent with a religious 
motivation not to employ anyone who is gay or transgender. How likely is that RFRA defense to prevail? 
In federal court, such a RFRA defense is unavailable where the federal appellate court has concluded that 
RFRA does not apply unless the government is a party to the litigation.57 RFRA, by its terms, only applies 
where “[g]overnment” substantially burdens religious exercise.58 RFRA makes the “government” bear the 
burdens of “going forward with the evidence and of persuasion” in showing that the challenged burden on 
religious exercise is the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling governmental interest,59 which 
the government cannot do if it is not a party to the lawsuit.60 Moreover, Congress enacted RFRA to 
restore a Free Exercise Clause doctrine that had only applied to burdens on religious exercise imposed by 
the government.61 
What then did Bostock mean by noting in dicta that RFRA “might supersede Title VII’s commands in 
appropriate cases” (citing 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb–3)? Perhaps Bostock was referring to Harris Funeral 
Homes, where the defendant had litigated a RFRA defense that it could raise because a federal 
government agency (the EEOC) had initiated the Title VII lawsuit against it.62 If so, the citation to 42 
U.S.C. § 2000bb–3 simply reminds the reader that RFRA “applies to all Federal law, and the 
 
54 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-1(a), (b). 
55 Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, 573 U.S. 682, 719 (2014). 
56 Bostock v. Clayton County, 140 S. Ct. 1731, 1754 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb–3). The Bostock and Zarda 
defendants had not raised RFRA, and the defendant in Harris Funeral Homes had not sought review of the Sixth 
Circuit’s ruling on its RFRA defense. See id. 
57 Listecki v. Official Comm. of Unsecured Creditors, 780 F.3d 731, 736-37 (7th Cir. 2015); General Conference 
Corp. of Seventh-Day Adventists v. McGill, 617 F.3d 402, 410 (6th Cir. 2010). But see Hankins v. Lyght, 441 F.3d 
96, 103 (2d Cir. 2006) (RFRA defense available in ADEA lawsuit brought by private plaintiff, because ADEA was 
also “enforceable” by EEOC); id. at 114-15 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting); and Rweyemamu v. Cote, 520 F.3d 198, 
204 n.2 (2d Cir. 2008) (dicta disfavoring RFRA analysis in Hankins). 
58 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-1(a). 
59 Id. §§ 2000bb–1(b), 2000bb–2(3). 
60 Hankins, 441 F.3d at 114–15 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). 
61 See 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb(b) (RFRA’s purposes: “(1) to restore the compelling interest test as set forth in Sherbert 
v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398 (1963) and Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972), and to guarantee its application in all 
cases where free exercise of religion is substantially burdened; and (2) to provide a claim or defense to persons 
whose religious exercise is substantially burdened by government”) (emphasis added). 
62 E.E.O.C. v. R.G. &. G.R. Harris Funeral Homes, Inc., 884 F.3d 560, 584 (6th Cir. 2018) (“[I]f Stephens had 
initiated a private lawsuit against the Funeral Home to vindicate her rights under Title VII, the Funeral Home would 
be unable to invoke RFRA as a defense because the government would not have been party to the suit.”). 
  
implementation of that law, whether statutory or otherwise,”63 including federal government enforcement 
of Title VII by the EEOC.64 
Alternatively, perhaps Justice Gorsuch cited to 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb–3 to encourage lawyers to argue in 
future cases that, because RFRA applies to the “implementation” of “all Federal law,” a RFRA defense is 
available even in a Title VII lawsuit with only private parties.65 This reading, however, raises many 
puzzles, including whether such a RFRA defense exists if that Title VII lawsuit is in state court66 and why 
RFRA defines “government” to include a “person” only if that person is “acting under color of law.”67 
Assuming a Title VII defendant can raise a RFRA defense, it must show that Title VII or its 
implementation “substantially burdens” the defendant’s conduct; that conduct is an “exercise of religion”; 
and the religious motivation for that conduct is sincerely held. How a RFRA defense to Title VII would 
fare on the merits is unclear. Past RFRA litigation tells us little. From July 2014 up through 2018, the 
federal district courts decided 115 RFRA claims on the merits, but only seven of those were employment 
cases (about six percent, with plaintiffs winning in four and losing in three).68 Still, RFRA’s definition of 
“religion” is broad, providing that religious “exercise” need not be “compelled by, or central to, a system 
of religious belief.”69 Accordingly, we expect the lower courts to accept most assertions that the conduct 
at issue is an exercise of “religion”. In contrast, taking the case law as a guide, we expect more disputes 
among litigants over RFRA’s “substantial burden” and whether imposing it is the “least restrictive 
means” to advance a “compelling” government interest. 
To illustrate, consider the fate of the RFRA defense in Harris Funeral Homes.70 The defendant funeral 
home was a for-profit corporation that Thomas Rost owned and operated. In the Sixth Circuit, the funeral 
home argued that Title VII, as applied to prohibit it from firing Ms. Stephens, was a “substantial burden” 
on Rost’s religious exercise of running the funeral home to serve grieving people.71 The Sixth Circuit 
considered and rejected two alleged substantial burdens. 
 
63 42 USC § 2000bb–3(a); see Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter & Paul Home v. Pennsylvania, 140 S. Ct. 2367, 
2383 (2020) (42 U.S.C. § 2000bb–3(a) covers “regulations implementing the [Affordable Care Act] contraceptive 
mandate”). 
64 Hankins, 441 F.3d at 115 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) (“Read in conjunction with the rest of the statute, [42 U.S.C. 
§ 2000bb–3] simply requires courts to apply RFRA ‘to all Federal law’ in any lawsuit to which the government is a 
party.”). 
65 Shruti Chaganti, Why the Religious Freedom Restoration Act Provides a Defense in Suits by Private Plaintiffs, 99 
VIRGINIA LAW REVIEW 343, 357 (2013) (reasoning that government action includes the imposition of legal rules “to 
be enforced by private plaintiffs,” citing, for example, New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964); that 
RFRA applies to the “implementation” of federal law; and therefore that “private plaintiffs suing over defendants’ 
exercises of religion are enforcing, or ‘implement[ing],’ a government-imposed burden on religion”) (footnote 
omitted). 
66 See City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507 (1997) (declaring RFRA unconstitutional as applied to States); 
Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000, Pub. L. No. 106–274, § 7(a)(1), (b) 114 Stat. 803, 
806 (amending RFRA by striking “a State, or a subdivision of a State” in definition of “government” and striking 
“and State” in 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb–3(a)). 
67 See 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-2(1),(2) (“any branch, department, agency, instrumentality, and official (or other person 
acting under color of law) of the United States” or the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the federal territories 
and possessions). 
68 Meredith Abrams, Empirical Analysis of Religious Freedom Restoration Act Cases in the Federal District Courts 
since Hobby Lobby, 4 COLUMBIA HUMAN RIGHTS LAW REVIEW ONLINE 55, 71-72 tbl. 1-2 (2019). 
69 See 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-2(4). 
70 E.E.O.C. v. R.G. &. G.R. Harris Funeral Homes, Inc., 884 F.3d 560, 585-597 (6th Cir. 2018). 
71 Id. at 585. No party disputed that Rost’s religious motivation was sincere. Id. 
  
First, Rost did not suffer a “substantial burden” on the ground that letting Stephens wear a skirt-suit to 
work would distract grieving families and thereby obstruct Rost’s ability to serve them. This assumed that 
customers would perceive Stephens as a man in woman’s attire and be disturbed by a transgender funeral 
director. It was, however, at least a “material question of fact as to whether [Rost’s] clients would actually 
be distracted.”72 More importantly, as a matter of law, “a religious claimant cannot rely on customers’ 
presumed biases” to establish a RFRA substantial burden.73 
Second, Rost did not suffer a “substantial burden” on the ground that Rost had to either provide female 
attire to Stephens or let her wear female attire to work—which he believed to be religiously forbidden—
or go out of business. Although Rost “currently provides his male employees with suits and his female 
employees with stipends to pay for clothing,” no law or religious motivation required Rost to provide that 
benefit, and the record did not show that benefit was “necessary to attract workers.”74 Moreover, the court 
accepted as sincere Rost’s belief that he would “violate “God’s commands” by letting Stephens “represent 
herself as a woman,” “because it would make him ‘directly involved in supporting the idea that sex is a 
changeable social construct rather than an immutable God-given gift.’” Nonetheless, the court found no 
RFRA “substantial burden” as a result, because as a matter of law, “bare compliance with Title VII—
without actually assisting or facilitating Stephens’s transition efforts—does not amount to an endorsement 
of Stephens’s views.”75 
Finally, the Sixth Circuit held that, in any case, the EEOC showed that any such “substantial burden” 
furthers a “compelling governmental interest” and is the “least restrictive means” to further that interest. 
If the EEOC could not enforce Title VII against the funeral home for firing Stephens, it could not advance 
its compelling interest of combating workplace discrimination.76 And Title VII liability was the least 
restrictive means to enforce that compelling interest here. For example, neither a gender-neutral dress 
code, nor an “equally-burdensome” sex-specific dress code, sufficed as lesser restrictive alternatives, 
because Rost’s sex-stereotyping applied not just to what Stephens wanted to wear, but Stephens’s 
appearance and behavior more generally.77 
C.  The First Amendment and the Ministerial Exception 
The Religion Clauses of the First Amendment bar applying employment discrimination statutes “to 
claims concerning the employment relationship between a religious institution and its ministers.”78 After 
Bostock, suppose a gay or transgender individual brings an otherwise winning Title VII sex 
discrimination claim, and the defendant-employer raises this “ministerial exception” defense to defeat 
Title VII liability. How likely is that defense to prevail? 
In short, because the Court has adopted a case-by-case approach to the issue of who counts as a 
“minister,” a lot depends on how easily lawyers and judges can analogize to the case characteristics of 
prior rulings on the ministerial exception defense. Relevant factors include whether the entity and the 
potential minister considered the person a minister, whether that person had a distinct role within that 
entity related to its religious mission, how much religious training the role required, and whether the 
 
72 Id. 
73 Id. at 586-87. Cf. 29 CFR § 1604.2(a)(1)(iii), (2) (EEOC guideline that, unless necessary for “authenticity or 
genuineness . . . e.g., an actor or actress,” Title VII’s “bona fide occupational qualification” exception for “sex” 
discrimination does not apply to “refusal to hire an individual because of the preferences of coworkers, the 
employer, clients or customers”). 
74  Harris Funeral Homes, 884 F.3d at 587-88. 
75 Id. at 590. 
76 Id. at 591-93. 
77 Id. at 593-94. 
78 Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church and School v. E.E.O.C., 565 U. S. 171, 188 (2012). 
  
person’s job duties included conveying the entity’s religious message or carrying out its religious mission. 
The title “minister” and its equivalents, and the associated formal religious training, are not dispositive. 
For example, in Our Lady of Guadalupe School v. Morrissey-Berru, the U.S. Supreme Court wrote that 
the ministerial exception applied to “employment disputes involving teachers at religious schools who are 
entrusted with the responsibility of instructing their students in the faith,” thus apparently increasing that 
defense’s scope.79 
V.  The Trump Judges 
Bostock’s effect depends not only how lower court judges read Bostock and the text of sex discrimination 
statutes, but also on those judges’ ideological and personal preferences about gender, sexuality, and 
religion. As best as can be measured, judge ideology matters to case outcomes, though it is often hard to 
disentangle how much it matters relative to other motivations or influences.80 
In recent years, federal judges have been more openly appointed based on their apparent ideological 
preferences, on the premise that those preferences will substantially affect how those judges will rule. As 
of September 2020, President Trump had appointed over 200 judges to serve on the main Article III 
federal courts (the U.S. Supreme Court, the thirteen U.S. Courts of Appeal, and the federal district 
courts), or about a quarter of the active federal judges on those courts.81 Most Trump appointees to the 
federal appellate courts had ties to the Federalist Society and were chosen as part of a process that 
weighted heavily their conservative bona fides.82 
If those lower court judges’ ideological preferences include disapproval of individuals who depart from 
heterosexual or cisgender norms, how much will that affect what those judges do with Bostock?83 
To illustrate, consider Stuart Kyle Duncan, appointed in 2018 by President Trump to the federal court of 
appeals for the Fifth Circuit. In United States v. Varner,84 a pre-Bostock case, Judge Duncan, writing a 
majority opinion (for himself and Judge Jerry E. Smith, a Reagan appointee), ruled that a district court 
could not consider a transgender woman prisoner’s request to change the name on that prisoner’s 
judgment of confinement from “Norman Varner” to “Kathrine Nicole Jett.” In the appeal, the prisoner-
appellant, proceeding pro se, had filed a two-sentence motion (titled “Motion to Use Female Pronouns 
When Addressing Appellant”): “I am a woman and not referring to me as such leads me to feel that I am 
being discriminated against based on my gender identity. I am a woman—can I not be referred to as 
one?”85 Denying her request, Judge Duncan wrote that the law did not require anyone to refer to “gender-
 
79 Our Lady of Guadalupe Sch. v. Morrissey-Berru, 140 S. Ct. 2049, 2055 (2020). 
80 See Allison P. Harris & Maya Sen, Bias and Judging, 22 ANNUAL REVIEW OF POLITICAL SCIENCE 241 (2019); 
Lee Epstein & Jack Knight, Reconsidering Judicial Preferences, 16 ANNUAL REVIEW OF POLITICAL SCIENCE 11 
(2013). 
81 FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER, Biographical Directory of Article III Federal Judges, 1789-Present, 
https://www.fjc.gov/history/judges/search/advanced-search (last visited Sept. 26, 2020). 
82 Rebecca R. Ruiz et al., A Conservative Agenda Unleashed on the Federal Courts, NEW YORK TIMES, March 14, 
2020. 
83 E.g., Letter of Am. Bar Ass’n to U.S. Senate Judiciary Comm. re: Nomination of Lawrence J.C. VanDyke to the 
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (Oct. 29, 2019) (“Some interviewees raised concerns about whether 
Mr. VanDyke would be fair to persons who are gay, lesbian, or otherwise part of the LGBTQ community. 
Mr. VanDyke would not say affirmatively that he would be fair to any litigant before him, notably members of the 
LGBTQ community.”), https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/administrative/government_affairs_office/ 
10-29-2019-vandyke-rating.pdf. The Senate confirmed VanDyke’s appointment to the Ninth Circuit on December 
11, 2019. 
84 United States v. Varner, 948 F.3d 250 (5th Cir. 2020). 
85 Varner, 948 F.3d at 259 (Dennis, J., dissenting). 
  
dysphoric litigants with pronouns matching their subjective gender identity”; if a court were to so require, 
it “may unintentionally convey its tacit approval of the litigant’s underlying legal position”; and it would 
be “quixotic” for federal judges to order use of “a litigant’s preferred pronouns,” given the complexity of 
“such neologisms” in other possible cases.86 
Suppose we infer from Varner’s content and tone that Judge Duncan tends to prefer cisgender over 
transgender individuals, all else equal, for whatever reason. If so, we might expect that, as a result, Judge 
Duncan, either deliberately or unwittingly, is more likely to distinguish Bostock away in cases where 
transgender individuals bring claims of sex discrimination under federal law or more likely to accept 
religion-based defenses to those cases, all else equal. And the more other Trump appointees share this 
tendency, the more likely that they too will rule, vote, and write opinions accordingly. 
Yet, this effect on Bostock will also likely vary with how Trump appointees comprise particular federal 
appellate courts. For example, President Trump has appointed six of the twelve active judges on Eleventh 
Circuit, six of the seventeen active judges on the Fifth Circuit, three of the fifteen active judges on the 
Fourth Circuit, but none of the active judges on the First Circuit.87 In any particular appeal, the odds of a 
Trump-appointee majority on a three-judge panel vary accordingly, and with that, what that panel will do 
with Bostock. 
Conclusion 
In this essay, we speculated about Bostock’s effect by pointing to the text of other sex-discrimination bans 
in the U.S. Code, the contours of possible religion-based defenses, and Trump appointees to the federal 
judiciary. Despite Justice Ginsburg’s recent death, five of the six Justices in the Bostock majority remain 
on the Court. As a result, Bostock will likely persist as precedent, even if Justice Ginsburg’s successor 
prefers Alito’s Bostock dissent (or disfavors Bostock on other grounds) and does not feel bound to 
Bostock by stare decisis. Nor do we suspect that such a successor, if appointed, would affect how hard 
lawyers work to distinguish Bostock away based on textual differences or work to make it easier for 
religion-based defenses to prevail. With Justice Ginsburg still alive, those lawyers would likely have 
made such arguments anyway. But, if her successor would readily accept such arguments, those lawyers 
are more likely to succeed, if only because they would have to convince Justice Gorsuch or Justice 
Roberts, not both, when the issue ultimately comes before the Court. 
 
86 Id. at 254-58 (footnote omitted). In dissent, Judge James L. Dennis, a Clinton appointee, stated that he would have 
granted the request, noting, as the majority opinion had, that “though no law compels granting or denying such a 
request, many courts and judges adhere to such requests out of respect for the litigant’s dignity.” Id. at 260 (citations 
omitted). 
87 FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER, supra note 81. 
 