Getting Data Subject Rights Right
Getting Data Subject Rights Right
A submission to the European Data Protection Board from 
international data rights academics, to inform regulatory 
guidance
by Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
© 2019 Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
Everybody may disseminate this article by electronic means and make it available for download under the terms and 
conditions of the Digital Peer Publishing Licence (DPPL). A copy of the license text may be obtained at http://nbn-resolving.
de/urn:nbn:de:0009-dppl-v3-en8.
Recommended citation: Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu, Getting Data Subject Rights Right, 10 (2019) JIPITEC 
283 para 1.
Summary
a step back and makes recommendations on the 
broader issues surrounding the accommodation of 
We are a group of academics active in research and  data subject rights in general.We strongly advise 
practice around data rights. We believe that the  the EDPB to consider the following points in its 
European Data Protection Board (EDPB) guidance  Guidance:
on data rights currently under development is an 
important point to resolve a variety of tensions  2  The interpretation and accommodation of data 
and grey areas which, if left unaddressed, may  subject rights should follow established CJEU case 
significantly undermine the fundamental right to  law requiring an ‘effective and complete protection 
data protection. All of us were present at the recent  of the fundamental rights and freedoms’ of data 
stakeholder event on data rights in Brussels on 4  subjects and the ‘efficient and timely protection’ 
November 2019, and it is in the context and spirit of  of their rights.
stakeholder engagement that we have created this 
document to explore and provide recommendations  3  The right of access plays a pivotal role in enabling 
and examples in this area. This document is based on  other  data  rights,  monitoring  compliance  and 
comprehensive empirical evidence as well as CJEU  guaranteeing due process. Analysis of guidance, 
case law, EDPB (and, previously, Article 29 Working  cases, and legal provisions indicates data controllers 
Party) guidance and extensive scientific research  cannot constrain the right of access through unfair 
into  the  scope,  rationale,  effects  and  general  file format, scope limitations, boiler-plate response, 
modalities of data rights. and that where data sets are complex, they should 
facilitate tools to enable understanding.
A. Main Takeaways 4  The right to erasure is not accommodated by 
anonymising personal data sets. In case the same 
personal data is processed for different processing 
1  The first half of this document lists recommendations  purposes some of which may not be subject to the 
for the four data subject rights mentioned in the  right to erasure, data controllers should interpret 
EDPB’s plan to draft guidelines: right of access (Article  erasure requests as a clear signal to stop all other 
15); right to rectification (Article 16); right to erasure  processing purposes that are not exempted.
(Article 17); and the right to restriction of processing 
(Article 18). The second half of this document takes 
3 283  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
5  The right to object offers a context-dependent  12  We can see this principle in operation in relation to 
and individualised re-assessment of the relevant  data rights which are prerequisites to others. The 
processing purposes, specifically in relation to the  Court held that the right of access is a pre-requisite 
data subject’s concrete situation. Data controllers’  to the ‘rectification, erasure or blocking’ of data, and 
potential compelling legitimate interests should be  thus the existence (and extent) of the right of access 
detailed, publicly declared and foreseeable, in order  must allow effective use of other data rights.4
to be able to override data subjects’ clear desire to 
stop the respective processing operation. 13  The Court has also held that provisions of data 
protection law must be interpreted as to give 
6  The right to restriction of processing — currently  effect to the efficient and timely protection of 
ignored by most data controllers — should be  the data subject’s rights.5 Furthermore, it is critical 
prioritised in time and effectively ‘freeze’ any  to consider data rights in light of the overarching 
further processing operations. Information society  principles of transparency and fairness in the 
services should offer this through an interface. GDPR. Data controllers are not permitted to frustrate 
data subjects in their attempts to benefit from the 
7  The right to rectification applies to opinions and  high level of protection that follows from their 
inferences of the data controller, including profiling,  fundamental rights. Indeed, they have to both 
and must consider that the vast majority of data is  implement data rights6 as well as facilitate the 
highly subjective. exercise of such rights.7
8  (Joint) controllers have an explicit duty to facilitate  14  Relatedly, the Court has also highlighted that 
the exercise of data subject rights and cannot  data protection should be understood within the 
require specific forms or legislative wording as a  framework of the responsibilities, powers and 
precondition for accommodating them. capabilities of a data controller.8 As the European 
Data Protection Board has already pointed out, 
9  Restrictions or limitations on how data rights are  ‘information society or similar online services that 
accommodated (eg rights and freedoms of others,  specialise in automated processing of personal data’ 
excessiveness, repetitiveness) need to be foreseeable  are highly capable at classifying, transmitting and 
and interpreted narrowly and specifically in light  managing personal data in automated ways, and as 
of the concrete and specific right, data subject and  a result9 meet data rights in an effective, complete, 
context at hand. efficient, and timely manner.
B. Background 15  Finally, the Court has also linked the ability to 
effectively exercise data subject rights with the 
10  Data subject rights are of critical importance in  fundamental right to effective judicial protection 
the European data protection regime. Throughout  in Article 47 Charter. Specifically, it stressed that 
all discussions of their scope and limits, it must be  ‘legislation not providing for any possibility for an 
recalled that rights are not simply a way to police 
that sufficient data protection is occurring, but they  de  Protección  de  Datos  (AEPD)  and  Mario  Costeja  González 
are an intrinsic part of the fundamental right to data  EU:C:2014:317 [53]; Case C-73/16 Peter Puškár v Finančné 
protection enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental  riadite stvo Slovenskej republiky and Kriminálny úrad finančnej 
rights, which states that:  správy EU:C:2017:725 [38].
ľ
Everyone has the right of access to data which has been  4  Case C434/16 Peter Nowak v Data Protection Commissioner 
collected concerning him or her, and the right to have it 
EU:C:2017:994 [57]; Case C-553/07 College van burgemeester en 
rectified.1
wethouders van Rotterdam v MEE Rijkeboer EU:C:2009:293 [51].
11  Data rights must, in general, be implemented with 
5  Case C-49/17 Fashion ID GmbH & CoKG v Verbraucherzentrale 
several observations of the Court of Justice of the 
European Union in mind.2 The Court has held that  NRW eV EU:C:2019:629 [102].
one of the key objectives of data protection law 
6  GDPR, art 25 (‘Data protection by design and by default’).
is the effective and complete protection of the 
fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons 
with respect to the processing of personal data.3 7  GDPR, art 12(2).
1  Charter, art 8(2). 8  Google Spain  (n  3)  [38];  Case  C136/17  GC and Others v 
Commission nationale de l’informatique et des libertés (CNIL) 
2  We refer to the Court of Justice as the Court in the remainder  EU:C:2019:773 [37].
of this article.
9  Article 29 Working Party, ‘Guidelines on the Right to Data 
3  Case C-131/12 Google Spain SL and Google Inc v Agencia Española  Portability (WP 242)’ (13 December 2016) 12.
3 284  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
individual to pursue legal remedies in order to have  personal data. Firstly, this right can, in principle, 
access to personal data relating to him, or to obtain  be considered as a sine qua non for meaningfully 
the rectification or erasure of such data, does not  exercising other data subject rights in Chapter 
respect the essence of the fundamental right to  III of the GDPR. More specifically, data subjects 
effective judicial protection, as enshrined in Article  will only be able to properly consider whether 
47 of the Charter.’10 Technical and organisational  to invoke their right to rectification (Article 16), 
arrangements, and arrangements of controllership,  erasure (Article 17), portability (Article 20) when 
must be understood in light of this Article 47  they know what personal data is processed exactly, 
obligation. for what purposes, whom it was shared with, and so 
on. The ‘enabling role’ of the right of access was also 
repeatedly confirmed by the Court.14 In effect, this 
C. The Right of Access (Article 15) means that any restrictions or conditions placed on 
or around the right to access have a knock-on effect 
on the entire data protection regime.
16  The right of access has been integral to data 
protection laws since the very early days. It was  18  Secondly, the right of access is an important tool that 
already positioned as ‘an essential minimum element  private individuals can use to monitor controllers’ 
in the protection of privacy’ in two Council of Europe  compliance with the general principles governing 
resolutions from the early 1970s.11 The right of  the processing of personal data, notably Articles 
access is also explicitly recognised in international  5-6 of the GDPR. Compliance with core provisions 
data protection instruments such as the OECD’s  of the regulation, such as purpose limitation, data 
1980 Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and  minimisation,  accuracy  and  storage  limitation 
Transborder Flows of Personal Data,12 and the  principles15 will be easier to verify after obtaining 
Council of Europe’s 1981 Convention.13 Importantly,  access. This monitoring role of the right of access is 
the OECD guidelines stress that data subjects have  explicitly recognised in recital 63 of the GDPR, which 
a right to have their personal data communicated  emphasises that
to them (a) within a reasonable time; (b) at no 
(excessive) charge; (c) in a reasonable manner; and   “a data subject should have the right of access to personal 
(d) in a readily intelligible form. data which have been collected concerning him or her, and to 
exercise that right easily and at reasonable intervals, in order 
to be aware of, and verify, the lawfulness of the processing.” 
17  The right of access constitutes a cornerstone in 
achieving the effective and complete protection  As such, the right of access effectively complements 
of  the  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  of  the data protection authorities mandate to monitor 
natural persons with respect to the processing of  and enforce the application of the GDPR (Article 57(1)
a), by enabling a broader number of stakeholders 
10  Case  C-362/14  Maximillian  Schrems  v  Data  Protection  to verify GDPR compliance. Max Schrems’ actions 
Commissioner EU:C:2015:650 [95]. against  Facebook  provide  a  useful  illustration 
of the effectiveness of this remedial function. 
11  Council of Europe - Committee of Ministers, ‘Resolution (73)  After filing an access request with the company, 
22 on the Protection of the Privacy of Individuals Vis-à-Vis  Schrems received an enormous PDF file (including 
Electronic Data Banks in the Private Sector’ (26 September  data thought to previously have been erased) and 
1973);  Council  of  Europe  -  Committee  of  Ministers,  initiated proceedings before the Irish DPA. Among 
‘Resolution (74) 29 on the Protection of the Privacy of  others, this access request served as a catalyst 
Individuals Vis-a-Vis Electronic Data Banks in the Public  which eventually led the CJEU to invalidate the Safe 
Sector’ (20 September 1974). Harbour decision.16 This role is especially important 
given the under-resourced and over-burdened sate 
12  OECD,  Recommendation  of  the  Council  concerning  of many supervisory authorities.17 It needs to be 
Guidelines  governing  the  Protection  of  Privacy  and 
Transborder Flows of Personal Data (2013) [C(80)58/FINAL,  14  Rijkeboer (n 4) [51]; Nowak (n 4) [57].
as amended on 11 July 2013 by C(2013)79], principle 13 on 
Individual Participation. 15  GDPR, arts 5(1)(b–e).
13  Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard  16  Schrems I (n 10).
to  Automatic  Processing  of  Personal  Data  (opened  for 
signature 28 January 1981, entered into force 1 October  17  See  generally  European  Data  Protection  Board,  ‘First 
1985) 108 ETS, art 8. The convention was modernised in 2018  Overview on the Implementation of the GDPR and the Roles 
(Protocol amending the Convention for the Protection of  and Means of the National Supervisory Authorities’ (Report 
Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal  presented to the European Parliament’s Civil Liberties, 
Data (opened for signature 10 October 2018) 228 CETS) and  Justice and Home Affairs Committee (LIBE), 26 February 
the relevant provision can now be found in Article 9. 2019).
3 285  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
stressed however, that well-resourced supervisory  21  In older data systems, where the number of points on 
authorities are key to the effective functioning of  any given individual was considerably smaller than it 
data rights. often is today, a simple print-out or summary would 
suffice to give the data subject oversight as to the 
19  The  importance  of  the  right  of  access  is  not  content of the data undergoing processing.21 Today, 
restricted to those purposes explicitly mentioned  however, many data systems collect such a large 
in the recitals.18 For example, the right of access  number of data points, that only a format that 
also functions as a due process guarantee. Personal  allows the data subject to analyse data themselves 
data is often collected to serve as input for making  will allow them to have sufficient oversight over 
decisions about people. Such decisions range from  the data processing being undertaken.
which advertisement is shown, whether and under 
which conditions a loan is given, to whether one  22  Firstly, it can and should be understood as part of the 
qualifies for social security. The right of access to  principle of fairness that a data controller should not 
personal data is historically also predicated on the  transform data from the machine-readable format 
idea that people should be empowered and able to  they hold it in22 into a format that makes it more 
assess and contest decisions made about them.19  difficult for the data subject to navigate. Information 
It is a response to these decisions being based on  society services can only analyse the data they hold about 
increasing collection and digitalisation of data  individuals by virtue of its machine-readable nature. To 
relating to individuals. refuse individuals the same ability exacerbates the 
informational and power asymmetries that the 
right of access, and the fundamental right of data 
I.  Data Format of Access Requests protection in general, seeks to rebalance.
23  In  particular,  data  controllers  should  not 
20  The format of data provided pursuant to the right of  transform data from common machine-readable 
access is very important for the effective use of the  formats (eg JSON, CSV) into PDF formats. Portable 
right by the data subject. It should be considered that  document format, or ‘PDF’, is a file designed for 
data subjects who exercise their rights have different  printing, not for analysis. The A29WP recognised this 
legitimate reasons for doing so and that they have  in their guidance on the right to portability, stating 
different backgrounds and capabilities. It follows  that
that the data format which is most appropriate to 
these different situations must vary accordingly. We  As an example, providing an individual with .pdf versions of 
therefore recommend that the layered approach  an email inbox would not be sufficiently structured. E-mail 
data must be provided in a format which preserves all the 
advocated by the A29WP in the context of privacy 
meta-data, to allow the effective re-use of the data. As such, 
statements/notices,20  should  equally  apply  to 
when selecting a data format in which to provide the personal
information provided through Article 15 access 
requests. Following this insight, we analyse first (in 
the remainder of 3.1) the limits of relying on PDFs to 
provide access, the need to provide access to all data,  21  This  is  not  to  say  that  many  systems  have  not  been 
and the benefits of doing so in a machine readable  considerably complex in relation to subject access rights 
format; and second (in 3.2) why the complexity  for many decades, see eg Graham Greenleaf and Roger 
of data processing should not be accepted as an  Clarke, ‘Database Retrieval Technology and Subject Access 
argument to limit the access to all data, but rather  Principles’ (1984) 16 The Australian Computer Journal.
to put an obligation on the data controller to provide 
the conditions necessary to render the complex data  22  In its Guidelines on Transparency, the A29WP (Article 
intelligible.  29  Working  Party,  ‘Guidelines  on  transparency  under 
Regulation 2016/679’ (n 20) 25) refers to Recital 21 of 
Directive 2013/37/EU for a definition: ‘A document should 
be considered to be in a machine-readable format if it is in 
18  Case C434/16 Peter Nowak v Data Protection Commissioner  a file format that is structured in such a way that software 
EU:C:2017:582, Opinion of AG Kokott [39]. applications  can  easily  identify,  recognise  and  extract 
specific data from it. Data encoded in files that are structured 
19  See Alan F Westin and Michael A Baker, Databanks in a Free  in a machine-readable format are machine-readable data. 
and Fair Society (Quadrangle Books 1972), which argues  Machine-readable formats can be open or proprietary; they 
for the introduction of the right of access based on due  can be formal standards or not. Documents encoded in a file 
process argument, and which was very influential on the  format that limits automatic processing, because the data 
development of data protection law, also in Europe. cannot, or cannot easily, be extracted from them, should 
not be considered to be in a machine-readable format. 
20  Article 29 Working Party, ‘Guidelines on Transparency  Member States should where appropriate encourage the 
under Regulation 2016/679’ (11 April 2018) 19–20. use of open, machine-readable formats.’
3 286  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
data, the data controller should consider how this format 
impaired users. The guidance should be very clear 
would impact or hinder the individual’s right to re-use the 
data.23 that screenshots in general are not an appropriate 
manner of providing access rights for services which 
24  Because PDFs are designed for printing, they are  rely heavily on the automatic processing of personal 
notoriously difficult to extract data from — so much  data, such as information society services.
so, that table extraction from PDFs is an academic 
area of study, which researchers even deploy neural  26  The common practice of limiting access to the 
networks and deep learning for in an attempt to  data that is visible through the interfaces, which 
solve.24 Transforming data into PDFs unwantedly  is available to support staff has other limiting 
only disadvantages the data subject and forecloses  implications for the right of access. First, not all 
analysis opportunities. Even formats such as HTML,  the personal data processed in a system may be 
ODF, ODT, XLSX or DOCX are more reusable and can  visible through the interface used for day-to-
be parsed by machines. day operations. Second, support staff may only 
have access to a subset of all the systems in which 
25  Furthermore, PDFs score extremely poorly for  personal data is processed. Just because personal 
individuals who need accessible information  data is not used in a day-to-day business practice 
online. Individuals who require or are assisted by  by frontline workers, it is not an appropriate 
accessible information include those with cognitive  reason to exclude it from access. If data is held, it 
disabilities, those with vision impairments, those  falls within the scope of the right to access.
with physical disabilities and those with hearing 
impairments. 25 A study of 100 blind screen-reader  27  A specific area of concern in this regard is ‘deleted’ 
users found that inaccessible PDFs were one of the  data. In many common implementations of database 
main causes of frustration while browsing the Web.  software, the processing operation that is commonly 
26 Accessible PDFs in practice are rarely found, are  referred to as ‘deleting’ merely changes a label 
difficult to create and often require consultants  attached to a data-point. For example, an individual 
and in-depth planning and expert knowledge. 27 In  may have pressed a ‘delete’ button on a social media 
general PDFs are not tools that lends themselves  post, or an old address may seem ‘deleted’ when 
to accessibility across the population.28 In the  overwritten with a new address, but that does not 
authors’ experience, many data controllers provide  necessarily mean associated data is deleted from 
screenshots of databases as visible to their support  the controller’s servers. While this practice may, 
staff — a format which is both unable to be re-used by  depending on the circumstances, be appropriate, it 
the data subject, and totally inaccessible to visually  is important to stress that such data still exists in 
the system, and therefore falls under the reach of 
the right of access to personal data. On websites and 
23  Article 29 Working Party, ‘Guidelines on the right to data  apps today, this data may have even been typed and 
portability (WP 242)’ (n 9) 14. then deleted (without ever having pressed ‘submit’ 
or ‘send’), or only partially uploaded (from the 
24  See generally Shah Khusro and others, ‘On Methods and  user’s point of view), yet still retained by the data 
Tools of Table Detection, Extraction and Annotation in PDF  controller. 29
Documents’ (2015) 41 Journal of Information Science 41. For 
a recent example of a neural network powered PDF parsing 
tool, see L Hao and others, ‘A Table Detection Method for 
PDF Documents Based on Convolutional Neural Networks’ 
(April  2016)  2016  12th  IAPR  Workshop  on  Document  29  Drew  Harwell,  ‘Start  a  Post,  Then  Delete  It?  Many 
Analysis Systems (DAS) 287. Websites  Save  It  Anyway.’,  Washington  Post  (18 
December  2018)  <https://www.washingtonpost.com/
25  cf Gian Wild and Daniel Craddock, ‘Are PDFs an Accessible  technology/2018/12/18/start-post-then-delete-it-many-
Solution?’ in Computers Helping People with Special Needs  websites-save-it-anyway/>  accessed  17  November  2019; 
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Klaus Miesenberger  Tony Romm, ‘Facebook Says a New Bug Allowed Apps to 
and others eds, Springer International Publishing 2016) 355. Access Private Photos of up to 6.8 Million Users’, Washington 
Post (14 December 2018) <https://www.washingtonpost.
26  Jonathan Lazar and others, ‘What Frustrates Screen Reader  com/technology/2018/12/14/facebook-says-new-bug-
Users on the Web: A Study of 100 Blind Users’ (2007) 22  allowed-apps-access-private-photos-up-million-users/> 
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 247. accessed 17 November 2019; Steven Englehardt and others, 
‘No Boundaries: Exfiltration of Personal Data by Session-
27  Erin  Brady  and  others,  ‘Creating  Accessible  PDFs  for  Replay Scripts’ (Freedom to Tinker, Centre for Information 
Conference Proceedings’ in Proceedings of the 12th Web for All  Technology  Policy,  Princeton  University,  15  November 
Conference (W4A ’15, New York, NY, USA, ACM 2015). 2017)  <https://freedom-to-tinker.com/2017/11/15/no-
boundaries-exfiltration-of-personal-data-by-session-
28  ibid. replay-scripts/> accessed 17 November 2019.
3 287  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
A social network is asked for to provide a copy of  these children could be a similar data record to John’s 
all data held about an individual, which includes 
own, nested in the ‘children’ key. This format is not 
posts, lists of friends, advertising interests and the 
tabular, and to convert it to tabular data would 
history of log-ins to the site. Because all of this data 
generally lose information. This is because each 
is processed automatically by the social network, and 
record might have different ‘keys’ (think columns 
readily available to the social network in a machine 
readable format, the social network is obliged not  in a table), and a different number of values for each 
to render it less machine readable or accessible to  key (think cells).
individuals with visual impairments by placing it into 
a PDF file or a similar format complicating machine  32  To illustrate the policy challenges, and guidance 
readability, such as an image or screenshot. requirements, of datasets such as those in JSON 
Proposed Example format, we will provide a truncated extract from an 
access request to a popular music service and data 
II. Rendering ‘Raw’, Necessarily  controller, Spotify. Spotify provided telemetry data 
to one of the authors in mid-2018 on the basis of a 
Complex Data Intelligible
data access right. The telemetry data Spotify held 
from the previous six months alone amounted to 
28  Often, data is necessarily complex. Datasets include,  845 megabytes of plain text files (TXT files in JSON 
for example, those which record varied data subject  structure). The following entry appears to relate to 
activity over time, such as their interaction with  the adding of a single song (‘No Man is Big Enough 
information society services. Such interactions may  for My Arms’ by Ibeyi) to a playlist. The actual entry 
not be classed within a single variable (eg clicked,  for this single action was 171 lines long, only 66 
played, watched) but may consist of multiple bundled  illustrative lines are reproduced here.
and nested variables, some with multiple values. 
29  Complexity of data should not be a reason not to 
{
provide the ‘raw’, maximally complex, data upon 
        “pid”: {
request. However, it may be a reason to develop a 
            “description”: “”, 
layered approach for individuals who may not be 
            “value”: “1217”
able to parse the dataset.
        }, 
        “time”: {
30  In many cases, raw data will likely be represented              “description”: “”, 
within the data controller in a flexible format such as              “value”: “1525786006.15”
JSON. A JSON file is simply a way of arranging a text          }, 
        “message”: {
file in a human-readable, yet machine-parseable, way 
            “item_uri”: {
as to describe a flexible data object. For example, the 
                “description”: “URI of item that was added and only the first 
below is an entry from John Smith, which contains  if multiple.”, 
some biographical information about John.                 “value”: “spotify:track:3nPOISgqtO1hl7nNxAZi7K”
            }, 
            “source”: {
{
                “description”: “The view uri which led to add to playlist.”, 
  “firstName”: “John”,
                “value”: “\u0003\u0001\u0000\u0001\ufffdDd\ufffdo\ufffd\
  “lastName”: “Smith”, ufffd\u0012\ufffdt’\
  “age”: 27,                  ufffd\u0006Ey\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\u000f}\
  “phoneNumbers”: [ ufffd\u001bLi\u0012\
    {                  ufffdO\u0019\ufffdp\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd4\ufffd\ufffddX\
u0002\ufffd\ufffd\
      “type”: “home”,
                 ufffd`”
      “number”: “212 555-1234”
            }, 
    },
            “message_version”: {
    {
                “description”: “”, 
      “type”: “mobile”,
                “value”: “4”
      “number”: “123 456-7890”
            }, 
    }
            “playlist_uri”: {
  ],
                “description”: “The uri of playlist added to or null.”, 
  “children”: [],
               “value”: “\u0003\u0001\u0000\u0001O\ufffd/&\ufffdE.\
  “spouse”: null ufffd@\ufffd\
} u001a\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\”\ufffd\ufffd\u0005\u0014f\
ufffd\ufffd\ufffd5f\
Example of a JSON file extract
31  Observe that, for example, in a JSON a nested 
structure is present: more than one telephone 
number is provided, and if John Smith had children, 
3 288  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\u001c\
u0011\ufffdY[\ufffd\ 34  Other data are less clear or completely opaque, such 
ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\u0011\ufffdn<\u007fN\ufffdb\ufffd\u0015\ufffd\ as: 
u0017Y\ufffd’p\
ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\r2”
•  client revision number (‘845100696’)
            }, 
•  connection  ID  assigned  by  the  AP 
            “time”: {
                “description”: “Unix timestamp”,  (‘28539029148205306’)
                “value”: “1525786006” •  rid (‘7795720745’)
            }, 
            “number_items”: {
                “description”: “Number of items added.”, 
                “value”: “1”
            },  35  Some data is technically obfuscated. For example: 
            “context_source”: {
               “description”: “URI representing action context source”, 
                “value”: 
- public IP address of the connected node (‘\u0003\b\u0000\u0001\
 “\u0003\u0001\u0000\u0001\ufffd\u0003\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\
ufffd\ufffd\u000e\ ufffd\ufffdw\ufffd\ufffd\ufffdZWI\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd^u\
u0013\ufffd|\ufffd\ufffd\ufffdP\ufffd>\ufffd:\ufffd2\ufffd\ufffd~?\
ufffd\ufffd2\ufffd\ ufffd\ufffd*\ufffd:\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffdv\ufffd\ufffd\
u0007\ufffd\u0012,’&\ufffd\ufffdMM}\ufffd\ufffdOP\ufffd\ufffd\ ufffdx\ufffd\ufffd?{\ufffd\u0006\ufffd\ufffd’)
ufffd\ufffdc\ufffdV\f\
ufffd:\ufffd\ufffd\r\ufffdY*\ufffdN\ufffd\ufffd\tU”
- URI representing action context source (‘\u0003\u0001\u0000\
            }
u0001\ufffd\u0003\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\u000e\
        }, 
        “rid”: { u0013\ufffd|\ufffd\ufffd\ufffdP\ufffd>\ufffd:\ufffd2\ufffd\ufffd~?\
            “description”: “”,  ufffd\ufffd2\ufffd\u0007\ufffd\u0012,’&\ufffd\ufffdMM}\ufffd\
            “value”: “7795720745” ufffdOP\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffdc\ufffdV\f\ufffd:\ufffd\ufffd\r\
        }, 
ufffdY*\ufffdN\ufffd\ufffd\tU’)
        “identData”: {
            “ip_addr”: {
                “description”: “public IP address of the connected node”, 
                “value”: 
“\u0003\b\u0000\u0001\ufffd\ufffdw\ufffd\ufffd\ufffdZWI\ufffd\ 36  Both of these variables are among several in the text 
ufffd\ufffd\
which are filled with ‘escaped’ Unicode characters 
ufffd^u\ufffd\ufffd*\ufffd:\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffd\ufffdv\ufffd\
ufffd\ufffdx\ufffd\ with no clear representation (eg ‘\ufffd’). Even when 
ufffd?{\ufffd\u0006\ufffd\ufffd” these are removed, we could not understand the 
            },  meaning of these sequences. If there is a decoding 
            “conn_country”: {
mechanism for these variables, it was not provided 
                “description”: “the country looked up with GeoIP by the AP”, 
to the data subject. The specific song that was added 
                “value”: “GB”
            },  was only accessible through the Spotify identifier, 
            “tcp_port”: { which can be resolved manually through the Spotify 
                “description”: “public TCP port of the connected node”, 
App, and requires further interaction with the 
                “value”: “59918”
service (and, of course, further data collection on 
            }, 
            “platform”: { this interaction by Spotify).
                “description”: “platform of the connected node”, 
                “value”: “iOS 11.3 (iPhone9,1)”
37  Whereas it is important for data controllers to be 
            }, 
able to provide all personal data they have on a 
            “version”: {
                “description”: “”,  data subject in raw format, it is equally important 
                “value”: “10” that they ensure data subjects can easily access 
            },  and understand such data (Article 12(1)). This 
        }
is  particularly  important  with  regard  to  data 
    }
controllers of complex data-ecosystems as illustrated 
Extract from the Spotify Telemetry Data provided to one 
of the authors above. We therefore recommend the EDPB to stress 
that accommodating the right of access should – 
where needed – include the tools rendering the 
entire data-set understandable. Put differently, the 
33  Some of this data comes with a relatively clear  layered approach heavily advocated by the A29WP in 
description, such as:  the context of privacy statements/notices,30 equally 
applies to subject specific information provided 
•  the country chosen by the user at registration time  through Article 15 access requests.
(‘GB’)
•  Number of items added (‘1’)
•  platform  of  the  connected  node  (‘iOS  11.3 
(iPhone9,1)’) 30  Article  29  Working  Party,  ‘Guidelines  on  transparency 
under Regulation 2016/679’ (n 20) 19–20.
3 289  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
38  In some cases, the risk of processing, and the  services.35 Access to these opinions and inferences 
requirement for the data controller to facilitate  is key to a variety of other rights and obligations in 
rights and design data protection into processing  the GDPR, such as rectification, objection, erasure, 
systems,  may  require  a  bespoke  exploration  as well as the broad assessment of fairness and non-
interface to be designed for such complex datasets.  discrimination.36 Access rights are pre-requisites 
However, particularly if the guidance determines  to so many other potentially applicable rights and 
that some data controllers would not be required to  checks, that providing them is key to effective 
create such tools, it is key that they release data  oversight and the principle of transparency.
in a format which allows such tools to be made 
by third parties. This requires, for example, that  42  It is worth noting that two recent relevant CJEU 
the datasets (such as the Spotify example above) are  cases, YS and Others37 and Nowak,38 do not clearly 
stable in their format (so that analysis tools made  map onto issues of access to inferences in the 
by civil society do not break), well-documented (so  digital economy. Because both concern the Data 
that faithful analysis tools can be created), and not  Protection Directive, they do not distinguish profiling 
contingent on hidden datasets for understanding  from other forms of opinion-forming. In particular, 
(such as reference dataset linking song names to  recital 72 of the GDPR emphasises that: 
identifiers).
Profiling is subject to the rules of this Regulation governing 
the processing of personal data, such as the legal grounds for 
III. Opinions and Inferences
processing or data protection principles.39
39  The fact that opinions and inferences can qualify  Profiling is defined as: 
as personal data has been confirmed by the CJEU, 
which noted that the term ‘any information’ in the  any form of automated processing of personal data consisting 
definition of personal data includes information  of the use of personal data to evaluate certain personal aspects 
relating to a natural person, in particular to analyse or predict 
that is ‘not only objective but also subjective, in the 
aspects concerning that natural person’s performance at 
form of opinions and assessments, provided that it 
work, economic situation, health, personal preferences, 
‘relates’ to the data subject’.31 The test of whether 
interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements40
data ‘relates’ to an individual is satisfied where it is 
linked to a person ‘by reason of its content, purpose  43  Profiling is seen as an activity which increases the 
or effect’.32 risk of data processing to data subjects rights and 
freedoms, indicated by, for example, significant 
40  Access to opinions about individuals can become  decisions based (even in non-solely automated 
contentious in cases where those opinions are  ways) on profiling triggering the requirement for 
expressed in a professional context by third parties,  a data protection impact assessment.41 The A29WP, 
such as written or oral evidence provided as part of  in guidance endorsed by the EPDB, list ‘[e]valuation 
a human resources dispute, yet recorded on a file  or scoring, including profiling and predicting’ 
about individuals. In those cases, it is an instance  as a criterion for the determination of high-risk 
of ‘mixed personal data’ and should be navigated  processing.42 
as such. This is dealt with later in this document.33
35  See generally Lilian Edwards and Michael Veale, ‘Slave to 
41  Opinions  or  inferences  formed  of  the  data  the Algorithm? Why a “Right to an Explanation” Is Probably 
subject by the data controller, however, should  Not the Remedy You Are Looking For’ (2017) 16 Duke Law & 
not  merit  a  similar  exemption.  In  practice,  Technology Review 18.
these inferences can range from a quantitative or 
‘predictive’ assessment of employment performance  36  GDPR, recital 71.
using manual or automated surveillance tools34 to 
profiling of data subjects by information society  37  Joined  Cases  C141/12  and  C372/12  YS  v  Minister  voor 
Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel and Minister voor Immigratie, 
31  Nowak (n 4) [34]. Integratie en Asiel v M and S EU:C:2014:2081.
32  ibid [35]. 38  Nowak (n 4).
33  See section 3.4. 39  GDPR, recital 72.
34  See generally Ifeoma Ajunwa and others, ‘Limitless Worker  40  GDPR, art 4(4).
Surveillance’ (2017) 105 Calif L Rev 735; Lilian Edwards and 
others, ‘Employee Surveillance: The Road to Surveillance  41  GDPR, art 35(3)(a).
is Paved with Good Intentions’ (SSRN Scholarly Paper, 18 
August 2018). 42  Article 29 Working Party, ‘Guidelines on Data Protection 
3 290  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
44  Neither  Nowak  or  YS and Others  can  be  easily  columns instead, each of which contains a number 
construed as profiling, as both were cases of manual,  between -1 and 1. It would be possible to plot these 
rather than automated, processing. Legal analysis  10,000 points on a 3D scatter plot, and the idea is that 
of the type in YS and Others would not fall under the  ‘similar’ users are clustered together. In practice, 
profiling definition. It also seems doubtful that a  the number of dimensions is much larger — often 
traditional examination, such as that in Nowak, would  thousands — but the concept is the same. In 1000D 
fall under the concept of profiling (unless it was  space, rather than 3D space, many more nuanced 
marked automatically). Consequently, we have not  characteristics can be caught: for example, on some 
seen the Court provide judgements clearly analogous  dimensions, users might be clustered in practice by 
to profiling. Profiling is therefore a distinct activity  language, while in others, they might be clustered 
which distinguishes many inferences and opinions  by ethnicity, and in others, by interests. Yet each 
made in the context of the digital economy from  column is not a clear variable such as this: it is the 
existing case-law: it is a situation where risk is  emergent property of ‘similarity’ which is important, 
heightened and the need to provide strong data  and therefore the columns are not interpretable 
protection is also heightened. without the rows to understand what the clusters 
mean in practice. 
45  Furthermore, when executing an access right, 
where inference is a human understandable score  48  In embedding systems, how individuals are being 
or category, context must be provided as to  profiled, and the opinions formed about them, are 
the alternatives that the individual could have  not in some human-readable inference, but are 
been categorised as. This is important for rights  instead based on their proximity and similarity to 
such as rectification where they apply in this  others.44 The Guidance must address how individuals 
context, or assessing whether such categorisations  can access the way they are being profiled in such 
are potentially discriminatory, as without this  systems.  In  particular,  it  must  be  emphasised 
knowledge, they would not know the alternative  that this is a dataset of personal data, not an 
options available. automated decision system as per GDPR Article 22. 
46  The EDPB should, however, be aware that a particular  Each individual is attached to a record of hundreds 
challenge exists in practice as many data controllers  or thousands of data points that place them in 
do not explicitly infer human-understandable  relation to other individuals, and which has been 
data about the data subject, but infer data  calculated in advance, ready for use at a later stage. 
which is used to shape and sort them, which  The automated system is simply looking at the 
only machines can ‘understand’. For example, a  distance between the co-ordinates of one individual 
common tool in this area is the ‘embedding’, where  and another, and that would be the ‘logic’ of the 
data records are plotted as ‘points’ in such a way that  processing. The data points are not the logic of 
the distance between them is an indicator of their  processing, and therefore the data points fall 
similarity or dissimilarity to each other. This is a  wholly within the right of access.
common practice in advertising and recommender 
systems.43 49  In particular, it is concerning that data controllers 
are seeking to use complex processing, such as 
47  An embedding is a simple but important technology.  embeddings, in order to practically render access 
Imagine 10,000 users, and each has 10 characteristics  rights  unhelpful  in  understanding  the  ways 
which are known about them, such as their age,  individuals are being profiled, and opinions formed 
location, and so on. This is a 10,000 x 10 table.  against them. 
An embedding turns these users into vectors of 
geometric points. Many methods, including neural 
networks, are possible to do this. The end product is 
a table with 10,000 rows, but with, for example, three 
Impact  Assessment  (DPIA)  and  Determining  Whether 
Processing is “Likely to Result in a High Risk” for the 
Purposes  of  Regulation  2016/679  (WP  248  Rev.01)’  (4 
October 2017) 9.
43  See for example the description of the system used by 
Pinterest at Stephanie deWet and Jiafan Ou, ‘Finding Users 
Who Act Alike: Transfer Learning for Expanding Advertiser 
Audiences’ in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD ’19,  44  See  further  Solon  Barocas  and  Karen  Levy,  ‘Privacy 
New York, NY, USA, ACM 2019). Dependencies’ [2019] Washington Law Review.
3 291  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
A social network uses vector embeddings to assess  a member of parliament that a complaint submitted 
the similarity between two data subjects. These  to the Constitutional Court could not be subject to 
embeddings are stored alongside a user ID. According  a document release request by an NGO because it 
to the layered approach, the entire vector for that  included personal data was in violation of Article 10 
user should be provided (so that the data subject  of the Convention, on the grounds that individuals 
can compare to other data subjects if they wish)  in public life should not be able to stop the genuine 
regardless of what the controller believes the utility  disclosure of documents on the basis that their 
of this to the data subject to be, but also, a system to  opinions on public matters constituted private data 
help users understand what these embeddings mean  which could not be disclosed without consent.46
for them, such as the nature of the other individuals 
they are clustered near, should be provided. 52  In the UK, the Court of Appeal has ruled that even 
where a third party has refused to consent to data 
Proposed Example released on the basis of an access request, that does 
not mean there is a rebuttable presumption against 
release, but that the case should be balanced on 
A political party has categorised a data subject as 
a ‘Pragmatic Liberal’ using a machine learning  importance and merits.47 
classifier. In the access request, the data controller 
lists  all  possible  other  classifications  for  this  The Information Commissioner also counsels in this 
individual, so that the data subject understands this  direction, stating that:
opinion within its context.
depending on the significance of the information to the 
Proposed Example
requester, it may be appropriate to disclose it even where 
the third party has withheld consent.48
53  Furthermore, the focus on the above is that the data 
IV. Mixed Personal Data’ Should Only 
controller should seek consent from third parties 
Justify Refusal in Limited Cases
in an access request. A data controller should not 
have a blanket policy to refuse to seek such consent. 
For an information society service, where such a 
50  Much personal data relate to more than one person.  process can be easily automated, that is especially 
This includes, for example, data such as: true.
•  reputation systems, where a rating relates to the 
A data subject requests the rating information 
rated and the rater; from individuals on a ratings platform. The data 
•  ambiently collected data, such as from sensors or  controller retains such data. The data controller has 
‘smart speakers’; an obligation to ask the relevant raters for consent to 
•  message data, which relates to the sender and  release this data, rather than refuse the data subject 
recipient, and may also mention and relate to third  access to this data. The controller then must assess, 
parties; with reference to the significance of the information 
to the requester, whether this data should be 
•  data as part of a professional duty or relationship, 
released. Such an assessment must not be a blanket 
such as notes taken by a medical professional about 
policy, but must co#nsider individual circumstances.
a patient.
Proposed Example
51  This data often causes challenges when the right 
of access is invoked.It is important to note that  V. Access to Sources and 
significant case-law in this area exists from the 
Recipients of the Data
European Court of Human Rights, which has, in 
general, favoured the individual seeking access to 
data over third parties seeking to limit its release. In 
Gaskin, the ECtHR ruled that just because no consent  54  While discussion of the right of access mostly 
had been obtained from all third parties in the data,  focuses on the right to access the data itself, it is 
it did not mean that it could not be released, and  important to stress that the right, on the basis of 
that there was a need for an independent authority 
to exist to make the final call; otherwise there would  46  Társaság a Szabadságjogokért v Hungary App no 37374/05 
have been a breach of Article 8 of the Convention.45  (2009).
In Társaság a Szabadságjogokért v Hungary, the claim by 
47  DB v General Medical Council [2018] EWCA Civ 1497 [70].
48  Information Commissioner’s Office, ‘Subject Access Code of 
45  Gaskin v United Kingdom [1990] EHRR 36. Practice’ (9 June 2017) 40.
3 292  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
Article 15(1)(a–f) also encompasses the obligation on  subjects to learn more about their particular 
data controllers to provide additional information  situation upon request. This also follows from the 
regarding the processing of data. Of particular  Court’s case law in Nowak51 and Rijkeboer52.
importance in relation to the data subject’s ability 
to monitor the controller’s compliance with data  57  The issue is illustrated by the way in which Facebook 
protection legislation, as well as her ability to  responds  to  access  requests:  With  respect  to 
effectively exercise her other data subject rights  information about the data categories that Facebook 
are the right to know the recipients, as well as the  holds about Mr. XYZ: this depends on how he uses 
sources of the data undergoing processing. the Facebook Products. The data categories and 
their sources are clearly set out in our Data Policy 
In  line  with  these  goals  and  building  on  the  (accessible via https://www.facebook.com/policy.php)
earlier position taken by A29WP,49 the provided 
information should include the actual named  58  Even when specifically asked not to simply recite 
sources and actual named recipients of the data  their privacy policy, Facebook still does. When 
subject’s personal data in particular. Without  explicitly requested to provide ‘a complete and 
such information, data subjects are not able to  detailed overview of all the different ways personal 
know where and how their personal data has  data have been and will be processed (not your 
been disseminated. Currently only a very small  general privacy policy, but a list of which of my 
proportion of data controllers provides such data  data were used for which concrete purpose) as well 
when requested.50 as the exact lawful ground (art.6 (1) GDPR) for each 
processing purpose’, Facebook responds:
VI. Responses to Access Requests  59  We understand that Mr XYZ would like a complete 
Need to be Specific and Tailored and detailed overview of all the different ways in 
which his personal data have been processed and 
will be processed, including the legal basis relied on 
55  Controllers  very  frequently  accommodate  (at  by Facebook. Whilst Mr XYZ indicates he does not 
least part of) access requests by reciting generic  seek our “general privacy policy”, we’d like to clarify 
information already available in the privacy policy/ that the information requested by him is detailed in 
notice/statement. This clearly appears from the  this document and our legal bases fly out. 
combined empirical work of the authors, as well 
as the many personal experiences from other  60  Facebook’s response is problematic because:
data subjects. Article 15(1) lists eight categories of 
information that can be requested, on top of the  a)  it refers to its privacy policy, which manifestly 
actual personal data being processed. When asked  does not link exactly what personal data is 
for some of this information in an individual access  used for exactly what purpose and under 
request, controllers will often answer in a very  what lawful ground each individual purpose 
generic way. This is highly problematic in light of the  falls.
different functions of the right of access (eg enabling 
the exercise of other rights, evaluating compliance),  b)  it fails to provide a tailored answer to the 
and its relation to the information obligations under  data subject in particular, who wishes to 
Articles 13-14. know what exact information was collected 
for what purposes and under what lawful 
56  Whereas Articles 13-14 can be considered ex ante  ground, for his particular situation.
obligations on controllers’ shoulders, Article 15 is 
an ex post right of data subjects. In other words,  61  In light of the above, we strongly recommend the 
Articles 13-14 contain transparency requirements  EDPB to make it very clear in their guidelines that the 
that need to be complied with by controllers upfront,  right of access in Article 15 requires controllers 
and necessarily need to relate to all potential data  to tailor the information to the specific situation 
subjects. The added value of Article 15 is that it  of the data subject making the request. This 
provides the possibility for individual data  means that each data subject can ask, for example: 
(a) what exact purposes their specific personal data 
has been processed for; (c) the exact (categories of) 
recipients their personal data has been disclosed to; 
49  Article  29  Working  Party,  ‘Guidelines  on  transparency  and (g) what source their specific personal data were 
under Regulation 2016/679’ (n 20) 37. obtained from.
50  René LP Mahieu and others, ‘Collectively Exercising the  51  Nowak (n 4) [56].
Right of Access: Individual Effort, Societal Effect’ (2018) 7 
Internet Policy Review. 52  Rijkeboer (n 4) [69].
3 293  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
D. The Right to Erasure (Article 17)
context and circumstances of each individual case,56 
its outcome can also change over time.57 In order to 
assess whether or not a dataset is truly anonymous, 
I.  Anonymisation as Erasure 
one will reasonably have to take into account the 
is Inadequate risk of re-identification over time.58 When the data 
on the Concept of Personal Data’ (Article 29 Working 
62  Anonymisation is often considered a valid way  Party 20 June 2007) 15; Article 29 Working Party, ‘Working 
to evade the applicability of the GDPR. Indeed, as  Document on the Processing of Personal Data Relating to 
recognised in Recital 26, data protection rules should  Health in  Electronic Health Records (EHR)’ (15 February 
not apply to ‘anonymous information, namely  2007)  29;  Article  29  Working  Party,  ‘Opinion  05/2014 
information which does not relate to an identified  on Anonymisation Techniques’ (n 53) 5 et seq; Pagona 
or identifiable natural person or to personal data  Tsormpatzoudi, ‘Eksistenz D7.4 Intermediate Report for 
rendered anonymous in such a manner that the data  D7.5’ (Deliverable, CiTiP 27 November 2015) 14.
subject is not or no longer identifiable’. In its 2014 
Opinion on anonymisation techniques, the A29WP  56  Important  factors  to  take  into  account  in  this  regard 
also stressed that ‘anonymisation results from  are: Who will the ‘anonymised’ dataset be shared with? 
processing personal data in order to irreversibly  How will it be processed? What other data will/might 
prevent identification’.53 it be combined with? What are the means that a likely 
attacker would have? See also Article 29 Working Party, 
63  The GDPR incorporated the A29WP’s Opinion as  ‘Opinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation Techniques’ (n 53) 
well as CJEU jurisprudence54 when stating that  10.”event-place”:”Brussels”,”abstract”:”In  this  Opinion, 
anonymisation of personal data entails making it  the WP analyses the effectiveness and limits of existing 
irreversibly impossible to identify the data subject,  anonymisation techniques against the EU legal background 
having regard to all the means likely reasonably to be  of  data  protection  and  provides  recommendations  to 
used.55 This test does not only depend on the relevant  handle these techniques by taking account of the residual 
risk of identification inherent in each of them.\nThe WP 
53  Article 29 Working Party, ‘Opinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation  acknowledges  the  potential  value  of  anonymisation  in 
Techniques’ (10 April 2014).”authority”:”Article 29 Working  particular as a strategy to reap the benefits of ‘open data’ 
Party”,”event-place”:”Brussels”,”abstract”:”In this Opinion,  for individuals and society at large whilst mitigating the 
the WP analyses the effectiveness and limits of existing  risks for the individuals concerned. However, case studies 
anonymisation techniques against the EU legal background  and research publications have shown how difficult it is to 
of  data  protection  and  provides  recommendations  to  create a truly anonymous dataset whilst retaining as much 
handle these techniques by taking account of the residual  of the underlying information as required for the task.\
risk of identification inherent in each of them.\nThe WP  nIn the light of Directive 95/46/EC and other relevant EU 
acknowledges  the  potential  value  of  anonymisation  in  legal instruments, anonymisation results from processing 
particular as a strategy to reap the benefits of ‘open data’  personal data in order to irreversibly prevent identification. 
for individuals and society at large whilst mitigating the  In doing so, several elements should be taken into account 
risks for the individuals concerned. However, case studies  by data controllers, having regard to all the means “likely 
and research publications have shown how difficult it is to  reasonably” to be used for identification (either by the 
create a truly anonymous dataset whilst retaining as much  controller or by any third party
of the underlying information as required for the task.
In the light of Directive 95/46/EC and other relevant EU  57  Particularly in the long run, Narayanan and others explain 
legal instruments, anonymisation results from processing  there is no technical basis for believing de-identification 
personal data in order to irreversibly prevent identification.  techniques will be effective. Arvind Narayanan and others, 
In doing so, several elements should be taken into account  ‘A Precautionary Approach to Big Data Privacy’ in Serge 
by data controllers, having regard to all the means “likely  Gutwirth and others (eds), Data Protection on the Move: 
reasonably” to be used for identification (either by the  Current Developments in ICT and Privacy/Data Protection (Law, 
controller or by any third party Governance and Technology Series, Springer Netherlands 
2016).  Similarly,  Barocas  and  Nissenbaum  explain  ‘[a]s 
54  Case C-582/14 Patrick Breyer v Bundesrepublik Deutschland  data sets become increasingly linked, anonymity is largely 
EU:C:2016:779 [46]. In this case, the Court agreed with the AG  impossible to guarantee in the future.’ Solon Barocas and 
that anonymisation hinges on whether ‘identification of the  Helen Nissenbaum, ‘Big Data’s End Run around Anonymity 
data subject was prohibited by law or practically impossible  and  Consent’  in  Privacy,  Big  Data,  and  the  Public  Good: 
on account of the fact that it requires a disproportionate  Frameworks for Engagement  (Cambridge  University  Press 
effort in terms of time, cost and man-power, so that the risk  2014).
of identification appears in reality to be insignificant.’
58  eg  due  to  the  development  of  ICTs  and/or  likelihood 
55  Recital 26 (both in the GDPR and Directive 95/46 before  of  identification  through  future  combining  with  other 
that). Also see: Article 29 Working Party, ‘Opinion 4/2007  databases. Article 29 Working Party, ‘Opinion 05/2014 on 
3 294  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
controller has no a priori means of distinguishing  environment, with ever-increasing data processing 
between anonymous and personal data in a mixed  capabilities, no guarantees can be given that any 
dataset, it will need to treat the entire set as personal  data-point might be (re-)connected to an identifiable 
data.59 natural person in the future. We therefore agree with 
the A29WP’s 2014 Opinion stating that anonymised 
64  We  believe  data  controllers  often  confuse  datasets can still present residual risks to data 
anonymisation with erasure, and this creates a  subjects,61 and believe it is much more useful to look 
range of challenges. at anonymisation as a sliding scale rather than 
a binary.62 Erasure, on the other hand and when 
65  Firstly, many data formats in the modern digital 
economy simply cannot be anonymised. This  Is There Need (and Room) For a New Concept of Personal 
is substantiated by an overwhelmingly rich and  Data?’  in  Serge  Gutwirth  and  others  (eds),  European 
growing body of literature.60 Indeed, in an online  data protection: in good health? (Springer 2012); Yves-
Alexandre de Montjoye and others, ‘Unique in the Crowd: 
Anonymisation Techniques’ (n 53) 8–9.”event-place”:”Br The Privacy Bounds of Human Mobility’ (2013) 3 Scientific 
ussels”,”abstract”:”In  this  Opinion,  the  WP  analyses  Reports 1376; Arvind Narayanan and Edward W Felten, ‘No 
the  effectiveness  and  limits  of  existing  anonymisation  Silver Bullet: De-Identification Still Doesn’t Work’ [2014] 
techniques  against  the  EU  legal  background  of  data  White Paper; Barocas and Nissenbaum (n 57); Narayanan, 
protection  and  provides  recommendations  to  handle  Arvind, ‘What Should We Do about Re-Identification? A 
these techniques by taking account of the residual risk  Precautionary  Approach  to  Big  Data  Privacy’  (Freedom 
of  identification  inherent  in  each  of  them.\nThe  WP  to  Tinker,  19  March  2015)  <https://freedom-to-tinker.
acknowledges  the  potential  value  of  anonymisation  in  com/blog/randomwalker/what-should-we-do-about-
particular as a strategy to reap the benefits of ‘open data’  re-identification-a-precautionary-approach-to-big-data-
for individuals and society at large whilst mitigating the  privacy/> accessed 24 February 2016; Yves-Alexandre de 
risks for the individuals concerned. However, case studies  Montjoye and others, ‘Unique in the Shopping Mall: On 
and research publications have shown how difficult it is to  the Reidentifiability of Credit Card Metadata’ (2015) 347 
create a truly anonymous dataset whilst retaining as much  Science  536;  Antoinette  Rouvroy,  ‘“Of  Data  and  Men”. 
of the underlying information as required for the task.\ Fundamental Rights and Freedoms in a World of Big Data’ 
nIn the light of Directive 95/46/EC and other relevant EU  (11 January 2016) 21; Sophie Stalla-Bourdillon and Alison 
legal instruments, anonymisation results from processing  Knight, ‘Anonymous Data v. Personal Data—a False Debate: 
personal data in order to irreversibly prevent identification.  An EU Perspective on Anonymization, Pseudonymization 
In doing so, several elements should be taken into account  and  Personal  Data’  (2017)  34  Wisconsin  International 
by data controllers, having regard to all the means “likely  Law Journal 284; Luc Rocher and others, ‘Estimating the 
reasonably” to be used for identification (either by the  Success of Re-Identifications in Incomplete Datasets Using 
controller or by any third party Also see: Douwe Korff,  Generative Models’ (2019) 10 Nat Commun 1.
‘Data Protection Laws in the EU: The Difficulties in Meeting 
the  Challenges  Posed  by  Global  Social  and  Technical  61  Article  29  Working  Party,  ‘Opinion  05/2014  on 
Developments’ (Comparative Study on Different Approaches  Anonymisation Techniques’ (n 53) 4.”authority”:”Article 
to New Privacy Challenges, in Particular in the Light of  29 Working Party”,”event-place”:”Brussels”,”abstract”:”In 
Technological Developments, European Commission - DG  this  Opinion,  the  WP  analyses  the  effectiveness  and 
Justice 2010) 48. limits of existing anonymisation techniques against the 
EU  legal  background  of  data  protection  and  provides 
59  The A29WP gives the example of internet access providers  recommendations to handle these techniques by taking 
who can generally not know what IP address does and does  account of the residual risk of identification inherent in 
not allow identification. Article 29 Working Party, ‘Opinion  each of them.\nThe WP acknowledges the potential value 
on Personal Data’ (n 55) 16–17. of anonymisation in particular as a strategy to reap the 
benefits of ‘open data’ for individuals and society at large 
60  See generally (including the many references in): P Ohm,  whilst mitigating the risks for the individuals concerned. 
‘Broken Promises of Privacy: Responding to the Surprising  However, case studies and research publications have shown 
Failure of Anonymization’ (2010) 57 UCLA Law Review  how difficult it is to create a truly anonymous dataset whilst 
1701; Douwe Korff and Ian Brown, ‘Comparative Study  retaining as much of the underlying information as required 
on Different Approaches to New Privacy Challenges , in  for the task.\nIn the light of Directive 95/46/EC and other 
Particular in the Light of Technological Developments’  relevant EU legal instruments, anonymisation results from 
(Final Report, 20 January 2010) 28; Arvind Narayanan and  processing personal data in order to irreversibly prevent 
Vitaly  Shmatikov,  ‘Myths  and  Fallacies  of  “Personally  identification. In doing so, several elements should be taken 
Identifiable Information”’ (2010) 53 Communications of the  into account by data controllers, having regard to all the 
ACM 24; Paul M Schwartz and Daniel J Solove, ‘PII Problem:  means “likely reasonably” to be used for identification 
Privacy  and  a  New  Concept  of  Personally  Identifiable  (either by the controller or by any third party
Information, The’ (2011) 86 NYU L Rev 1814; Mario Viola de 
Azevedo Cunha, ‘Review of the Data Protection Directive:  62  See (the references in): Nadezhda Purtova, ‘The Law of 
3 295  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
executed properly, is a binary and data controllers  Anonymisation can thus be used to disempower 
should in principle be required to irretrievably  data  subjects.  Anonymisation  may  prevent 
remove all personal data from their system rather  individuals ‘from understanding, scrutinising, and 
than merely anonymising it. questioning the ways in which data sets are used 
to organise and affect their access to resources and 
66  Secondly, it is important to remember that, since  connections to a networked world.’67 Indeed, as the 
data protection is an intent-agnostic regime (see  authors have demonstrated elsewhere, some data 
further section 9.4, this document) there are many  controllers argue that they cannot accommodate 
motivations for erasure. Some of these concern  data subject rights because they allegedly have no 
confidentiality, which (proper) anonymisation may  way of reidentifying the data subject, effectively 
help to meet. Yet these are not all the concerns a data  disempowering individuals.68
subject might have. Since its origins, data protection 
law has also — arguably primarily — been seen as a  68  Furthermore, the proportionality of anonymisation 
regime for regulating the imbalances that emerge  rather than erasure should be read in the context 
from informational power.63 of the many hurdles to successful erasure in Article 
17. If such hurdles are overcome (which in many 
67  Informational power is tied up with notions of  cases are difficult and raise uncertainties about how 
‘group’ or ‘categorical’ privacy.64 An individual, for  to proceed, see section 4.2, this document), then a 
example, may not wish for information to be known  data subject should be entitled to erasure, and not 
and processed around a community, neighbourhood  less than that. Erasure is possible when no valid 
or demographic she is part of.65 She may wish to erase  processing purposes remain: these purposes 
data not to obscure herself, but to obscure the groups  include purposes where anonymisation and 
she constitutes from a data controller she does not  aggregation, which themselves are processing 
favour or trust. Anonymisation instead of erasure  operations, are utilised.
disempowers her. It states that her data can still be 
utilised, valorised, for example ‘anonymised’ into  69  Thirdly, the right to erasure does not explicitly 
machine learning models,66 while she has specifically  mention  anonymisation  as  constituting  an 
stated she no longer wants that data to be accessible  equivalent measure. This becomes clear when 
to the data controller in any form. comparing the language of Article 17 – clearly 
dictating erasure per se – with other provisions that 
use the language of recital 26 on anonymisation – i.e. 
data no longer permitting identification – such as the 
storage limitation principle (Article 5(1)(e)) and its 
Everything. Broad Concept of Personal Data and Future  different mutations in Article 11 and 89.
of EU Data Protection Law’ (2018) 10 Law, Innovation and 
Technology 40.
II. Interpreting Erasure as Objection
63  See eg the work of Stefano Rodotà, former chairman of 
the Article 29 Working Party, in particular Stefano Rodotà, 
Elaboratori  Elettronici  E  Controllo  Sociale  [Computers  and  70  The right to erasure tackles the underlying data 
Social Control] (Societa Editrice Il Mulino 1973) and in  involved in a processing operation. Because the same 
Germany: Wilhelm Steinmüller and others, Grundfragen des  data can and is often processed in many different 
Datenschutzes Gutachten im Auftrag des Bundesmnisteriums des  ways, often with a different lawful ground, erasure 
Innern (BT-Drs. VI/3826 1971). may fail if the data controller can retain a valid 
64  See  generally  Anton  Vedder,  ‘KDD:  The  Challenge  to  67  Seda  Gürses,  ‘The  Spectre  of  Anonymity’  in  Renée 
Individualism’ (1999) 1 Ethics and Information Technology  Turner (ed), Sniff, scrape, crawl . {on privacy, surveillance 
275; Linnet Taylor and others (eds), Group Privacy: New  and our shadowy data-double} (Mute Publishing Ltd 2012) 
Challenges of Data Technologies (Philosophical Studies Series,  3; 5; Seda Gürses, ‘Can You Engineer Privacy?’ (2014) 57 
Springer International Publishing 2017). Communications of the ACM 20.
65  See further Edwards and Veale (n 35) 46–48. 68  Specifically, Apple denies access requests with regard to Siri 
voice data it collects and stores for up to two years, because 
66  It is worth noting that such anonymisation may also not  they say they do not have the tools in place to re-connect 
be valid, as machine learning models can ‘remember’ data  such voice data to the user. Even if this argumentation 
they have been trained on, or in some cases such as support  can be contested significantly, it does raise a considerable 
vector machines, simply store it as part of their model. See  hurdle  to  data  subject  empowerment.  See  particularly 
generally  Michael  Veale  and  others,  ‘Algorithms  that  Michael Veale and others, ‘When Data Protection by Design 
Remember: Model Inversion Attacks and Data Protection  and Data Subject Rights Clash’ (2018) 8 International Data 
Law’ (2018) 376 Phil Trans R Soc A 20180083. Privacy Law 105.
3 296  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
lawful ground for data processing. Even if one of the  74  In this context, it is also important to recall the Court’s 
grounds in Article 17(1) applies, this might not lead  view that rights must be protected in an ‘efficient 
to effective erasure. It is therefore important that  and timely’ manner.71 An efficient manner is one 
the guidance clarifies how to resolve situations in  which does not require the data subject to expend 
which erasure is requested, but the controller claims  unnecessary energy in order to secure protection 
it can further process the respective personal data  of their rights. An efficient, timely approach here 
for different purposes. would be to require data controllers to interpret 
‘failed’ erasure attempts, due to residual legal 
71  Even where data controllers offer data subjects a  bases, as a clear signal to object. The controller 
right to erasure, it is often unclear what personal  would then be required to re-substantiate its claim 
data it applies to exactly and under what circumstances  to have a continued lawful ground for further 
the right can be invoked. As illustrated in Table 1  processing said personal data.
below, the applicability of the right to erasure 
inherently  depends  on  what  lawful  ground 
is relied on for which processing purpose(s)  An  employee  at  work  has  their  ‘screen  time’ 
relating  to  what  specific  personal  data  in  monitored by an employer who produces aggregate 
particular. The vast majority of privacy notices/ activity about the different tasks workers engage in. 
statements of information society services fails to  The employer utilises a piece of software to undertake 
clearly link these components (simply listing what  such tracking, and claims that such monitoring falls 
personal data is processed separately from what  within its legitimate interests. An employee requests 
purposes they process personal data for and/or the  the erasure of this data. However, recent data is 
lawful grounds relied on), rendering it very hard  also used for the purposes of security and access 
to effectively exercise the right to erasure. This  control, as the installed software has more than 
is made even more challenging by the practice of  one purpose, and the data controller believes such 
data controllers to ‘switch’ between, for example,  security presents a compelling legitimate interest, 
consent and legitimate interests.69 It is exacerbated  meaning that not all the data can be erased. The 
by the ‘list’ approach to Article 13/14, whereby data  data controller must interpret the erasure request 
controllers provide a list of lawful bases (often copied  as erasure insofar as possible and treat the remaining 
straight from the GDPR), a list of data categories, and  portions of the request as a request to object (or, 
a list of data processing operations, without cross- if appropriate, withdraw consent) in relation to 
referencing them in any way. processing operations for which the data subject’s 
prevail in a balancing test.
72  In order for the right to erasure to have any 
meaningful role, data controllers should make  Proposed Example
it very clear upfront (eg in their privacy notice/
statement) what personal data it applies to and 
III. Availability of erasure 
under what circumstances. This obligation also 
follows from the transparency principle (Article 5(1) does not absolve from 
(a)), purpose limitation principle (Article 5(1)(b)) and  other GDPR obligations
transparency requirements in Articles 13–14. Table 
170 (see next page) describes the complexity of the 
‘erasure triggers’. These illustrate the importance  75  In principle, the right to erasure is only a last resort 
of making the functioning of the right to erasure  solution, empowering data subjects to request 
clear to data subjects. It is also not clear that data  erasure in situations where their personal data 
controllers understand these distinctions. ought to have been erased already in the first place. 
This clearly appears from the six situations listed in 
73  Making it clear which data a data subject can, and  Article 17(1), which all im-/explicitly refer to other 
cannot, erase is important because without this, the  provisions in/outside the GDPR that already imply 
data subject cannot easily make an informed choice  erasure (cf. Table 2 next page).
as to whether they should use a particular service, 
or engage with a particular data controller. 76  In the authors’ experience, data controllers often 
appear to use the availability of data subject rights 
69  See eg Privacy International, ‘Submission to the Information  as a red herring. Yet, offering data subjects a 
Commissioner:  Request  for  an  Assessment  Notice/ right to erasure does not absolve data controllers 
Complaint of AdTech Brokers Criteo, Quantcast and Tapad  from having to comply with key data protection 
(the ’AdTech Data Brokers’)’ (8 November 2018). principles such as purpose limitation (Article 5(1)
(b)), data minimisation (Article 5(1)(d)), or storage 
70  Jef Ausloos, The Right to Erasure in EU Data Protection  limitation (Article 5(1)(e)). Indeed, many privacy 
Law. From Individual Right to Effective Protection (Oxford 
University Press forthcoming). 71   Fashion ID (n 5) [102].
3 297  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
Legal Basis  Relation  Erasure Triggers 
(a) Consent  When consent is relied on as lawful ground, the most relevant  a) purpose expiration 
right to erasure trigger will be b), i.e. withdrawing consent.  b) consent withdrawal 
When consent was given in the context of ISS while the data  d) unlawful processing 
subject was a child, the last trigger f) could also be used.  e) legal obligation 
Theoretically, triggers a) (purpose expiration), e) (legal  f) consent withdrawal in 
obligation), and d) (unlawful processing) will also be applicable.  context of ISS offered to 
Given the difficulty of demonstrating expiration of purposes or  children 
unlawfulness in practice, it seems much more straightforward 
to simply rely on the less ambiguous withdrawal of consent to 
obtain erasure. 
(b) Contract  When necessity for the performance of a contract is relied on as  a purpose expiration 
lawful ground for processing, the most relevant trigger to rely  b consent withdrawal 
on will be a purpose expiration (which will generally occur at  d unlawful processing 
the latest upon rescinding the contract). Trigger d) may also be  e legal obligation 
relevant when the lawful ground is not valid (anymore). To the 
extent this ground overlaps with the first lawful ground on 
consent, trigger b) might also be of some relevance. Finally, it 
cannot be excluded that an external legal obligation imposes 
erasure, even when processing is still necessary for 
performance of a contract (so trigger e) remains open). 
(c) Legal  (d) Vital  These two lawful grounds are largely outside the control of any  a) purpose expiration 
Obligation  Interests  of the parties involved. The most relevant triggers therefore  d) unlawful processing 
will be a) (purpose expiration) and e (legal obligation). As  e) legal obligation 
always, trigger d) remains available in those situations where 
the lawful ground is incorrectly relied upon in the first place. 
(e) Task in Public  Compared to the previous two, this lawful ground leaves more  a) purpose expiration 
Interest  room for interpretation as to the scope of processing  c) right to object 
operations that it may cover. So, on top of triggers a (purpose  d) unlawful processing 
expiration), e (legal obligation) and d (unlawful processing),  e) legal obligation 
data subjects will also be able to request erasure on the basis of 
trigger c, following a right to object. 
(f) Legitimate  Contrary to the previous three, the last lawful ground leaves  a) purpose expiration 
Interests  considerable freedom to controllers to define their interests  c) right to object 
and purposes. Particularly triggers a) (purpose expiration), c  d) unlawful processing 
(right to object) and d) (unlawful processing) will be relevant,  e) legal obligation 
though e) (legal obligation) remains open as well. 
T able  1: Right to Erasure Trigger by Legal Basis
 
Right to erasure triggers  Cross-references 
Article 17(1)  Articles  Recitals 
(a) Purpose expiration  5(1)b,  c  and  e;  6(4);  13(2)a;  39; 50 
14(2)a 
(b) Consent withdrawal  4(11); 6(1)a; 7; 8; 9(2)a  32; 42 
(c) Right to object  21  69; 70 
(d) Unlawful processing  4(11); 5(1)a; 6(1); 7; 8; 9  32; 65; 69 
(e) Legal obligation  6(1)c  10; 45 
(f) Minors’ withdrawal of consent in ISS  7; 8  38 
context 
Table 2: Right to Erasure Triggers and relevant GDPR provisions 
 
3 298  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
notices/statements appear to offer data subjects a  interests are not an ‘easy’ alternative to consent, but 
right to erasure mainly pro forma only, while at the  require substantive and public justification.76 The 
same time acknowledging a vast data processing  Information Commissioner’s Office has expressed 
apparatus. concern that particularly online, data controllers 
seeing legitimate interests as the ‘easy option’ lack 
77  Indeed, important research in behavioural sciences  a ‘full understanding of what legitimate interests 
has demonstrated that the perceived control data  requires’.77
subjects have over their personal data through tools 
such as the right to erasure, may paradoxically lead  80  Because individuals are asked to formulate and 
to lower concerns over data processing practices and  provide ‘grounds’ specific to their situation, which 
a false sense of security, which in turn may lead to  will be weighed against any compelling legitimate 
revealing even more (sensitive) information.72 grounds of the data controller, it should be the case 
that the legitimate interest of the data controller 
are laid out in advance in accordance with Article 13 
E. The Right to Object (Article 21)
and 14. Article 13(1)(d) states that data controllers 
must provide the data subject with ‘the legitimate 
78  The  right  to  object  offers  data  subjects  an  interests pursued by the controller or by a third 
opportunity to oppose the further processing of their  party’. 
personal data for specific purposes. It comprises a 
much stronger focus on the specific context in an  81  This is an important component for the individual 
individual situation than the ex-ante (and more  in determining whether and how to make the case 
generic) balancing as prescribed by Article 6(1)(f).73  for their right to object. It should be considered 
Even though processing may be ‘lawful’ under Article  contrary  to  the  fairness  principle  for  a  data 
6(1)(e–f) GDPR, the right to object offers a context- controller, in balancing the right to object against 
dependant and individualised re-assessment. This  potential compelling legitimate grounds, to rely 
can be derived both from the use of the broader term  on a legitimate interest which has not been clearly 
‘grounds’ (as opposed to interests as contained in  declared to the data subject in advance. This could 
Article 6(1)(e)-(f))74 and the words ‘relating to his  put the data subject in a position where they chose 
or her particular situation’ (as opposed to a more  a particular service provider and enabled them to 
generic situation in Article 6(1)(f)).75 In light of this,  process data about themselves under Article 6(1)
we recommend the EDPB to require data controllers  (f), unaware of the interests of the controller and 
to clearly demonstrate any argument against the  unable to foresee their own capacity to object in the 
right to object in relation to the specific situation  face of these undeclared legitimate interests. This is 
of the data subject, rather than a generic statement. particularly key because legitimate interests operate 
in the context of ‘necessity’, which is a concept 
that must be scrutinised in relation to determining 
I.  Compelling Legitimate 
whether or not processing is lawful.78
Interests Must be Detailed, 
Public and Foreseeable
79  The right to object is available to data subjects 
with regard to processing operations that rely on 
legitimate interests as a lawful ground (Article 
6(1)(f)). As emphasised by the A29WP, legitimate 
72  Laura Brandimarte and others, ‘Misplaced Confidences: 
Privacy  and  the  Control  Paradox’  (2012)  4  Social 
Psychological and Personality Science 1948550612455931.
76  Article 29 Working Party, ‘Opinion 06/2014 on the Notion 
73  See also Damian Clifford and Jef Ausloos, ‘Data Protection  of Legitimate Interests of the Data Controller under Article 
and the Role of Fairness’ (2018) 37 Yearbook of European  7 of Directive 95/46/EC’ (Opinion, European Commission 9 
Law 130.  April 2014).
74  The language used implies that the term ‘grounds’ here can  77  Information Commissioner’s Office, ‘Update Report into 
be understood as broader than ‘interests’ (i.e. given the fact  Adtech and Real Time Bidding’ (20 June 2019) 18.
that the data subject grounds to object appear to include; 
context, interests rights and freedoms). 78  See eg Case C-13/16 Valsts policijas Rīgas regiona pārvaldes 
Kārtības policijas pārvalde v Rīgas pašvaldības SIA ‘Rīgas 
75   See in this regard also Google Spain (n 3) [75]–[76]. satiksme’ EU:C:2017:336 [30] and the case-law cited.
3 299  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
A wayfinding transport application sequence, upon  have the right – more broadly – to challenge 
download, informs a data subject that they process  controllers’ compliance with any of the GDPR’s 
location data on the basis of Article 6(1)(f) for the  requirements (even if it does not qualify as a 
purposes of building an aggregated, anonymised  specific right in Chapter III). This is already reflected 
dataset to help the company provide traffic data  in the implied right in Article 18(1)(b) to object 
within the app. Later, the data controller receives  to ‘unlawful’ processing,85 and Article 17(1)(d) to 
an objection request from this data subject relating  erase personal data processed without an adequate 
to the use of location data for this purpose. The data  lawful ground.86 As DPAs, such as the Information 
controller carries out a balancing test, and argues  Commissioner’s Office in the UK, are requesting that 
that while the data subject’s objection request  individuals ‘raise a concern’ with an organisation 
overrides the legitimate interest of in-app traffic  before they will take action, clarification on the 
data, the controller also provides this aggregated,  modalities for data subjects to challenge data 
non-personal data to local governments and planning  controllers’ compliance with key provisions 
agencies, and this represents a compelling legitimate  (such as the data protection principles in Article 
ground. However, because the data controller had  5 and the lawfulness requirement in Article 6) 
not already declared this specific, albeit genuine,  is particularly important.87 In particular, the 
legitimate interest, the right to object must be  guidance should specify what the obligation of a 
upheld. controller to respond to such claims of unlawful 
processing should be.
Proposed Example
F. The Right to Restriction of 
II. Objection and Processing 
Processing (Article 18)
‘Necessary for the 
Performance of a Contract’
84  Restriction of processing means ‘the marking of 
stored personal data with the aim of limiting their 
82  The right to object only has a limited scope of  processing in the future’.88 The data subject has the 
application, as it only applies to situations where  right to restrict processing while they are waiting for 
processing is based on either one of the last two  an assessment of the accuracy or the efficacy of the 
lawful  grounds  in  Article  6(1).  It  is  therefore  right to object, as well as in situations where they 
unsurprising that since the entry into force of the  claim the processing is unlawful (to ensure retention 
GDPR, many controllers whose business model relies  of evidence of unlawfulness) and where the data 
heavily on personalisation (and advertisement) have  subject wishes to ensure the data still exist for the 
shifted from relying on either consent79 or legitimate  establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.89 
interests,80 to necessity for the performance of a  Despite many such requests, we have encountered 
contract.81 Reliance on this ground effectively strips  not a single data controller that acknowledged, 
data subjects from the ability to withdraw their  let alone accommodated, the right to restriction 
consent82 or object83 to said processing. In light of  of processing.
the recent EDPB guidance on the lawful basis of 
necessity for contract,84 many controllers may be 
illegitimately relying on this ground. 
85  Noting that the data subject shall have the right to obtain 
83  With that in mind, it would be valuable if the  from the controller restriction of processing where ‘the 
guidance could specify that data subjects also  processing is unlawful and the data subject opposes the 
erasure of the personal data and requests the restriction of 
79  GDPR, art 6(1)(a). their use instead’.
80  GDPR, art 6(1)(f). 86  Noting that ‘the data subject shall have the right to obtain 
from the controller the erasure of personal data […] the 
81  GDPR, art 6(1)(b). personal data have been unlawfully processed’
82  GDPR, art 7(4). 87  See Information Commissioner’s Office, ‘Raising a Concern 
with an Organisation’ (24 September 2019) <https://ico.org.
83  GDPR, art 21. uk/your-data-matters/raising-concerns/> accessed 11 June 
2019.
84  European Data Protection Board, ‘Guidelines 2/2019 on 
the Processing of Personal Data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR  88  GDPR, art 4(3).
in the Context of the Provision of Online Services to Data 
Subjects (Version 2.0)’ (8 October 2019). 89  See generally, GDPR, art 18.
3 300  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
I.  Restriction Timeframe for  In automated filing systems, the restriction of processing 
should in principle be ensured by technical means in such 
Information Society Services
a manner that the personal data are not subject to further 
processing operations and cannot be changed.92
85  Information society services encompass any service  89  For example, where an individual has objected 
normally provided for remuneration, at a distance,  to tracking or profiling, and has in the meantime 
by electronic means and at the individual request of  restricted processing, this should mean that the 
a recipient of services.90 In many cases, data subjects  continual processing stops in the meantime, 
will already be verified to use the service through  and that no more profiles are built, updated or 
having logged in. applied. In practice, this does not occur. 
86  The right to restrict processing is an interim measure. 
Particularly given the automated way information  III. Necessary processing, legitimate 
society services function, it is important to give effect  interests and the right to restrict
to this interim measure. In Fashion ID, the Court was 
clear that provisions of data protection law must 
be interpreted as to give effect to the ‘efficient and  90  Data controllers must be able to stop processing 
timely’ protection of the data subject’s rights.91 As a  of data that is subject to the right to restriction 
consequence, the right to restrict processing must  in an interim period. This must be technically and 
always be interpreted and enforced as to give effect  organisationally feasible within their systems, in 
to its nature as an interim measure.  light of the requirements in Articles 24-25 GDPR.
The right to restrict must therefore be prioritised in  91  In this context, we note the recent 14m EUR fine 
time, and subject to a considerably tighter timeframe  levied by the DPA of Berlin in relation to a failure 
than, for example, the right to object it is linked  of data protection by design. In this case, a data 
to. Where it is feasible to automate restriction in  controller operated an archiving system that was 
this interim period, it may be incumbent on a data  unable to erase data. Such a system was held to be in 
controller, on the basis of data protection by design  breach of Article 25.93 Similarly, a processing system 
and  the  risk-based  approach  throughout  data  which is unable to implement an interim period of 
protection, to do so. restricted data processing would quite clearly also 
fall foul of Article 25 in a similar manner.
II. In the context of continuous  92  We believe that the clearest way to deal with this 
processing and profiling issue is to state that all data that has the potential 
to be restricted must be technically possible 
to restrict, with the exception of data which the 
87  The right to restrict processing is likely to impose  data controller can reliably continue to process 
different  technological  and  organisational  for the reasons laid out in Article 18(2) without the 
requirements on different data controllers. For  authorisation of the data subject, namely (i) for the 
example, for an organisation operating a customer  establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims or 
relations management (CRM) system, a flagged,  for the protection of the rights of another natural or 
restricted profile can quite easily be separated from  legal person; and (ii) for reasons of important public 
normal processing activities. interest of the Union or of a Member State.
88  Many firms in the modern digital economy operate 
under conditions of continual processing, and do 
so under grounds including legitimate interests. 
This is the situation where the right to restrict is 
the most important, yet we are concerned that 
data controllers are disregarding the right to 
restriction of processing. The GDPR states:
90  Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 9 September 2015 laying down a procedure  92  GDPR, recital 67.
for the provision of information in the field of technical 
regulations and of rules on Information Society services  93  Berliner  Beauftragte  für  Datenschutz  und 
(Text with EEA relevance), art 1(1)(b). Informationsfreiheit,  ‘Berliner  Datenschutzbeauftragte 
verhängt Bußgeld gegen Immobiliengesellschaft’ (711.412.1, 
91  Fashion ID (n 5) [102]. 5 November 2019).
3 301  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
A data controller providing an app processes telemetry  business perspective. This is particularly the case 
data, such as the data subject’s behaviour inside the app,  for profiling in the digital economy, for example in 
on the basis of legitimate interests. The data subject  the area of advertising ‘interests’. In these cases, 
has logged into this app, and submits a request for  the right to data protection will be likely to prevail, 
restriction, and a request for objection in relation to  particularly given the highly subjective nature of 
the telemetry purposes. The data controller has no  profiling and predictive inference techniques.95 For 
means to prioritise restriction in time over the objection  example, in the context of the digital economy, an 
request, and besides, has not installed functionality in  individual may be classified as ‘male’ by a predictive 
the app to prevent all telemetry data processed under  system: this should be open for an individual to 
the legitimate interest ground to cease. Consequently,  rectify.
the data controller is in breach of the GDPR.
98  It should be recalled that the data subject retains 
Proposed Example the right to erase the ‘original’, pre-rectified 
data that is retained by the data controller, or 
to object to its use, and the procedures for each of 
G. The Right to Rectification 
these rights act as balances for the interests at stake 
(Article 16) in that situation.
93  In this section, we look only at one element of the  H. Recognising Rights
right to rectification: the right to rectify in the 
context of inferences and opinions.
99  Data rights can come in a variety of forms and 
manners, and the guidance must clearly address 
I.  Opinions and Inferences issues in practice that relate to the recognition of 
rights.
94  Inferences  and  opinions  are  considered  to  be 
personal data by the CJEU.94 As with all data rights,  I.  Requiring a Specific Request 
the right to rectification should generally apply  Form or Format Should 
to  inferences  and  opinions  unless  justified 
Not Be Permitted
exceptions grounded in law exist.
95  In some cases, the data controller may disagree 
with the attempt to rectify data by the data subject.  100 Both the data controller and processor have an 
This may be the case, for example, where a third  explicit obligation to facilitate the exercise of data 
party has provided an opinion to an employer  subject rights (Articles 12(1) and 28(3)(e)). In light 
about an individual’s inappropriate behaviour in  of this obligation, it is certainly to be encouraged 
the workplace. In this case, balancing is clearly  that tools be developed in order to make data subject 
justified, as Charter rights could be implicated, such  rights more accessible to data subjects (eg privacy 
as Articles 11, 12, 15 and 21. dashboards, forms, ‘download my data’ functions, 
etc). However, data controllers or processors 
96  The EDPB should avoid permitting either the  cannot force data subjects to exercise their rights 
data subject or the data controllers can act as  in one way or another as long as the requirements 
the ‘arbiter of truth’ in contentious cases. Where  under the GDPR are complied with. Moreover, 
the data controller has good reasons to disagree with  practice shows that when data subjects request 
the data subject concerning a proposed rectification,  access to additional information not included in 
the best solution is to oblige both opinions to co- ‘download my data’ functionalities (but mentioned 
exist in the data processing system, and to oblige  in Article 15), they are often ignored.96
the data controller in line with the accuracy 
and fairness principles to consider both the 
rectified and the original data in downstream 
data processing. In this sense, rectification is an 
addendum rather than a replacement. 
95  See generally Solon Barocas and Andrew D Selbst, ‘Big Data’s 
97  It should not, however, be considered a ‘good  Disparate Impact’ (2016) 104 California Law Review 671.
reason’ simply because the inference would be 
convenient to retain in its current form from a  96  See eg Jef Ausloos and Pierre Dewitte, ‘Shattering One-Way 
Mirrors – Data Subject Access Rights in Practice’ (2018) 8 
94   Nowak (n 4) [34]. International Data Privacy Law 4.
3 302  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
II. Accurately Recognising Data 
and  allocation  of  responsibilities,99  from  the 
Subjects’ Intent Without 
perspective of a data subject exercising his/her 
Legislative Wording rights it is less relevant.
103 Article 28(3)(e) dictates that processors need to 
101 Following on from the previous point, it is important  assist the controller in accommodating data subject 
that data subjects cannot be expected to use the  rights, notably by adopting ‘appropriate technical 
exact wording of the GDPR in order for their  and organisational measures, insofar as this is 
rights to be effectively accommodated. Indeed,  possible’. This should be interpreted as allowing a 
the Commission’s first objective when officially  data subject to invoke his/her right to erasure vis-
announcing its plans for a data protection reform  à-vis processors as well. Whereas they are not the 
concerns the strengthening of data subject rights.97  ones responsible to effectively accommodate 
In light of the Court’s emphasis on ensuring an  the data subject’s rights, processors are liable 
‘effective and complete protection’, it is therefore  to assist controllers in doing so.
necessary that data controllers act on the apparent 
intent of data subject requests, and cannot require  104 In sum, the plurality of actors processing personal 
them to use the exact phrasing (or article references)  data should not hinder the effective exercise of data 
of the GDPR. The guidance should be clear about  subject rights. Data subjects can approach processors 
what a data controller should do upon receiving a  and/or (joint) controller(s) with their rights, even 
request which is vague, but could be interpreted  though that entity might not be the one who is 
as a right to restrict, object, erase, port or access. ultimately responsible to accommodate such claims 
in casu. Even when the complexity of a processing 
chain causes the data subject to invoke their right 
III. Joint Controllers and  vis-à-vis the ‘wrong’ controller, the latter should still 
Processors Must Pass on  be required to forward the request (Article 19). This 
process can be made easier with a single point for 
and Deal with Data Rights
request to be made by data subjects, or forwarded to 
by joint controllers. Notwithstanding the possibility 
for data subjects to direct their requests to each 
102 Article 26 of the GDPR clarifies the concept of joint  joint controller, the EDPS recommends to establish 
controllers: ‘[w]here two or more controllers jointly  a single contact point to which data subjects may 
determine the purposes and means of the processing  forward their requests in exercising their rights.’100 
of personal data, they are joint controllers [...]’.98 The  The  burden  of  enabling  effective  use  of  data 
article further requires such joint controllers to  subject rights, especially in complex networks of 
delineate, in a transparent manner, their respective  processing, should be on the various controllers and 
responsibilities in light of complying with the GDPR.  processors.101
Importantly, data subjects can exercise their 
rights (to erasure) vis-à-vis any of the joint 
controllers, regardless of the arrangement (of 
respective roles and responsibilities) between 
these controllers (Article 26(2)). In other words, 
even  though  ‘joint  controllership’  might  have 
considerable ramifications as to GDPR compliance
99  Brendan Van Alsenoy, ‘Allocating Responsibility among 
Controllers,  Processors,  and  “Everything  in  between”: 
The Definition of Actors and Roles in Directive 95/46/EC’ 
(2012) 28 Computer Law & Security Review 25; Korff (n 
97  European  Commission,  ‘Communication  from  the  58) 61. The latter author highlighting issues arising from 
Commission  to  the  European  Parliament,  the  Council,  joint controllership between entities located in different 
the European Economic and Social Committee and the  jurisdictions.
Committee of the Regions A Comprehensive Approach 
on Personal Data Protection in the European Union’ (4  100  European Data Protection Supervisor, ‘Guidelines on the 
November 2010). Concepts of Controller, Processor and Joint Controllership 
under Regulation (EU) 2018/1725’ (7 November 2019) 30–31.
98  The concept of ‘joint controllership’ only first made an 
appearance during the legislative process of Directive 95/46  101  Rene Mahieu and others, ‘Responsibility for Data Protection 
(inserted by the European Parliament) Article 29 Working  in a Networked World: On the Question of the Controller, 
Party, ‘Opinion 1/2010 on the Concepts of “Controller” and  Effective and Complete Protection and Its Application to 
“Processor”’ (Article 29 Working Party 16 February 2010)  Data Access Rights in Europe’ (2019) 10 J Intell Prop Info 
17–18. Tech & Elec Com L 84.
3 303  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
II. Excessiveness Exemptions 
A news website uses an installed third-party tracker 
Relate to Requests’ Nature, 
which gathers data about website visits against 
persistent identifiers. A data subject contacts the  Not Burden or Intent
news website to ask for access to data collected by 
these trackers. As the website is a joint controller 
with the organisations who maintain the code for  108 Article  12(5)  allows  data  controllers  to  refuse 
the trackers, it is the websites responsibility to pass  to act upon a right where ‘requests from a data 
the access request on to every tracking organisation  subject are manifestly unfounded or excessive, in 
they have a joint controllership arrangement with. particular because of their repetitive character’. 
Where they do this, the ‘controller shall bear the 
Proposed Example burden of demonstrating the manifestly unfounded 
or excessive character of the request.’
I.  Illegitimate Refusal of Rights
109 The A29WP have noted, in guidance endorsed by 
the EDPB and in relation to another right (i.e. to 
105 The principle of effective and complete protection  data portability), that for the cases of information 
and the status of data protection as a fundamental  society services which specialise in automated data 
right both point to a strong consideration of necessity  processing, ‘there should be very few cases where 
where rights are being refused or restricted. In  the data controller would be able to justify a refusal 
practice, we believe the scope of refusing rights  to deliver the requested information, even regarding 
is narrower than many data controllers currently  multiple data portability requests.’103
understand and practice.
110 They  also  note  that  the  cost  of  building  the 
infrastructure to comply with these requests is 
I.  Prima Facie Limits of the ‘Rights 
irrelevant to the notion of ‘excessive’ requests. 
and Freedoms of Others’ In particular, they state that ‘the overall system 
implementation costs should neither be charged to 
106 The right to access a copy of personal data and the  the data subjects, nor be used to justify a refusal to 
right to portability are both limited by paragraphs  answer portability requests.’104
stating that the stated aspects of these rights ‘shall 
not adversely affect the rights and freedoms of  111 An argument that a ‘manifestly unfounded or 
others.’102 This requires some considerations of,  excessive’  request  might  be  construed  as  one 
among other issues, the privacy and data protection  which relates to any sufficiently large or complex 
interests of third parties (see further, section 3.4 this  processing operation sets a dangerous precedent 
paper). that some data processing activities are ‘too big to 
regulate’. This logic would mean to say that some 
107 However, it should be clarified in the guidance that  processing activities are at such a global scale, and 
this consideration is not present for other rights,  so complex, and producing and capturing so much 
such as the right to object or restrict processing.  data about individuals, that they escape the reach 
A different and more specific balancing arrangement  of fundamental rights such as the right to access. 
is in place for the right to erasure. As a consequence,  This seems perverse: the more impactful and the 
the guidance should indicate that the right to  more sizeable the activity, surely the higher 
object or restrict processing should not be unduly  the acceptable cost of compliance on the data 
hindered by the privacy interests of others. controller, and the more urgent and pressing the 
need to provide data subjects with oversight and 
control rights. 
A ‘smart speaker’ analyses voice recordings on 
the basis of legitimate interests to improve the  112 Where such processing implicates a high number 
quality of speech recognition in certain languages.  of users, this would likely count as ‘large scale’ 
A data subject who uses the device in a communal  processing posing a high risk under the GDPR, and 
area requests the right to object to this processing  thus has little ground to be manifestly ‘unfounded’. 
purpose. The data controller does not need to seek  According to the GDPR compliance should scale up in 
the approval of the other members of the household,  relation to high risk processing, not down.105
whose voices are also picked up by this speaker in an 
indiscriminate manner, in order to process this right. 103  Article 29 Working Party, ‘Guidelines on the right to data 
portability (WP 242)’ (n 9) 9–10.
Proposed Example
104  ibid 15.
102  GDPR, arts 15(4), 20(4). 105  GDPR, art 24.
3 304  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
III. Repetitive Requests May  IV. Data Rights are Intent-Agnostic/
Be Justified in Situations of  Motive-Blind
Continuous Processing
115 Access rights have commonly been used in relation 
113 In the case of information society services in  to highly specific pieces of information, often as 
particular,  personal  data  is  constantly  being  part of disputes that might be related to issues of 
collected, amended, transformed and applied. As  criminal,106 employment,107 immigration,108 trust109 
a result, any provisions which assume static, long  or defamation proceedings.110 These types of cases 
term, unchanging datasets must, in order to preserve  can create, in the words of Advocate General Bobek, 
the fairness principle and the technology-neutral  ‘certain intellectual unease as to the reasonable use 
nature of the GDPR, be read in light of modern data  and function of data protection rules’.111
processing practices.
116 National courts have also held specifically that 
114 As  a  result  of  this  situation  of  ‘continuous  data rights are purpose-blind. Courts in England 
processing’, the rights of access, rectification and/ and Wales have long supported the ‘purpose-blind’ 
or erasure may be of permanent relevance as  nature of data rights.112 The Court of Appeal of 
well. The guidance should therefore be mindful  England and Wales held that there is no ‘no other 
to clearly constrain the scope of Article 12(5)  purpose’ [than privacy or data protection] rule 
GDPR, allowing controllers to refuse to act or  that requires data subjects to specify a reason for a 
charge fees for accommodating data subject rights  subject access request or refrain, for example, using 
when they are ‘excessive, in particular because of  it for litigation.113 Courts ‘should not enquire into or 
their repetitive character’. When personal data,  permit investigation of the purpose for which a SAR 
and how it is processed, constantly changes,  has been made’.114 The ICO has further stated that 
repeatedly exercising data subject rights should  there is nothing in data protection legislation ‘that 
not be considered excessive. Instead, it may be  limits the purposes for which a SAR may be made, or 
upon controllers to ensure an automated and  which requires the requester to tell you what they 
easy manner to facilitate the accommodation of  want the information for’.115
those rights. This is also relevant for the right to 
data portability (not within the scope of the planned  106  Kololo v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2015] EWHC 
guidance), which may actually require controllers  600 (QB). Lin & Anor v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis 
such as social networks to implement protocols for  [2015] EWHC 2484 (QB).
enabling interoperability (essentially allowing for 
a constant stream of ‘access rights’ in a machine- 107  Ittihadieh v 5-11 Cheyne Gardens RTM Company Ltd & Ors [2017] 
readable format). EWCA Civ 121.
108  Joined  Cases  C141/12  and  C372/12  YS  v  Minister  voor 
A gaming platform runs a dynamic data collection  Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel and Minister voor Immigratie, 
and scoring system which determines an individual’s  Integratie en Asiel v M and S EU:C:2014:2081.
visibility to other players. This data is updated every 
day, and the score is updated accordingly. A data  109  Dawson-Damer & Ors v Taylor Wessing LLP [2017] EWCA Civ 74.
subject makes two requests within a month for this 
changing data. The data controller is not permitted  110  Rudd v Bridle & Anor [2019] EWHC 893 (QB).
to refuse the request on the basis that it is ‘excessive, 
in particular because of [its] repetitive character’,  111  Case C-13/16 Valsts policijas Rīgas re iona pārvaldes Kārtības 
because the data processing operation is of a similar  policijas  pārvalde  v  Rīgas  pašvaldības  SIA  ‘Rīgas  satiksme’ 
ģ
character. Instead of refusal, the data controller must  EU:C:2017:43, Opinion of AG Bobek, para 93.
either honour the requests or justify refusal under 
some other basis. This is proportionate as, in line with  112  See eg Durham County Council v D [2012] EWCA Civ 1654 [16]; 
the obligation of data protection by design (Article  Guriev v Community Safety Development (UK) Ltd [2016] EWHC 
25), the data controller should be implementing  643 (QB) [67]–[72]; Dawson-Damer & Ors v Taylor Wessing 
technical and organisational measures to ensure  LLP [2017] EWCA Civ 74 [105]–[113]; Ittihadieh v 5-11 Cheyne 
data rights keep pace with data processing, such as  Gardens RTM Company Ltd & Ors [2017] EWCA Civ 121 [104]–
providing more regular access to the personal data  [110]; DB v General Medical Council (n 47) [79].
through, for example, an API or automated data 
download. 113  Dawson-Damer & Ors v Taylor Wessing LLP (n 112) [104]–[114].
Proposed Example 114  Guriev v Community Safety Development (UK) Ltd (n 112) [70].
115  Information Commissioner’s Office, ‘Subject access code of 
3 305  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
Arden LJ, in Dawson-Damer, stated an important general 
118 The only situations where commercial interests 
reason why access rights should not be subject to an analysis 
of intent noting that ‘a “no other purpose” rule would have  (alone) may effectively block data subject rights, will 
undesirable secondary consequences, such as non-compliance  be when accommodating these rights would affect 
by data controllers with SARs on the grounds that the data  the essence of a fundamental right in the Charter or at 
subject had an ulterior purpose.’116 the very least not be proportionate stricto sensu.121 The 
two most relevant fundamental rights in the present 
The CJEU, in YS and Others, did not comment on  context are the freedom to conduct a business 
the fact that the individual was seeking to use the  (Article 16 Charter) and the right to (intellectual) 
documents they sought in litigation as a factor which  property (Article 17 Charter). Both of these have 
would disqualify the access right from succeeding.117 repeatedly been declared not to be absolute rights, to 
be considered in relation to their social function.122 
All evidence suggests that, as a general rule, they are 
V. Freedom to Conduct a  not self-sufficient to override individual freedoms 
Business is Unlikely to  in the Charter,123 such as the rights to privacy 
(Article 7), data protection (Article 8), or freedom 
Override Data Subject Rights
of expression (Article 11).124 Indeed, pursuant to 
Article 52(3) – which aligns Charter provisions 
with those in the ECHR – it would be difficult to 
117 Data subject rights may effectively pit data subjects’  claim economic objectives alone can constrain 
rights, freedoms and interests against the economic  fundamental rights/freedoms representing essential 
freedoms of the data controller. The right of access  values in a democratic society.125 Only when, in light 
may challenge trade secrecy, and the rights to object 
and erasure may conflict with various economic  Technology and Privacy: The New Landscape (MIT Press, 1997) 
and property interests. From a data protection  219–241; Spiros Simitis, ‘From the market to the polis: The 
perspective, the ensuing balancing act shifts in favour  EU Directive on the protection of personal data’ 80 Iowa Law 
of the data subject by default upon invoking said  Review (1995) 445–469.
right.118 As emphasised repeatedly by the Court,119 at 
least in delisting cases the economic interests of the  121  Ausloos (n 70) ch 6.
search engine operator are trumped by the rights, 
freedoms and interests of data subjects by default.  122  See for example, the following cases, and the case-law cited: 
This also appears from the general drafting of the  Case C-554/10 Deutsches Weintor eG v Land Rheinland-Pfalz 
GDPR, which took a rigorous ‘fundamental human  EU:C:2012:526 [54]; Case C-101/12 Herbert Schaible v Land 
rights’ approach, implying that ‘data protection  Baden-Württemberg EU:C:2013:661 [28]; Case C-283/11 Sky 
automatically trumped other interests and could  Österreich GmbH v Österreichischer Rundfunk EU:C:2013:28 
not be traded-off for economic benefits.’120 [45].
practice’ (n 48) 55. 123  See similarly: Peter Oliver, ‘The Protection of Privacy in 
the Economic Sphere before the European Court of Justice’ 
116  Dawson-Damer & Ors v Taylor Wessing LLP (n 112) [108]. (2009) 46 Common Market Law Review 1443, 1481.
117  See generally Joined Cases C141/12 and C372/12 YS v Minister  124  Serge Gutwirth, ‘De Toepassing van Het Finaliteitsbeginsel 
voor Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel and Minister voor Immigratie,  van de Privacywet van 8 December 1992 Tot Bescherming 
Integratie en Asiel v M and S EU:C:2014:208. van  de  Persoonlijke  Levenssfeer  Ten  Opzichte  van  de 
Verwerking van Persoonsgegevens’ [The Application of 
118  After all, it is a direct expression of their informational  the Purpose Specification Principle in the Belgian Data 
autonomy,  implicating  the  fundamental  right  to  data  Protection Act of 8 December 1992]’ (1993) 1993 Tijdschrift 
protection in Article 8 Charter. voor Privaatrecht 1409, 1431.1431.”,”plainCitation”:”Serge 
Gutwirth, ‘De Toepassing van Het Finaliteitsbeginsel van de 
119  Google Spain (n 3); Case C507/17 Google LLC v Commission  Privacywet van 8 December 1992 Tot Bescherming van de 
nationale de l’informatique et des libertés (CNIL) EU:C:2019:772. Persoonlijke Levenssfeer Ten Opzichte van de Verwerking 
van Persoonsgegevens’ [The Application of the Purpose 
120  Federico  Ferretti,  ‘Data  Protection  and  the  Legitimate  Specification Principle in the Belgian Data Protection Act of 
Interest of Data Controllers: Much Ado about Nothing or  8 December 1992]’ (1993 Some call the rights in Article 16–17 
the Winter of Rights?’ (2014) 51 CML Rev 843, 852. This work  of the Charter ‘peripheral rights’ that are always overridden 
refers to Joined Cases C-465/00, C-138/01 and C-139/01  by data protection rights. See eg Hielke Hijmans, ‘The 
Rechnungshof  v  Österreichischer  Rundfunk  and  Others  European Union as a Constitutional Guardian of Internet 
EU:C:2003:294. See also Dorothee Heisenberg, Negotiating  Privacy and Data Protection’ (PhD Thesis, University of 
Privacy (Lynne Rienner, 2005) chapters 1–3; Viktor Mayer- Amsterdam 2016) 196, 216–17, 258.
Schonberger, ‘Generational development of data protection 
in  Europe’,  in  Philip  Agre  and  Marc  Rotenberg  (eds),  125  Paul P Craig and Gráinne De Búrca, EU law: text, cases, 
3 306  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
of Article 52(1), a specific legal provision ordains  in other cases, they do not exist. As a result, this can 
processing for commercial purposes and/or raises  only be interpreted as a contextual provision which 
obstacles to invoke certain data subject rights, does  requires consideration of the ability for these rights 
it seem realistic that a controller can legitimately  to be exercised in a data subject’s specific situation.
not accommodate data subject rights purely on the 
basis of commercial interests.126  121 While the data controller should be flagging these 
rights to facilitate the data subject’s awareness and 
119 In relation to this, attention should be given to a  use of them — a common EU law trope found in areas 
decision by the Supreme Court of the Netherlands,  such as airline and rail delay rights129 — this is not 
which did not accept exemptions based on a claim by  the only role of this provision. Given that the data 
a company that received requests based on alleged  subject often (although not always) has a choice 
harm to their freedoms or rights. In Dexia127 it did  as to whether to engage with a data controller, 
not accept three instances of this argument. First  such as putting themselves to actively consent to 
the high cost associated with responding to a single  processing or contract with the controller, or to 
access is not (in itself) a reason to exempt access.  move within a zone where processing on the basis 
Second, the fact that an organisation may receive  of, for example, legitimate interests is likely to occur, 
a high number of requests is not accepted as a  the purpose of the GDPR’s information rights is to 
reason to restrict access. Third, the fact that data  provide information to help the data subject decide 
subjects have been incited to use their rights by a  whether they wish to enable such data processing. 
consumer protection programme and have made use  A core piece of that information is whether that 
of a request template provided by that programme  specific processing can be objected to, erased, 
cannot be invoked. ported or accessed.130
122 The data controller should have pre-empted how to 
VI. Rights a Controller Expects  deal with rights in relation to all data they process, 
to Refuse Must be Flagged  and the principles of fairness and transparency 
require that this information be provided ahead, 
as per Arts 13/14/25
read in line with the specific requirements of Article 
13-14 not subsequent to processing. Furthermore, 
as there will be times where individuals have not 
120 An important, but underappreciated, aspect of the  been informed of their rights under either Article 
GDPR is found in the parts of Articles 13–15 which  13 or 14,131 the data controller should be prepared to 
require data controllers to declare the existence of  reveal this information upon request under Article 
certain GDPR rights.128 These parts have usually been  15.132
interpreted as copy-pasting the GDPR into, say, a 
privacy policy. It is quite clear however, that in some 
cases, in respect to some data, these rights exist, and 
and materials (Oxford Univ Press 2011) n 221. Gutwirth (n 
124) 1430–31; Orla Lynskey, ‘Regulating “Platform Power”’ 
(Working Paper, LSE Legal Studies Working Paper, LSE 21 
February 2017) 25–26; Hijmans (n 124) 258. The last author 
refers to Craig and De Búrca who explain that permitting 
economic objectives to limit the scope of fundamental  129  Regulation (EC) No 261/2004 of the European Parliament 
rights, would go against ECHR jurisprudence. See: Paul  and of the Council of 11 February 2004 establishing common 
P Craig and Gráinne De Búrca, EU law: text, cases, and  rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the 
materials (Oxford Univ Press 2011) n 221. event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay 
of flights, and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 295/91 (Text 
126  This can be the case, for example, when the controller can  with EEA relevance) OJ L 46/1, art 14; Regulation (EC) No 
invoke a legal obligation to process the personal data as a  1371/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
lawful ground (GDPR, art 6(1)(c)) and/or as an exemption  23 October 2007 on rail passengers’ rights and obligations OJ 
to the right to erasure (GDPR, art 17(3)(b)). Regardless,  L 315/14, art 29.
further processing in this context will be constrained to 
what the legal obligation requires only (again reiterating  130  See generally Veale and others (n 68) 118.
the importance of the need for a granular approach).
131  Such as in the situations envisaged in GDPR, art 14(5)(b) 
127  Hoge Raad (29 June 2007) NL:HR:2007:AZ4663; Hoge Raad (29  (‘the provision of such information proves impossible or 
June 2007) NL:HR:2007:AZ4664. would involve a disproportionate effort’).
128  GDPR arts 13(2)(b), 14(2)(c), 15(1)(e). 132  GDPR, art 15(1)(e).
3 307  2020Jef Ausloos, Michael Veale and René Mahieu
A data controller in response to an Article 15  doing so would be in breach of the security principle, 
request informs the data subject, by data category  and therefore not something they are willing to 
and processing purpose, where the right to request  countenance.136 
rectification, erasure, restriction or objection exists. 
Where no possibility for a request exists — such as  126 In cases where, by design or not, verification is 
the lack of right to object to data necessary for a  imperfect, data controllers must take a realistic 
contract, such as credit card data processed for the  risk-based approach to release, which does not 
purposes of fulfilling a future payment, the data  disempower data subjects. In many cases, the 
controller makes this clear in their response. impact of accidental release of data to someone 
other than the data subject, particularly where the 
Proposed Example data subjects are inherently difficult to identify, will be 
low, and possible to monitor on an aggregate level. 
J.  Verifying Data Subjects
II. Rights-Dependent 
123 Verification of data subjects is an important part of  Verification Burden
exercising data rights, however academic research 
and the authors’ experience show that verification  127 Different rights have different levels of consequence 
approaches taken by many data controllers today  for data subjects if they are applied by mistake or 
are not compliant with the principles of the GDPR.133 fraudulently. For example, the rights of access and 
portability can lead to sensitive data disclosure, and 
it is important that verification is an effective and 
I.  Authentication should not 
secure process.137
be an unnecessary obstacle 
128 Other  rights,  such  as  erasure,  restriction  and 
to data subject rights
objection are more contextual in nature. Misapplied 
erasure might, for certain kinds of data, result in an 
124 Many controllers engage in singling-out of the  inability for the genuine data subject to establish or 
data subject for the purpose of service delivery or  substantiate legal claims, or affect the availability 
analysis but have not built a system with which to  of services, or cause the loss of important personal 
identify data subjects for the purposes of exercising  data. Yet for many kinds of data which already have 
their rights. In some cases, they simply refuse to  limited storage retention, erasure will merely hasten 
build a system that can be accessed by the user,  deletion which should have occurred anyway. For 
despitehaving access to the specific user and device  example, the impact on an individual’s rights and 
from their server.134 Examples of this are documented  freedoms of the incorrect erasure of web-tracking 
by two of the authors in a recent academic paper.135 data, or app telemetry data, is significantly lower 
than the impact of accidental disclosure of this data.
125 In other cases, such as in the case of wireless 
analytics or targeting advertising, data controllers  129 The lack of negative consequences for the data 
have established a system where their business  subject is perhaps most stark where the data is being 
model can operate with imprecise targeting or  processed on the basis of legitimate interests of the 
singling out of individuals (which nonetheless is  data controller, as the individual did not explicitly 
highly individualised over time). The impact of this  request this processing be carried out, and therefore 
imprecise, but personalised targeting is that the  in many cases their interest in the processing will 
data controller can claim that providing data rights  be minimal.
would be imprecise too, but the consequences of 
130 Where the right to object is being applied, as the 
133  Coline Boniface and others, ‘Security Analysis of Subject  data are still being stored but simply not processed 
Access  Request  Procedures  How  to  Authenticate  Data  for  the  objected-to  purposes,  the  process  is 
Subjects Safely When They Request for Their Data’ [2019]  generally reversible in the case that verification 
Annual Privacy Forum, Jun 2019, Rome, Italy. was incorrect. As a result, the right to object or 
to restrict processing should, in general, require 
134  See eg Veale and others (n 68); Chris Norval and others,  a lower burden of verification than access and 
‘RECLAIMING Data: Overcoming App Identification Barriers  erasure. The Guidance should also lay out the 
for Exercising Data Protection Rights’ in Proceedings of the 
2018 ACM International Joint Conference and 2018 International  136  See eg the example of Transport for London in ibid.
Symposium on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Wearable 
Computers (UbiComp ’18, New York, NY, USA, ACM 2018). 137  See generally Andrew Cormack, ‘Is the Subject Access Right 
Now Too Great a Threat to Privacy?’ (2016) 2 European Data 
135  See Veale and others (n 68). Protection Law Review 15.
3 308  2020Getting Data Subject Rights Right
K. Concluding Remarks
circumstances in which the right to erasure 
should require less of a burden of verification 
than the right of access. In particular, the  133 In this document we have laid out our understanding 
controller  should  need  to  demonstrate,  in  – considering case-law, the provisions and the 
accordance with the principles of accountability  regulatory guidance thus provided – of the extent 
and fairness, compelling reasons as to why they  of data rights and the context in which they must 
are requesting detailed verification from a data  operate. There are strongly held views on the 
subject for the right to object. matter, not least from industry, but these must be 
very carefully considered in light of the fundamental 
rights framework underpinning data protection. The 
III. Verifiability, Fairness and 
system of data rights is both intrinsically important 
Data Protection by Design and key as an enabler of the entire data protection 
regime. They are going to be more important than 
131 The GDPR’s risk-based approach, and its by-design  ever in the years to come in mitigating the power 
approach, are not currently widely recognised and  asymmetries that have emerged, and in many cases 
followed in relation to verification systems for data  appear to be worsening, between individuals and 
rights. The method used for authentication should  their representations in data. The Guidance therefore 
be proportionate to avoid abusive identity checks.138  should ensure data rights are the strong tools the 
For  example,  controllers  such  as  information  text and case-law intend them to be, in order to 
society services, which due to users explicitly  uphold fundamental rights in the information age.
requesting the service often have login credentials 
or an existing verification system, should not, in 
general, require a higher level of verification. If 
controllers request a higher level of verification  CCoooorrddiinnaattiinngg  AAccaaddeemmiiccss::
than required to access the service, they must 
Jef Ausloos, Postdoctoral Researcher
justify this in relation to the accountability 
and fairness principles, and minimise both the  Institute for Information Law, University of Amsterdam
burden on the user (in line with ‘efficient and 
timely protection’) and personal data processed  René Mahieu, PhD Candidate
(in line with data minimisation) in the process. Law, Science, Technology & Society (LSTS), Vrije Universiteit 
Brussel
132 Furthermore, data controllers often ask for a 
government issued identification document in  Michael Veale, Lecturer in Digital Rights & Regulation
situations where it is clearly disproportionate.  Faculty of Laws, University College London and the Alan Turing 
In many cases, for example when an individual is  Institute
seeking data connected to an identifier (eg a cookie 
ID) and the controller has no knowledge of the 
real identity of the data subject, it is unclear what 
purpose the government ID serves. Moreover, asking 
for a government ID entails unnecessary risk as 
data controllers may not have secure systems set 
up to receive such data, and often in the authors’ 
experience request it through email. Furthermore, in 
many cases, a data subject will be requesting data on 
the basis that they do not trust the data controller, 
and wish to consider their options in terms of eg 
objection, erasure or the withdrawal of consent. 
In these cases, the need to provide sensitive data 
to the data controller may be unfairly dissuading 
data subjects from exercising their rights. Some 
recommendations of national DPAs recommend 
controllers  to  request  a  government  ID.  The 
Guidance should make clear that a government-
issued ID should only be required when this is 
proportionate. This would also provide reassurance 
to data controllers who may feel obliged to ask for 
such information.
138  Boniface and others (n 133).
3 309  2020