LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2 [2017-12] 
Blurred Lines—Intersexuality and the Law:  
An Annotated Bibliography*
Pat Newcombe**
This bibliography gathers, organizes, and annotates relevant law review articles 
(and one monograph) dealing with legal issues concerning intersexuality. Articles 
are included to introduce researchers to the intricacies involved in the discussion of 
intersexuality, to examine issues of medical interventions, and to explore possibilities 
of judicial relief within the existing framework.
Introduction .........................................................222
Scope and Organization ...............................................226
Terminology .........................................................227
Intersex  ...........................................................227
Disorders/Differences of Sex Development ............................229
Hermaphrodite ....................................................229
Medical Intervention and Its Legal Framework ...........................230
Informed Consent ..................................................230
Medical Malpractice ................................................230
Constitutional Rights ...............................................231
Annotated Bibliography .............................................233
Confines of a Binary System ............................................236
Annotated Bibliography .............................................240
Discrimination .......................................................242
Discrimination Generally ............................................242
Annotated Bibliography ...........................................242
Discrimination in Sports ............................................244
Annotated Bibliography ...........................................247
Human Rights ........................................................248
Annotated Bibliography .............................................251
Intersex Activist Movement ............................................252
Intersex Activist Movement Generally .................................252
  *  © Pat Newcombe, 2017. Many thanks to my colleagues Sudha Setty and Beth Cohen for 
reviewing this article and providing thoughtful comments and feedback. I am also grateful to my 
colleague Jennifer Levi for sending my article for review by Julie Greenberg, an internationally recog-
nized legal expert in the field of intersexuality. I am indebted to Julie for her advice and inspiration. A 
special thanks to my research assistant, Kathryn Mullin, for her assistance with this project. Respon-
sibility for any errors is mine alone. Additionally, I am most grateful for the work my excellent library 
staff does that makes it possible for me to pursue writing projects.
  **  Associate Professor of Law and Associate Dean for Library and Information Resources, West-
ern New England University School of Law, Springfield, Massachusetts.
221222 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
Annotated Bibliography ...........................................253
Intersection with Other Movements: LGBT and Same-Sex Marriage .......254
Annotated Bibliography ...........................................255
Foreign Approaches to Intersex Rights ...................................257
Discrimination .....................................................257
Genital Surgery Practices ............................................258
Annotated Bibliography .............................................260
U.S. Reform/Recommendations .........................................262
Annotated Bibliography .............................................263
Conclusion  ..........................................................267
Introduction
¶1 Boy or girl? This is often the first question upon the birth of a child or upon 
learning of a pregnancy.
¶2 “Intersex” is an umbrella term for a variety of congenital conditions that lead 
to ambiguity about an individual’s biological sex. The physical effects can be subtle 
or clear. While genital ambiguity is the most obvious manifestation, intersex can 
present genetically, hormonally, or anatomically, as when internal reproductive or 
sexual anatomy does not conform to standard definitions of male or female.1 From 
the late nineteenth to the early twentieth centuries, physicians determined sex 
solely based on an individual’s gonads: an individual with ovaries was considered a 
female, and an individual with testicles was considered a male.2 By the 1950s, the 
focus of sex determination moved to the appearance of the external genitalia.3 
Physicians considered intersexuality discovered at birth as an emergency requiring 
surgical intervention to “normalize” genitalia in affected infants to mitigate the 
stigma that may be associated with being perceived as sexually variant.4 There were 
two reasons for this development. First, physicians developed surgical methods to 
alter genitalia to look cosmetically consistent for the assigned sex. Second, it 
became a pervasive belief among the medical establishment that one’s gender iden-
tity was dependent on nurture not nature.5 Doctors did not believe that infants had 
an  innate  sense  of  being  male  or  female;  rather,  this  was  learned  behavior. 
Researchers theorized that if early genital-normalization surgery enabled parents 
to raise their child as the sex that matched the child’s genitals, the child would not 
  1. Hida Viloria, What Is Intersex?, OII-USA, http://oii-usa.org/1128/intersex/ [https://perma.cc 
/X24Q-K2P6]; see infra “Terminology,” ¶¶ 14–21, for a more complete definition.
  2. Julie A. Greenberg, Intersexuality and the Law: Why Sex Matters 15 (2012).
  3. Id.
  4. Id. at 15–17; see also Am. Acad. of Pediatrics, Evaluation of the Newborn with Developmental 
Anomalies of the External Genitalia, 106 Pediatrics 138, 138 (2000) (“The birth of a child with 
ambiguous genitalia constitutes a social emergency.”). Surgery other than genital-normalization 
surgery may be medically necessary at times, however, to assist in bowel and bladder activity or 
when there is a risk of cancer, such as with nonfunctional testes. Catherine L. Minto et al., Long Term 
Sexual Function in Intersex Conditions with Ambiguous Genitalia, 14 J. Pediatric & Adolescent 
Gynecology 141, 141–42 (2001). 
  5. See, e.g., Joan G. Hampson et al., Hermaphrodism: Recommendations Concerning Case Man-
agement, 16 J. Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 547 (1956).Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 223
suffer gender identity confusion in spite of any differences in chromosomes or 
hormones.6
¶3 Without surgery, physicians were concerned that “abnormal” genitalia would 
make a child suffer deep psychological distress.7 Physicians also believed that inter-
sex genitalia made people uncomfortable and that parents would not be able to 
accept or bond with their intersex children unless the ambiguity was “erased” with 
such surgery.8 Because there was much stigma and shame surrounding this atypical 
condition, many families kept the condition secret. Parents were often told half-
truths about their child’s condition and were advised never to tell the child about 
his or her condition.9 Genital-normalization surgery became the standard of medi-
cal care for intersex infants. The choice, traditionally, has been which sex to assign 
to the baby, not whether to perform genital-normalization surgery.10
¶4 By the late 1990s, this medical protocol was challenged by intersex activists and 
experts in various disciplines, including law.11 Studies confirmed that one’s sense of 
being male or female relates more to brain and hormonal functions than the cosmetic 
appearance of one’s genitals, and therefore if the surgically altered genitalia did not 
conform to the child’s own sense of being male or female, a child would be greatly 
harmed.12 Additional evidence established that the irreversible surgical procedures 
had troubling risks, supported by numerous personal accounts of individuals with 
intersex traits who felt permanently scarred and traumatized.13 The procedures may 
have serious permanent effects, including sterility, a loss or diminishment of the abil-
ity to experience sexual pleasure, chronic pain or pain associated with dilation of a 
surgically created vagina, incontinence, lifetime mental suffering,14 and impairment 
  6. Alice Domurat Dreger, Ambiguous Sex—Or Ambivalent Medicine? Ethical Issues in the Treat-
ment of Intersexuality, Hastings Ctr. Rep., May/June 1998, at 24.
  7. Hazel Glenn Beh & Milton Diamond, An Emerging Ethical and Medical Dilemma: Should 
Physicians Perform Sex Assignment Surgery on Infants with Ambiguous Genitalia?, 7 Mich. J. Gender 
& L. 1, 43–46 (2000).
  8. Id. at 44–45. 
  9. Julie A. Greenberg, Health Care Issues Affecting People with an Intersex Condition or DSD: Sex 
or Disability Discrimination?, 45 Loy. L.A. L. Rev. 849, 859 (2012).
  10. Emily Greenhouse, A New Era for Intersex Rights, New Yorker (Dec. 30, 2013), http://www 
.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/a-new-era-for-intersex-rights [https://perma.cc/GM56-U4W8].
  11. Greenberg, supra note 2, at 19.
  12. Id. Dr. John Money’s nurture over nature theory was debunked in 1997, when it was discov-
ered that what he reported as a “successful” experiment with his test of behavioralism was actually a lie. 
Id. See also Milton Diamond & H. Keith Sigmundson, Sex Reassignment at Birth: Long-Term Review 
and Clinical Implications, 151 Archives Pediatric & Adolescent Med. 298, 300 (1997).
  13. Mireya Navarro, When Gender Isn’t a Given, N.Y. Times (Sept. 19, 2004), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2004/09/19/fashion/when-gender-isnt-a-given.html [https://perma.cc/E7RU-MNKS]; see also 
Laura Hermer, Paradigms Revised: Intersex Children, Bioethics & the Law, 11 Annals Health L. 195, 
212–13 (2002) (stating that many individuals in one of the largest studies experienced psychological 
and identity issues).
  14. Many of these children suffer from depression, and some consider suicide as adults. There are 
many personal accounts, such as Jim Ambrose’s, who had an X and Y chromosome, but had surgery 
as an infant to have his genitals appear more female-like. He later took female hormones and had a 
vagina constructed. Jim obtained his medical records when he was an adult and discovered the cir-
cumstances of his birth. As an adult, he began to take testosterone shots and had surgery to remove 
his breasts. Greenhouse, supra note 10. Jim’s father remembers that the doctors did not make it appear 
as if there was much of a choice when Jim was an infant. The doctors said they could simply fix the 
problem. When Jim discovered that he was born intersex, Jim’s parents told Jim that they felt that were 
doing the best thing for him, but Jim was very angry about it. Id.224 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
of the parent-child relationship.15 In fact, the growing consensus was that no compel-
ling evidence supports a finding that the presumed social benefits of such “normal-
izing” surgery outweigh the potential costs.16 
¶5 Intersex activists advise against nonconsensual genital-normalization sur-
gery and counsel acceptance for affected children. It is perhaps an expected con-
tinuance of the gender-blurring evolution. Feminism and the gay and transgender 
rights movements have smoothed the path for greater acceptance of individuals 
who do not conform to the standard male or female model. Although the general 
public is often confused by the difference between intersex conditions and gender 
identity issues, they are quite distinct. As a starting point, reference to one’s gender 
identity describes the individual’s internal, deeply held sense of his or her identity 
as male or female, or neither; intersex involves biological characteristics. 
¶6 Currently, advocates are advancing efforts to alter the approach taken in plan-
ning healthcare for children with intersex traits. For example, the Gender and Sex 
Development program at Chicago’s Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital, 
launched three years ago, is one of several U.S. programs that uses a collaborative 
multidisciplinary care team of specialists experienced in this area: pediatric endocri-
nologists, urologists, surgeons, nurses, genetic counselors, neonatologists, pediatric 
gynecologists, ethicists, and child psychologists.17 The team works to assist families 
in weighing their options, including whether surgery should be contemplated at all. 
¶7 There is an increasing awareness of intersexuality today, which has led more 
families to explore treatment options. The new treatment approach results partially 
from a 2006 Consensus Statement on Intersex Disorders by U.S. and European 
medical specialists and intersex advocates who met to consider treatment proto-
cols, including genital-normalization surgery.18 The Consensus Statement advo-
cated a more cautious approach before proceeding with genital surgery, noting the 
resulting impact to quality of life, such as decreased sexual sensitivity. It also noted 
that evidence for early genital-normalizing surgery is not substantiated; promoted 
a more open dialog between patients and families, along with the provision of psy-
chosocial support; and encouraged patients’ and families’ participation in decision 
making.19 Although this Consensus Statement was a step in the right direction, it 
  15. “If such interventions are performed solely with a view to integration of the child into its 
family and social environment, then they run counter to the child’s welfare. In addition, there is no 
guarantee that the intended purpose (integration) will be achieved.” Swiss Nat’l Advisory Comm’n 
on Biomedical Ethics, On the Management of Differences of Sex Development: Ethical Issues 
Relating to “Intersexuality” 13 (Opinion No. 20/201, Nov. 2012), http://www.nek-cne.ch/file 
admin/nek-cne-dateien/Themen/Stellungnahmen/en/NEK_Intersexualitaet_En.pdf  [https://perma 
.cc/DC6E-KGEA].
  16. Greenberg, supra note 9, at 864. There is still an absence of consistent psychosocial follow-
up. Lih-Mei Liao et al., Parental Choice on Normalising Cosmetic Genital Surgery: Between a Rock and 
a Hard Place, 351 BMJ h5124, h5124 (Sept. 28, 2015), http://aisdsd.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10 
/Liao-creighton-2015-bmj.h5124.full_.pdf.
  17. Differences of Sex Development, Anne & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hosp. of Chi., https://
www.luriechildrens.org/en-us/care-services/conditions-treatments/disorders-of-sex-development 
/Pages/index.aspx [https://perma.cc/R6JX-995F].
  18. Peter A. Lee et al., Consensus Statement on Management of Intersex Disorders, 118 Pediatrics 
e488, e488 (2006).
  19. Id. at e490.Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 225
did not recommend a cessation of genital-normalization surgeries, a point that 
activists criticize. 
¶8 The Consensus Statement recommendations are a natural outgrowth of the 
patients’ rights movement in U.S. medicine toward better communication between 
doctors and patients treatment that is more patient-focused. With intersex condi-
tions, communication between doctors and parents/patients is particularly laden 
with emotion and controversy, and not all families are ready to accept a change in 
treatment philosophy. Even after advisement on the risks and concerns of genital-
normalization surgery, some families still opt for the surgery due to deep-seated 
concerns that their children will be considered abnormal if they fail to take any 
immediate action.20 Unfortunately, genital-normalization surgery has a long his-
tory of acceptance in healthcare, and even after the 2006 Consensus Statement 
there was no abrupt change in medical practices.21 The Chicago consensus “does 
not seem to have percolated down to frontline care in many cases.”22 
¶9 In 2016, there was an update to the 2006 Consensus Statement.23 Most sig-
nificant is that the update notes that physicians working with families should be 
aware that there has been movement in recent years for legal and human rights 
bodies to increasingly emphasize the importance of maintaining patient autonomy. 
It also encourages that peer support be provided on a routine basis at the earliest 
possible time for parents, and integrated with clinical care to ease parental distress. 
Care recommendations include the use of a team approach, full disclosure to 
patients and parents, and a focus on the best possible outcome for quality of life.24 
¶10 Many physicians in the United States still regard genital-normalization sur-
gery as necessary to avoid psychological damage, and data supports that there is 
little change in practice.25 “There is still no consensual attitude regarding indica-
tions, timing, procedure and evaluation of outcome” of this surgery.26 The per-
ceived visibility of the intersex condition, along with the standardized reaction 
from the medical community and an expectant society has put much pressure on 
  20. Sarah M. Creighton et al., Childhood Surgery for Ambiguous Genitalia: Glimpses of Practice 
Changes or More of the Same?, 5 Psychol. & Sexuality 34, 41 (2014).
  21. There have been few reviews on the effect of the 2006 Consensus Statement, clitoral surger-
ies on children under the age of fourteen have increased since 2006, and “recent publications in the 
medical literature tend to focus on surgical techniques with no reports on patient experiences.” Id. 
at 38.
  22. Martha Henriques, Intersex: Seeking the Beauty in Difference, Mosaic: The Science of 
Life (Oct. 4, 2016), https://mosaicscience.com/story/intersex-DSDs [https://perma.cc/GA2E-FWXZ 
?type=image].
  23. Peter A. Lee et al., Global Disorders of Sex Development Update Since 2006: Perceptions, 
Approach and Care, 85 Hormone Res. Paediatrics 158 (2016).
  24. Id. at 160, 169–70.
  25. Alice Dreger, Malta Bans Surgery on Intersex Children, The Stranger: SLOG (Apr. 3, 
2015),  http://www.thestranger.com/blogs/slog/2015/04/03/22001053/malta-bans-surgery-on-intersex 
-children [https://perma.cc/8AL5-3ZY9]; see also Ellen K. Feder & Alice Dreger, Still Ignoring Human 
Rights in Intersex Care, 12 J. Pediatric Urology 436 (2016) (noting that issues have not progressed 
over the last twenty years, with clinical evidence still lacking and the standard of care remaining sub-
stantially the same). 
  26. Lee et al., supra note 23, at 176. Another 2016 publication reiterated numerous similar asser-
tions from the update, but eliminated mention of human rights concerns. Pierre D.E. Mouriquand et 
al., Surgery in Disorders of Sex Development (DSD) with a Gender Issue: If (Why), When, and How?, 12 
J. Pediatric Urology 139 (2016). 226 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
physicians and parents to take an aggressive and intrusive approach at an early age. 
However, it is possible that we are on the very brink of a sea change in the medical 
standard of care, as surgical practices have become a controversial issue in public 
and professional discussion, and as we now see legal and human rights institutions 
increasingly focus on patient autonomy. 
Scope and Organization
¶11 This annotated bibliography offers a survey of law review articles (and one 
monograph)27 to introduce researchers and scholars to the issues involved in the 
discussion of intersexuality and the law.28 Although there is limited scholarship in 
this area, it is a topic of burgeoning interest, and it is useful to review and update 
existing scholarship. The annotations include a brief summary of a particular focus 
within each article. In this way, the breadth of available scholarship in a wide vari-
ety of subject areas is provided. Before each grouping of annotations is an overview 
of each topic incorporating any available updated information.
¶12 Searching for legal literature on intersexuality requires the use of multiple 
words and phrases to describe the issues. All of the search terms listed below were 
used in compiling this annotated bibliography. The selected articles were compiled 
by conducting Westlaw searches using the following search terms in the title field: 
intersex!, hermaphrodit!, “genital normaliz!,” assign! /3 sex, disorder /2 “sex devel-
opment,” difference /2 “sex development,” DSD, sexing /4 child!, “third gender,” 
“ambigu! /2 sex, and “ambiguous genital!”29 
¶13 Since this issue is an evolving one of increasing awareness, articles are from 
2001 to the present. This annotated bibliography is divided into sections that cover 
resources that provide a background on the medical intervention for individuals 
with intersex traits and its legal framework, the confines of treating gender as a 
binary system, discrimination against intersex individuals, the human rights issues 
surrounding intersexuality, the impact of the intersex activist movement, some 
foreign  approaches  to  intersexuality,  and  possible  U.S.  judicial  and  statutory 
reforms. Within each section, the items are arranged alphabetically by author.
  27. Greenberg, supra note 2. This title is included as it is the sole monograph that focuses on 
the role that legal institutions can play in protecting the rights of people with intersex traits, and it is 
a very highly regarded work.
  28. Much cutting-edge work on the topic of intersexuality is published in nonlegal journals. 
Although I am focusing on law review literature in this article, it is important to note that there are 
excellent articles in, for example, medical journals that delve into legal issues, which researchers 
would be wise to examine.
  29. All the annotated articles resulted from this search, except for one outlier written by one of 
the leading experts on the topic of sex testing and sports policies that ban women athletes for having 
naturally high testosterone. Katrina Karkazis et al., Out of Bounds? A Critique of the New Policies on 
Hyperandrogenism in Elite Female Athletes, Am. J. Bioethics, July 2012, at 3.Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 227
Terminology
Intersex30
¶14 At birth, infants are classified as male or female, usually determined by the 
presentation of their external anatomy. In reality, however, an individual’s sex is a 
combination of bodily characteristics that comprises chromosomes, genitals, hor-
mones, and gonads. If any of these do not fit typical definitions of male or female, 
they can result in additional variations in secondary sexual characteristics such as 
muscle mass, hair distribution, breast development, hip-to-waist ratio, and stat-
ure.31 All of these factors encompass the wide array of variations in sex character-
istics in intersexuality. 
¶15 Medical science has progressed so that we now have a greater understand-
ing of the origins of intersexuality. Genetic male and female embryos are anatomi-
cally identical through the first six to seven weeks of gestation.32 After that, hor-
monal and genetic influences trigger the beginning of development of testes or 
ovaries.33 However, hormonal and genetic occurrences in the womb may cause 
biological variation so that at birth, chromosomes, hormones, gonads, or external 
anatomy do not correspond to the typical male or female. 
¶16 These hormonal and genetic occurrences may cause an intersex individual 
to be born with one of several medical conditions that lead to the individual’s bio-
logical sex being ambiguous. For example, an infant may be born with genitalia 
that have characteristics of both males and females. A female child may be born 
with an unusually large clitoris or without a vaginal opening; a male child may be 
born with a micropenis or with a scrotum that is divided in the formation typical 
of labia. 
¶17 However, not all intersex conditions involve ambiguous genitalia, so they 
may not be immediately identified at birth. Some individuals with intersex traits 
have external genitals of one sex, but the internal anatomy of the other sex. Some 
individuals have the chromosomes of one sex, but the sexual anatomy of the oppo-
site sex. Some may possess male genitals, small testes, and ovaries. Others may have 
atypical chromosomal configurations, such as XXX or XXY or XYY, while some 
may have different chromosomal compositions in different tissues, a condition 
referred to as mosaicism. There is an array of congenital conditions including, 
  30. The term “intersexuality” was coined by Richard Goldschmidt in his 1917 article Intersexual-
ity and the Endocrine Aspect of Sex, 1 Endocrinology 433 (1917). Throughout the accompanying text 
in this annotated bibliography, I use the term “intersex,” and, when referencing individuals, I use the 
term “individuals with intersex traits,” so as to avoid labeling individuals with a term of a biological 
condition. When annotating articles, I use the specific term the author used.
  31. Viloria, supra note 1.
  32. Exploring the Biological Contributions to Human Health: Does Sex Matter? 45  
(Theresa M. Wizemann & Mary-Lou Pardue eds., 2001).
  33. Am. Acad. of Pediatrics, supra note 4, at 138.228 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
among others, hypospadias,34 Turner syndrome,35 congenital adrenal hyperplasia,36 
complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS),37 partial androgen insensitivity 
syndrome (PAIS),38 and 5-alpha-reductase deficiency (5-ARD).39 
¶18 Doctors’ assessments about what specific conditions should be classified as 
intersex has been controversial.40 Due to this lack of consensus, and the various 
terms used to refer to intersex, estimates for the prevalence of intersex conditions 
are not exact. Medical experts, however, estimate that when looking at the number 
of infants born with visibly anomalous genitalia that prompts medical investiga-
tion, the average is about 1 in 2000 births, or 0.05% of births.41 However, some 
advocates believe many more people are born with more subtle types of sex varia-
tions than ambiguous genitalia, which are not discovered upon birth, and that they 
constitute 1.7% of births.42 Sometimes intersexuality does not come to light until 
puberty43 or during later stages in development, such as when adults find that they 
  34. Hypospadias is a condition in which individuals with XY chromosomes have the urinary 
opening of the penis located somewhere along the underside of the penis, instead of the tip. The 
severity of hypospadias can vary; sometimes it is such that the penis resembles labia. This can occur 
as an isolated symptom in men with otherwise typical sex development or in conjunction with other 
intersex conditions. Hypospadias, ISNA: Intersex Soc’y of North Am., http://www.isna.org/faq 
/conditions/hypospadias [https://perma.cc/W2WZ-PSFZ]. Although ISNA became defunct in 2008, 
this informative website remains accessible for historical purposes. Dear ISNA Friends and Support-
ers, ISNA: Intersex Soc’y of North Am., http://www.isna.org/ [https://perma.cc/GX27-DYGD].
  35. Turner syndrome is a chromosomal condition in which girls have only one X chromo-
some; female sex characteristics exist but are immature in comparison to the average female. Turner 
Syndrome, ISNA: Intersex Soc’y of North Am., http://www.isna.org/faq/conditions/turner [https://
perma.cc/DL2L-BFKM].
  36. In congenital adrenal hyperplasia, the adrenal glands cannot produce cortisol, causing a large 
production of other hormones that cause virilization. Infants with XX chromosomes may develop 
larger than average clitorises, or even a clitoris that resembles a penis, or labia that appear more like 
a scrotum. Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH), ISNA: Intersex Soc’y of North Am., http://www 
.isna.org/faq/conditions/cah [https://perma.cc/7YDM-NC8D].
  37. Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) is a genetic condition in which, because 
of a receptor defect, the body is unable to process the testosterone produced by the testes, so the 
body develops as female. CAIS individuals have XY chromosomes and a short vagina or none at all. 
External female genitalia form, but no internal female reproductive organs develop. Individuals with 
CAIS have undescended or partially descended testes. Melissa Hines et al., Psychological Outcomes 
and Gender-Related Development in Complete Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome, 32 Archives Sexual 
Behav. 93, 93 (2003). Most individuals with CAIS never learn the reason they do not menstruate or 
are unsuccessful in becoming pregnant. Sharon E. Preves, Out of the O.R. and into the Streets: Explor-
ing the Impact of Intersex Media Activism, 12 Cardozo J.L. & Gender 247, 249–50 n.7 (2005).
  38. In contrast, individuals with partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS) are able to 
partially process testosterone, so their genitals will masculinize to a certain extent. Greenberg, supra 
note 9, at 854 n.6.
  39. An enzyme deficiency, 5-alpha-reductase deficiency (5-ARD) results in XY genetic individuals 
who most often appear to be females when born, but virilize at puberty when testosterone increases.  
What Is 5-Alpha-Reductase Deficiency (5-ARD)?, Accord Alliance, http://www.accordalliance.org 
/faqs/what-is-5-alpha-reductase-deficiency-5-ard/ [https://perma.cc/BW3Y-XGLX]. Children are often 
raised as girls, but usually come to have a male gender identity.
  40. Elisabeth McDonald, Intersex People in Aotearoa New Zealand: The Challenges for Law and 
Social Policy Part I: Critiquing Gender Normalising Surgery, 46 Victoria U. Wellington L. Rev. 705, 
707 (2015).
  41. Hida Viloria, How Common Is Intersex? An Explanation of the Stats., OII-USA, http://oii-usa 
.org/2563/how-common-is-intersex-in-humans/ [https://perma.cc/CEC5-ZPHF].
  42. Id.
  43. For example, if a doctor does not know that an infant who possesses typical female genitals Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 229
are infertile. Sometimes individuals are determined to have an intersex condition 
only upon autopsy. Others live all their lives with intersex conditions without any-
one knowing it, including themselves.
Disorders/Differences of Sex Development
¶19 A more recent term used to connote intersexuality in the medical commu-
nity is “disorders of sexual development” (DSD). This term is defined by the 2006 
Consensus Statement on Intersex Disorders as “congenital conditions in which 
development of chromosomal, gonadal, or anatomic sex is atypical.”44 Accord Alli-
ance, an advocacy organization, notes that older terms such as “hermaphrodite” 
and “intersex” are not preferred because the terms are imprecise, and label indi-
viduals, not specific medical conditions.45
¶20 The term “disorder” of sex development is itself a controversial term,46 even 
though it is the most common term used in the medical literature now. Individuals 
with intersex traits, activists, and academics have challenged the use of the term 
“DSD” with its designation as a “disorder,” viewing this as offensive to those who feel 
there is nothing wrong with them and feel stigmatized by the medical connota-
tions.47 An alternative term suggested, which uses the same acronym “DSD,” is “dif-
ferences of sex development.”48 Many individuals with intersex traits still choose to 
embrace the term “intersex,” however, as the term “DSD” simply contributes to 
pathologizing their reality and indicates the need for a medical “cure.”49 
Hermaphrodite50
¶21 Individuals with intersex traits were formerly referred to as “hermaphro-
dites,” an outdated term that is both misleading and stigmatizing,51 although some 
has testes within her abdominal cavity, it will likely not be until puberty that the condition will be 
detected, upon failure to menstruate. Greenberg, supra note 9, at 854.
  44. Lee et al., supra note 18, at e488.
  45. Disorders of Sex Development, Accord Alliance (Aug. 1, 2013), http://www.accordalliance 
.org/glossary/disorders-of-sex-development/ [https://perma.cc/8ZKX-TADD]. 
  46. Georgiann Davis, Contesting Intersex: The Dubious Diagnosis 87–89 (2015). 
  47. Ellen K. Feder, Imperatives of Normality: From “Intersex” to “Disorders of Sex Development,” 
15 GLQ: J. Lesbian & Gay Stud. 225, 225–26 (2009). This is ironic in light of the fact that the Intersex 
Society of North America (ISNA), a now defunct organization, originally used the term “DSD” spe-
cifically to support improved medical care for those born with such conditions. Why Is ISNA Using 
“DSD”?, ISNA: Intersex Soc’y of North Am. (May 24, 2006), http://www.isna.org/node/1066 [https://
perma.cc/9KVJ-MDK6].
  48. Milton Diamond & Hazel G. Beh, Changes in the Management of Children with Intersex Con-
ditions, 4 Nature Clinical Prac.: Endocrinology & Metabolism 4, 5 (2008).
  49. Robert Hupf, Allyship to the Intersex Community on Cosmetic, Non-Consensual Genital “Nor-
malizing” Surgery, 22 Wm. & Mary J. Women & L. 73, 77 (2015); see also interACT Statement on Intersex 
Terminology,  interACT,  http://interactadvocates.org/interact-statement-on-intersex-terminology/ 
[https://perma.cc/7BHU-X373?type=image].
  50. The term “hermaphrodite” was named after the mythological Greek figure Hermaphroditus, 
“the product of a union between Hermes and Aphrodite.” Jessica L. Adair, In a League of Their Own: 
The Case for Intersex Athletes, 18 Sports Law. J. 121, 124 (2011). 
  51. What Is Useful About the Terminology of DSD? What Is Unhelpful?, Accord Alliance, 
http://www.accordalliance.org/faqs/what-is-useful-about-the-terminology-of-dsd-what-is-unhelpful 
[https://perma.cc/UB8B-5SHF]. In the 1940s, British specialist A.P. Cawadias made the first recom-
mendation to substitute the term “hermaphrodite” with “intersex.” A.P. Cawadias, Hermaphroditos: 
the Human Intersex 6 (1943). 230 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
use the term as a form of reclamation.52 The term “hermaphrodite” is from mythol-
ogy, conveying that an individual is both thoroughly male and thoroughly female 
(an anatomical impossibility).53 The term has been used to identify those with both 
testicular and ovarian tissue (ovotestes).54 Up until the mid-twentieth century, the 
term “hermaphrodite” was used to refer to all individuals with intersex traits, but 
it is no longer an accurate term as it refers only to a distinct observable gonadal 
anatomy of an individual. The term “intersex” refers to a much more complex array 
of permutations involving both physical appearance and genetic makeup.
Medical Intervention and Its Legal Framework
¶22 Some scholars have suggested litigation as a way to protect, and to achieve 
justice for, infants with intersex traits. This includes the use of the informed con-
sent doctrine, medical malpractice, and constitutional rights. Examining the vari-
ous legal strategies is critical, as individuals with intersex traits who have had their 
rights violated require a legal avenue for effective remedy, including redress and 
compensation. 
Informed Consent
¶23 The informed consent doctrine requires that physicians must disclose all 
pertinent information about medical procedures and the alternatives, including no 
treatment at all, and must ensure that parents understand. However, because many 
intersex conditions are not legitimate medical emergencies, the normalization sur-
geries themselves are not medically necessary and may therefore mislead an inter-
sex infant’s parent(s) into consenting to surgery that would make true, “informed” 
consent absent.55 
Medical Malpractice
¶24 A medical malpractice strategy is another option discussed by scholars. 
However, it may be argued that the doctors followed standard medical practice 
when they performed genital-normalization surgery.56 Because the medical estab-
lishment determines the medical standard of care, proving that a specific standard 
of care is negligent presents many challenges. 
¶25 The medical malpractice strategy may have only a slight possibility of suc-
cess in those jurisdictions that no longer follow the customary practice standard; 
these jurisdictions may assert that the customary practice might itself be negligent, 
and adopt a reasonableness standard instead.57 In those jurisdictions where physi-
cians can no longer be sheltered by the customary practice standard, the trier of 
  52.  Hupf, supra note 49, at 78.
  53. Is a Person Who Is Intersex a Hermaphrodite?, ISNA: Intersex Soc’y of North Am., http://
www.isna.org/faq/hermaphrodite [https://perma.cc/EDT6-U6VH].
  54. Adair, supra note 50, at 128.
  55. Liao et al., supra note 16, at 1 (noting that parents are strongly affected by medical advice, 
may not be aware that they are consenting to experimental surgeries, and may experience a high level 
of regret).
  56. Beh & Diamond, supra note 7, at 2.
  57. Darra L. Clark Hofman, Male, Female, and Other: How Science, Medicine and Law Treat the 
Intersexed, and the Implications for Sex-Dependent Law, 21 Tul. J.L. & Sexuality 1, 14–15 (2012).Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 231
fact must balance the comparative risks of a medical procedure and avoidance of 
the procedure without any expert testimony.58 The trier of fact, of course, is subject 
to the same societal influences regarding gender norms as the doctors who perform 
genital-normalization surgeries, and therefore this medical malpractice strategy 
may not be fruitful.59
Constitutional Rights
¶26 Nonconsensual genital-normalization surgery60 potentially infringes on the 
fundamental rights of a child with intersex traits in various ways. Due to the fact 
that the surgeries cause irreversible damage to intersex children’s physical bodies, 
and often leave them sterile, the fundamental rights to bodily integrity and procre-
ation may be infringed.61 The U.S. Supreme Court should recognize and safeguard 
the individual right to freedom from these damaging and nonessential surgeries. 
Despite  these  considerations,  current  U.S.  jurisprudence  does  not  sufficiently 
address the many injuries experienced by individuals with intersex traits.62 
¶27 While there has been some success internationally in litigation in this 
area,63 access to reparation in the United States is as yet unknown, as no federal case 
  58. Id. at 15.
  59. Id.
  60. The term “genital-normalization” surgery throughout the text of this article refers to “non-
consensual” genital-normalization surgery, unless otherwise stated.
  61. “The Court’s insistence that the right to control one’s body be protected from undue interfer-
ence by others shows a developed principle of a right to bodily integrity that has evolved from the 
right to privacy.” Joshua C. Albritton, Comment, Intersexed and Injured: How M.C. v. Aaronson Breaks 
Federal Ground in Protecting Intersex Children from Unnecessary Genital-Normalization Surgeries, 24 
Tul. J.L. & Sexuality 163, 173 (2015). The Supreme Court has found the Constitution to fundamen-
tally protect procreational rights. Skinner v. Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535, 541 (1942). 
  62. See Benjamin Sweeney, The Cobblestones of Good Intentions: Substantive Due Process and 
Infant Genital Normalizing Surgery, 13 Seattle J. Soc. Just. 153, 155 (2014).
  63. In Germany, Christiane Völling was the first individual with intersex traits who won an 
award for damages in a lawsuit brought for genital-normalization surgery. In re Völling, (Regional 
Ct. Cologne, Ger.) (Case No. 25 O 179/07, Feb. 6, 2008), http://icj2.wpengine.com/wp-content 
/uploads/2008/02/In-re-Volling-Regional-Court-Cologne-Germany-English.pdf  [https://perma.cc 
/V3VN-TXZQ]. Völling was a teenager when she underwent genital surgery. She was born with XX 
chromosomes with ambiguous genitals and was brought up as a boy. When Völling was fourteen years 
old, she required an appendectomy; at that time, surgeons discovered she had two ovaries. Völling had 
never been told that she had XX chromosomes, and when she turned eighteen years of age, she had an 
operation to remove her ovaries. Eventually, Völling identified as a female and, upon investigation, her 
medical records revealed the truth about her diagnosis. Id.; see also Christiane Völling: Hermaphrodite 
Wins Damage Claim over Removal of Reproductive Organs, Zwischengeschlecht.org (Aug. 12, 2009), 
http://zwischengeschlecht.org/pages/Hermaphrodite-wins-damage-claim  [https://perma.cc/QAG6 
-9YNB]. The surgeon was ordered to pay €100,000 in damages after a legal battle that began in 2007, 
thirty years after the removal of her reproductive organs. A second successful case in Germany, filed 
by Michaela Raab, was reported in 2015. Seelenlos, Nuremberg Hermaphrodite Lawsuit: Michaela 
“Micha” Raab Wins Damages and Compensation for Intersex Genital Mutilations!, STOP Intersex 
Genital Mutilations in Children’s Clinics! (Dec. 17, 2015), http://stop.genitalmutilation.org/post 
/Nuremberg-Hermaphrodite-Lawsuit-Damages-and-Compensation-for-Intersex-Genital-Mutilations 
[https://perma.cc/9QMQ-XBAP]. Raab sought medical advice as she did not begin to menstruate or 
develop breasts by the time she was twenty years old. Physicians started her on female hormonal treat-
ment and minimized the size of her clitoris. Raab learned years later that she had XY chromosomes, 
information that her physicians had withheld from her. Intersex Person Sues Clinic for Unnecessary Op, 
Local (Feb. 27, 2015), http://www.thelocal.de/20150227/intersex-person-sues-doctors-for-unwanted 
-op [https://perma.cc/BB42-WEQV].232 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
has established injury from genital-normalization surgery. However, in 2013, for 
the first time in the United States, a lawsuit was filed on behalf of an individual  
with intersex traits alleging a violation of constitutional rights because of genital- 
normalization surgery.64 M.C. was born with ambiguous genitals and became a 
ward of the state of South Carolina.65 During this time, the South Carolina Depart-
ment of Social Services held the authority to provide medical care for M.C.66 
¶28 Medical testing determined that M.C. had “ovotesticular DSD,” which is 
characterized by the presence of both ovarian and testicular tissue.67 Although 
there was no medical need for surgery, one of the named defendants, a doctor 
employed by a state university hospital, decided on operations that would assign a 
female sex to M.C., while other named defendant employees of the same hospital 
concluded that M.C. could be raised as a boy or girl, and there was no way to make 
a determination at the time of future gender identity.68 At sixteen months of age, 
M.C.’s surgeons performed “corrective” surgery to remove most of his ambiguous 
phallus, a testis, and testicular tissue on one gonad, and surgically encourage the 
appearance of female genitals.69 These procedures caused M.C. to be sterilized; 
without the surgeries he may have been capable of producing sperm.
¶29 A Columbia, South Carolina, couple, the Crawfords, adopted M.C. after the 
surgery and raised M.C. as a girl according to the sex assignment.70 M.C. grew up 
to self-identify as a male.71 The Crawfords realized the constraints M.C. suffered 
through his genital-normalization surgery and joined with the Southern Poverty 
Law Center (SPLC) and interACT Advocates for Intersex Youth to file suit. They 
brought two complaints—one in federal court72 and one in state court73—against 
the doctors who participated in M.C.’s surgery and the South Carolina Department 
of Social Services and its employees. 
¶30 The federal complaint alleged that M.C.’s substantive due process rights74 of 
procreation, privacy, liberty, and bodily integrity were violated under the Fourteenth 
  64. This was a case of first impression in the United States, as M.C. is the first intersex plain-
tiff to assert constitutional claims in a federal court against a defendant for performing genital- 
normalization surgery. Groundbreaking SPLC Lawsuit Accuses South Carolina, Doctors, and Hospitals 
of Performing Unnecessary Surgery on Infant, Southern Poverty Law Ctr. (May 13, 2013), https://
www.splcenter.org/news/2013/05/14/groundbreaking-splc-lawsuit-accuses-south-carolina-doctors 
-and-hospitals-unnecessary [https://perma.cc/4VR2-U96N].
  65. Complaint at 11–12, M.C. v. Aaronson, No. 2:13-cv-01303 (D.S.C. May 14, 2013), 2013 WL 
1961775.
  66. Id. at 11. 
  67. Id. at 12.
  68. Id. at 13–14.
  69. Id. at 15.
  70. The Crawfords had hoped to prevent the unnecessary surgery once they saw M.C.’s profile 
on the State of South Carolina’s child adoption website, but it had already been completed. Id. at 19.
  71. Id.
  72. Id. at 1.
  73. Complaint, M.C. ex rel. Crawford v. Med. Univ. of S.C., No. 2013CP400 (S.C. May 14, 
2013),  https://www.splcenter.org/sites/default/files/d6_legacy_files/downloads/case/Crawford_State 
_Complaint_Filed.pdf [https://perma.cc/3CFU-P4MP].
  74. The SCDSS employees consented to M.C.’s surgery because the child was a ward of the state. 
The substantive due process claim is dependent on a government actor providing consent. If M.C.’s 
biological parents agreed to the surgery before parental rights were terminated, then a Fourteenth 
Amendment claim would not have been a feasible legal strategy. The Fourteenth Amendment does 
not protect against unjust private actions. Sweeney, supra note 62, at 183. Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 233
Amendment as a result of unnecessary, merely cosmetic genital surgery.75 The com-
plaint also asserted a violation of M.C.’s procedural due process rights under the 
Fourteenth Amendment by subjecting M.C. to this procedure without a predepriva-
tion hearing to examine whether the procedure was in M.C.’s best interest.76 The case 
was accepted by the federal district court to go to trial, and the court acknowledged 
that M.C. sufficiently alleged both a violation of his substantive due process right to 
procreation77 and his procedural due process right to a pre-deprivation hearing.78 
The district court then rejected the defendants’ motion to dismiss and rejected their 
defense of qualified immunity.79 Subsequently, the defendants interlocutorily appealed 
the rejection of this defense. In January 2015, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth 
Circuit reversed and remanded with instructions to dismiss the complaint.80 The 
Fourth Circuit found that M.C.’s asserted rights were not sufficiently clear at the time 
of the operation so as to give officials reasonable fair warning of their violation.81
¶31 M.C.’s state complaint was filed against the Medical University of South 
Carolina  (MUSC)  and  the  Greenville  Hospital  System,  alleging  medical 
malpractice,82 and the South Carolina Department of Social Services (SCDSS), 
alleging gross negligence.83 The case against the Greenville Hospital System has 
been settled by the parties.84 While this disposition leaves the law unclear at this 
moment, and may indicate that litigation over such issues might be a difficult path 
for plaintiffs, there is still a pending lawsuit against MUSC and SCDSS. This case is 
likely to be litigated in spring 2017, and the results will be significant. “There is a 
growing community of intersex individuals seeking answers and apologies for the 
medical treatments they received as children,”85 and litigation involving victims of 
intersex infant surgeries is likely to increase.86 
Annotated Bibliography
Albritton,  Joshua  C.  “Intersexed  and  Injured:  How  M.C.  v.  Aaronson  Breaks 
Federal Ground in Protecting Intersex Children from Unnecessary Genital-
Normalization Surgeries.” Tulane Journal of Law & Sexuality 24 (2015): 163–78. 
This student comment analyzes the factual and legal background of M.C. v. Aaronson 
and further explores how causes of action arise from genital-normalization surger-
ies. Medical malpractice considerations arise when physicians fail to inform parents 
that medical surgeries are not medically necessary. Constitutional issues are borne 
out of genital-normalization surgeries that result in irreversible damage to sexual 
  75.  Complaint, supra note 65, at 21.
  76. Id. at 22–23.
  77. Id. at 9–10.
  78. Id. at 11–12.
  79. Order, M.C. v. Aaronson, No. 2:13-cv-01303 (D.S.C. Aug. 29, 2013), 2013 WL 11521881.
  80. M.C. ex rel. Crawford v. Amrhein, 598 F. App’x 143, 148 (4th Cir. 2015).
  81. Id. at 149.
  82. Complaint, supra note 73, at 13–17.
  83. Id. at 17–18.
  84. Public Index Search for Case No. 2013CP4002877, Richland Cty.; 5th Jud. Cir. Pub. 
Index  (2013),  http://www6.rcgov.us/SCJDWEB/PublicIndex/(X(1)S(uwx3krpgqk4ksaaaiqkwnfvv)) 
/CaseDetails.aspx?County=40&CourtAgency=40002&Casenum=2013CP4002877&CaseType=V.
  85. Skylar Curtis, Reproductive Organs and Differences of Sex Development: The Constitutional 
Issues Created by the Surgical Treatment of Intersex Children, 42 McGeorge L. Rev. 841, 865–66 (2011).
  86. Greenberg, supra note 2, at 107.234 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
function and reproductive ability. The author suggests that M.C. v. Aaronson opens 
the door for more conversation related to the protection of intersex individuals. 
Specifically, the author proposes that legal mechanisms should be put in place to 
protect intersex infants from genital-normalization surgeries performed by the 
state, as well as those consented to by their own parents. 
Beh,  Hazel  Glenn,  and  Milton  Diamond.  “David  Reimer’s  Legacy:  Limiting 
Parental Discretion.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 5–30.
Here, the authors examine whether a parent should have the authority to consent 
to infant genital-normalization surgeries. The article questions “whether parents 
and intersex infants share a community of interests sufficient to grant parental 
authority” (p.30), or if societal influences have transformed a socially necessary 
surgery into a medically necessary surgery grossly favoring the interest of the par-
ents. The authors set the story of David Reimer (the subject of Dr. John Money’s 
failed nurture versus nature study) as the backdrop of the article, a reminder that 
David’s death should serve as a caveat to those involved with genital normaliza-
tion. The authors argue that even a heightened informed consent model cannot 
justify a medically unnecessary surgery, premised only on concerns about social 
stigma and gender conformity. 
Benson, Sara R. “Hacking the Gender Binary Myth: Recognizing Fundamental 
Rights for the Intersexed.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 31–63.
This article injects constitutional law considerations into the conversation about 
intersexed individuals and the informed consent doctrine. Establishing the mod-
ern informed consent doctrine, Benson states the general legal rule: a parent or 
guardian can legally consent on behalf of a minor child to intersex surgery so 
long as the surgery is in the child’s best interest. Benson proposes a new informed 
consent standard, one that imports constitutional principles, specifically, the 
fundamental right to bodily integrity, personality, sexuality, and gender identity. 
According to Benson, the inclusion of the fundamental rights would force the 
courts to balance the constitutional right of the child to choose his or her own 
future with the right of the parent to control the upbringing of the child.
Ford,  Kishka-Kamari.  “‘First,  Do  No  Harm’—The  Fiction  of  Legal  Parental 
Consent to Genital-Normalizing Surgery on Intersexed Infants.” Yale Law & 
Policy Review 19 (2001): 469–88.
This student note argues that parents cannot legally consent to their child’s  
genital-normalization surgery. Ford questions whether the emergency exception 
to the informed consent doctrine can be applied to genital-normalization surger-
ies and if the surgeries can be fairly characterized as nonexperimental. Answering 
both questions in the negative, Ford labels parental informed consent to this type 
of surgery a fiction, warning doctors who have performed the surgery that legal 
informed consent has not been established. Ford concludes her piece by stating, 
“a moratorium should be declared on the use of defenseless infants as the experi-
mental subjects of genital normalizing surgery” (p.488). 
Fox, Marie, and Michael Thomson. “Cutting It: Surgical Interventions and the 
Sexing of Children.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 81–97.
This article examines the proffered justifications for male circumcision and 
compares them to those held out in support of intersex surgeries. The authors 
criticize scholars who have dismissed the relevancy of drawing parallels between 
the two types of infant surgeries. Enforcing the connection, the authors offer that 
at the very core, both procedures are derived from “the involvement of health Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 235
professionals in surgical interventions which remove healthy tissue from the body 
of a child who is unable to provide consent” (p.84). The authors suggest that the 
acceptance of both procedures involved a certain combination of medical prac-
tice, class, and gender, but that male circumcision may have paved the way for 
intersex surgeries. 
Greenberg, Julie A. Intersexuality and the Law: Why Sex Matters. New York: New 
York University Press, 2012.
The author, the leading legal scholar on intersex issues, details the surgical inter-
ventions performed on intersex infants to conform genitalia to the medically 
created definition of “normal.” She examines the unique challenges the intersex 
community faces in securing legal protection against these unnecessary cosmetic 
genital surgeries and explores how the law can operate to safeguard the rights of 
intersex individuals. The author considers potential ways that the intersex move-
ment might use legal arguments and strategies to further its goals.
Huddleston, Ashley. “Intersex Children in Foster Care: Can the Government Elect 
Sex Assignment Surgery?” Journal of Law & Policy 22 (2014): 957–1004.
This student note draws from the facts of M.C. v. Aaronson and asks whether gov-
ernment officials have the ability to consent to sex assignment surgery on behalf 
of an intersex child in the custody of the state. Huddleston argues that, for the 
purposes of state foster care procedures, sex assignment surgery is neither a medi-
cal emergency nor is it routine. Huddleston contends that sex assignment surgery 
must then be classified as extraordinary, a classification under certain state laws 
for procedures that require judicial approval. Based on this analysis, Huddleston 
concludes that government officials must seek judicial approval prior to electing 
sex assignment surgery on behalf of an intersex child in their custody. 
Martin,  Patricia  L.  “Moving  Toward  an  International  Standard  in  Informed 
Consent: The Impact of Intersexuality and the Internet on the Standard of 
Care.” Duke Journal of Gender Law & Policy 9 (2002): 135–69.
This article addresses three questions: (1) What is the appropriate and evolving 
standard of care for the intersexed individual? (2) What constitutes informed 
consent when physicians treat the intersexed individual and his or her family? 
(3) What other torts might concern the medical professional when treating an 
intersexed individual? Analysis of these issues leads the author to call for new 
treatment protocols, ones that specifically incorporate the opportunity to explore 
the needs of the intersex community, to evaluate current treatment standards, and 
to investigate how other countries are tackling this issue—or, as Martin calls it, a 
“time out.”
Sweeney,  Benjamin.  “The  Cobblestones  of  Good  Intentions:  Substantive  Due 
Process and Infant Genital Normalizing Surgery.” Seattle Journal for Social 
Justice 13 (2014): 153–88. 
The foundation of this student piece is derived from M.C. v. Aaronson and asks 
whether surgical sex assignment of intersex children violates their substantive due 
process rights. The author explores the application of the following due process 
rights that have been previously recognized by the courts: the right to privacy, 
liberty, and preservation of bodily integrity. While the author acknowledges the 
viability of a substantive due process claim in a case like M.C. v. Aaronson, where 
the child was a ward of the state, he recognizes the limitations of the substantive 
due process claim in a case void of the state actor requirement and with parental 
consent. 236 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
Tamar-Mattis,  Anne.  “Sterilization  and  Minors  with  Intersex  Conditions  in 
California Law.” California Law Review Circuit 3 (2012): 126–35. 
This article analyzes how a California court might rule on a motion to authorize 
an intersex surgery that would result in the sterilization of the intersex child. 
The author analogizes the sterilization of intersex children with the sterilization 
of a developmentally disabled individual, a situation already addressed in the 
California Probate Code. Expanding this framework to intersex infants/children, 
the author states that this scheme would allow for judicial intervention, includ-
ing court-appointed counsel for the intersex child. According to the author, since 
California has already recognized the need to protect minors and those who can-
not consent when reproductive freedom is at stake, extending the same rights to 
intersex minors is a natural, and necessary, next step.
White, Ryan L. “Preferred Private Parts: Importing Intersex Autonomy for M.C. v. 
Aaronson.” Fordham International Law Journal 37 (2014): 777–821. 
This student note compares four international sex assignment cases to the seminal 
lawsuit in the United States, M.C. v. Aaronson. The author applies the legal ratio-
nales from decisions in Colombia and Germany to M.C. v. Aaronson to argue that 
genital-normalizing surgery violates an individual’s fundamental right to liberty. 
Specifically, the author argues that the timing of the surgery and the resulting depri-
vation of the individual’s right to self-determination render the genital-normalizing 
surgery unconstitutional. The author concludes by suggesting that the protection of 
fundamental rights for intersex individuals in the United States is near. 
Confines of a Binary System
¶32 While the term “gender” refers to social and cultural differences, and the 
term “sex” refers to an individual’s biological sex,87 the difference between the 
meaning of the terms “sex” and “gender” goes frequently unnoticed in society and 
in official documents. In the annotations of this bibliography, I have used which-
ever term the author uses, “gender” or “sex,” as the two terms are often used inter-
changeably in the legal realm.88
¶33 Over time our society has become more accepting of “gender” as a spec-
trum, where male and female lines blur, but the same cannot be said about “sex.” In 
2014, Facebook initiated the use of many possible terms for people to describe their 
gender; some of these terms are intersex, agender, bigender, pangender, gender-
queer, and androgyne, among others.89 In the same year, the dating website  
OKCupid added new gender options for those individuals who do not fall in the 
  87. Am. Psychol. Ass’n, Definitions Related to Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity in 
APA Documents, https://www.apa.org/pi/lgbt/resources/sexuality-definitions.pdf [https://perma.cc 
/DLZ8-4EJ2]. Only in the past few decades have medical and mental health specialists closely 
examined the differences between sex and gender. Charlene L. Muehlenhard & Zoe D. Peterson, 
Distinguishing Between Sex and Gender: History, Current Conceptualizations, and Implications, 64 
Sex Roles 791 (2011).
  88. Julie A. Greenberg, What Do Scalia and Thomas Really Think About Sex? Title VII and Gen-
der Nonconformity Discrimination: Protection for Transsexuals, Intersexuals, Gays and Lesbians, 24 T. 
Jefferson L. Rev. 149, 150 (2002).
  89. Tom McKay, Facebook Just Created 50 New Gender Options for Users to Choose From,  
Mic.com  (Feb.  13,  2014),  https://mic.com/articles/82241/facebook-just-created-50-new-gender 
-options-for-users-to-choose-from#.S1aVH0Dqy [https://perma.cc/6LWM-E48W].Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 237
binary; these now include agender, adrogynous, bigender, cis man, cis woman, 
genderfluid, genderqueer, hijra, intersex, nonbinary, other, pangender, transfemi-
nine, transgender, transmasculine, transsexual, trans man, trans woman, and two-
spirit.90 Previously, OKCupid allowed users to select only from male, female, 
straight, bisexual, and gay.
¶34 The adoption and use of nonbinary gender classifications by academic 
institutions is another sign of the social evolution. The use of preferred personal 
pronouns in universities and colleges in the United States is gaining traction,91 and 
many provide these preferences to faculty in class rosters. Some of these personal 
pronoun preferences that expand the he/she binary include “xe,” “xyr,” and “xem,”92 
among many other options. 
¶35 Although there has been real progress in challenging traditional gender 
stereotypes and rigid gender norms, and accepting that gender is but a social con-
struct, there is less acceptance that sex itself does not comply with rigid binaries.93 
Our bodies are simply subject to biological variation, but somehow the binary 
perspective of two sexes—male and female—and the pathologizing of deviation 
from this norm is firmly rooted in our society. However, there is some evidence 
that the tide may be turning ever so slowly. In June 2016, a landmark ruling in 
Oregon held that an individual who did not identify as male or female is now 
legally considered nonbinary.94 This ruling in the Circuit Court of the State of 
Oregon, Multnomah County is believed to be the first nonbinary legal classifica-
tion in the United States.95
¶36 Another sign of change can be seen in a decision filed in a 2015 federal 
discrimination lawsuit against the U.S. State Department on behalf of an individual 
with intersex traits, Dana Zzyym.96 Dana was denied a U.S. passport because Dana 
did not choose either male or female on a passport application form; no other gen-
der categories are provided on the form, and Dana does not identify as male or 
  90. Curtis M. Wong, OKCupid Begins Rolling Out New Gender, Sexuality Options, Huffington  
Post  (Nov.  17,  2014),  http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/11/17/okcupid-new-gender-options_n 
_6172434.html [https://perma.cc/RQ23-74S3].
  91. Adam Tamburin, Colleges Trend Toward Gender-Neutral Pronouns, USA Today (Sept. 5, 
2015),  http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2015/09/05/colleges-trend-toward-gender-neutral 
-pronouns/71780214/ [https://perma.cc/2EW8-PH47?type=image].
  92. The Need for a Gender-Neutral Pronoun, Gender Neutral Pronoun Blog, https://gender 
neutralpronoun.wordpress.com/ [https://perma.cc/4THB-M7ZL].
  93. The same cannot be said in all cultures, some of which include intersex individuals in a “third 
gender” category. See infra annotations following ¶ 41.
  94. In re Sex Change of Jamie Shupe, Case No.: 16CV13991 (June 10, 2016), http://www 
.portlandmercury.com/images/blogimages/2016/06/15/1466024211-shupe_ruling.pdf. 
  95. Christopher Mele, Oregon Court Allows a Person to Choose Neither Sex, N.Y. Times (June 
13, 2016), http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/14/us/oregon-nonbinary-transgender-sex-gender.html. 
Oregonians currently cannot list a nonbinary classification on a driver’s license, so state officials are 
now working on a process to remove that barrier. Id. A second person has changed sex classifica-
tion from female to nonbinary in 2016. Mary Emily O’Hara, Californian Becomes Second US Citizen 
Granted “Non-Binary” Gender Status, NBC News (Sept. 26, 2016), http://www.nbcnews.com/feature 
/nbc-out/californian-becomes-second-us-citizen-granted-non-binary-gender-status-n654611 
[https://perma.cc/LF3W-M53U].
  96. The complaint asserts that the U.S. State Department violates the Due Process and Equal Pro-
tection Clauses of the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, as well as the federal Administrative 
Procedure Act. Complaint at 15, 17, 12, 14, Zzyym v. Kerry, No. 1:15-cv-2362 (D. Colo. Oct. 25, 2015), 
2015 WL 6449495.238 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
female. A federal judge pressed the State Department to issue a gender-neutral 
passport stating, “A lot of things are changing in our world.”97 In November 2016, 
the court found that the administrative record did not provide evidence that the 
Department “followed a rational decisionmaking process in deciding to implement 
its binary-only gender passport policy.”98 The court remanded the case to the U.S. 
State Department “to give it an opportunity either to shore up the record, if it can, 
or reconsider its policy.”99 
¶37 Some scholars theorize that a third sex category would support individuals 
with intersex traits by denouncing the binary system.100 However, many intersex 
activists view these proposals to be outside the “primary” focus of their movement 
to end nonconsensual genital-normalization surgery, and that “until there is a pro-
hibition on the practice . . . , proposals for an alternative solution must take a step 
back.”101 The intersex community advocates that all children should receive a 
binary sex assignment dependent upon the medical condition discovered at birth; 
once the child develops a gender identity, the child may decide to have surgery or 
not, but would be able to consent to this intervention.102 The Council of Europe 
expressed concerns about recognition of third and blank classifications in a 2015 
Issue Paper, stating that these may lead to “forced outings” and cause heightened 
strain on parents of children with intersex traits to select a sex for their child. The 
Issue Paper argues that “further reflection on non-binary legal identification is 
necessary.”103 Some scholars contend that the sex binary system itself validates and 
compels the continued practice of genital-normalization surgery.104 
¶38 Other scholars propose that we not only eliminate sex classifications that 
determine peoples’ rights by opposing the binary system, but also via the eradica-
tion of government-required sex classification on official papers such as birth 
certificates and passports.105 Two of the most cited reasons given for sex classifi-
cation for legal purposes, military combat and marriage, are no longer essential. 
The fact that one’s sex must be noted on every official identifying paper illus-
trates how our society emphasizes the legal significance of this characteristic. 
Some activists state that dispensing with sex and gender classifications from 
  97. Federal Judge Urges US to Grant Gender Neutral Passport, Fox News (July 21, 2016), http://
www.foxnews.com/politics/2016/07/21/federal-judge-urges-us-to-grant-gender-neutral-passport 
.html.
  98. Zzyym v. Kerry, No. 15-CV-02362-RBJ, 2016 WL 7324157 (D. Colo. Nov. 22, 2016), at 3.
  99. Id.
  100. Hofman, supra note 57, at 19.
  101.  Hupf, supra note 49, at 104. 
  102. Consortium on the Mgmt. of Disorders of Sex Dev., Clinical Guidelines for the 
Management of Disorders of Sex Development in Childhood 38 (2006), http://www.dsdguide 
lines.org/files/clinical.pdf  [https://perma.cc/S69P-9Y93].  Intersex  activists’  recommendations  to 
assign a gender to an intersex infant is often based on protecting intersex children and adults, likely 
due to their own experiences of ostracism and distress from sex nonconformity.
  103. Council of Europe, Comm’r for Human Rights, Human Rights & Intersex People, 
Issue Paper 40 (Apr. 2015), https://wcd.coe.int/com.instranet.InstraServlet?command=com.instranet 
.CmdBlobGet&InstranetImage=2933521&SecMode=1&DocId=2367288&Usage=2  [https://perma.cc 
/7KVQ-9U2N].
  104. See Samantha S. Uslan, Note, What Parents Don’t Know: Informed Consent, Marriage, 
and Genital-Normalizing Surgery on Intersex Children, 85 Ind. L.J. 301, 304 (2010).
  105. James McGrath, Are You a Boy or a Girl? Show Me Your REAL ID, 9 Nev. L.J. 368, 369–70 
(2009).Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 239
official documents, similarly to race and religion, is a long-term strategic goal for 
the movement.106 
¶39 Various countries have moved to recognize third gender designations, and 
progressive groups have welcomed the laws as a sign of success for intersex rights. 
In 2013, Germany became the first country in Europe to acknowledge a third gen-
der designation: X, for indeterminate or intersex.107 An infant with intersex traits 
will not be required to endure medical intervention when born with ambiguous sex 
characteristics. In that case, an infant will have an “X” marked on the birth certifi-
cate, rather than the rigid categories of M or F. This step allows intersex children to 
decide their gender identity when they reach adulthood, rather than legally or sur-
gically forcing a gender identity upon them without their consent. At the same 
time, the interior ministry declared that German passports would similarly allow a 
third designation, X, for intersex citizens.108 The German third gender designation 
has angered some intersex-rights groups, which object to its stipulation that a child 
who is classified as neither female nor male will be noted in the register of births 
without such assignment.109 The law appears to “necessitate” exclusion from the 
binary classification, so it still leaves judgment to the medical world, not as an 
option for the parents.110
¶40 Other countries issuing passports or national identity cards with an “X,” 
“other,” or “E” (eunuch)111 marker for nonbinary categories include Australia,112 
  106. Morgan Carpenter, The Human Rights of Intersex People: Addressing Harmful Practices 
and Rhetoric of Change, Reproductive Health Matters, May 2016, at 74, 79. 
  107. Michelle Castillo, Germany to Allow Third Gender Designation on Birth Certificates, CBS 
News (Nov. 1, 2013), http://www.cbsnews.com/news/germany-to-allow-third-gender-designation-on 
-birth-certificates [https://perma.cc/NK7J-ZQS4]. However, the German government emphasizes that 
this “third blank box isn’t an official third gender, or the ‘other’ box—so it doesn’t actually mean that 
there are now three recognized genders in Germany. It’s seen as a temporary solution for very specific 
intersex cases—the children are not expected to live their lives as Xs, but to make a decision to be male 
or female at a non-specified point in the future.” Jacinta Nandi, Germany Got It Right by Offering a 
Third Gender Option on Birth Certificates, Guardian (Nov. 10, 2013), http://www.theguardian.com 
/commentisfree/2013/nov/10/germany-third-gender-birth-certificate  [https://perma.cc/3Z44-3NPF]. 
Germany does not include sex as a category on its ID cards. Miriam Dalli, Male, Female or X: The New 
Gender Options on Identification Documents, Malta Today (Feb. 3, 2015), http://www.maltatoday.com 
.mt/news/national/49185/male_female_or_x_the_new_gender_options_on_identification_documents# 
.WEB89lw0-nY [https://perma.cc/YZK7-2KXN].
  108. Castillo, supra note 107.
  109. Nandi, supra note 107.
  110. Sham  Package  for  Intersex:  Leaving  Sex  Entry  Open  Is  Not  an  Option,  OII Europe 
(Feb. 15, 2013), http://oiieurope.org/bluff-package-for-inter-leaving-sex-entry-open-is-not-an-option/ 
[https://perma.cc/54ST-TDCA].
  111. Jennifer Rellis, Please Write “E” In This Box: Toward Self-Identification and Recognition 
of a Third Gender: Approaches in the United States and India, 14 Mich. J. Gender & L. 223, 233 (2008).
  112. Christopher  Zara,  Intersex  Australia:  Third  Gender  Allowed  on  Personal  Documents 
in Addition to Male and Female, Int’l Bus. Times (June 14, 2013), http://www.ibtimes.com/intersex 
-australia-third-gender-allowed-personal-documents-addition-male-female-1307843 [https://perma 
.cc/6VYU-9HS7].240 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
Bangladesh,113 Colombia,114 Denmark,115 India,116 Malta,117 Nepal,118 New Zealand,119 
and Pakistan.120 These are examples of jurisdictions using a tool other than the 
judiciary to recognize intersex or otherwise gender-variant individuals. 
¶41 Intersex activists’ paramount goal and efforts are to see a moratorium on 
nonconsensual genital-normalization surgery, not to first champion a movement 
to reform the binary sex classification system. Banning nonconsensual genital-
normalization surgery would be a breakthrough in intersex rights, and, once this 
issue is resolved, we should see more focus on support for the termination of our 
preoccupation with the male/female sex binary. 
Annotated Bibliography
Gruber, Natascha. “Ethics in Medicine: With a Special Focus on the Concepts of 
Sex and Gender in Intersex Management.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 
12 (2005): 117–25. 
This article provides an outline of the author’s research project for the Beatrice 
Bain  Research  Group  on  Gender  at  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley, 
entitled, “Open Sex—Undoing Gender.” The project focuses on issues related 
to a multiple sex/gender model, and asks whether an alternative to the binary 
system could initiate new approaches to intersex treatment. Although the author 
is not “purposely opposed” to a multiple sex/gender model, she acknowledges 
that it raises collateral issues. She advocates instead for an increased focus on 
recognizing a broader range of sexual possibilities: “[R]ecogniz[ing] a broader 
range of sexual possibilities in general and for patients would subvert and replace 
heterosexist ideologies in current intersex management in the long run” (p.125). 
Hofman, Darra L. Clark. “Male, Female, and Other: How Science, Medicine and 
Law Treat the Intersexed, and the Implications for Sex-Dependent Law.” Tulane 
Journal of Law & Sexuality 21 (2012): 1–21. 
This article examines how certain legal rights related to fundamental aspects of 
life depend on the cultural and social views on gender and sex. Hofman criticizes 
the law’s continued reliance on binary categories in spite of scientific advance-
  113. Mohosinul Karim, Hijras Now a Separate Gender, Dhaka Trib. (Jan. 26, 2014), http://
www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/2013/nov/11/hijras-now-separate-gender  [https://perma.cc 
/E43R-3PLU].
  114. Daniela Franco, Colombia, the Surprising Global Leader in Transgender Rights, TakePart 
(June  10,  2015),  http://www.takepart.com/article/2015/06/10/colombia-surprising-global-leader 
-transgender-rights [https://perma.cc/BW42-VEKD].
  115. Mitch  Kellaway,  Denmark  Passes  Groundbreaking  Gender  “Self-Determination”  Law, 
Advocate (Sept.  3,  2014),  http://www.advocate.com/politics/transgender/2014/09/03/denmark 
-passes-groundbreaking-gender-self-determination-law [https://perma.cc/G57Q-S85R].
  116. India Recognizes Transgender Citizens as “Third Gender,” RT.com (Apr. 15, 2014), https:// 
www.rt.com/news/india-court-third-gender-636/ [https://perma.cc/7AYM-T5ES].
  117. Dalli, supra note 107.
  118. Clarissa-Jan Lim, New “Third Gender” Option on Nepal Passports Finally Protects the 
Rights of LGBT Community, Bustle (Jan. 8, 2015), http://www.bustle.com/articles/57466-new-third 
-gender-option-on-nepal-passports-finally-protects-the-rights-of-lgbt-community [https://perma.cc 
/LX87-NLUL].
  119. Information  About  Changing  Sex/Gender  Identity,  [N.Z.]  Identity  &  Passports, 
https://www.passports.govt.nz/Transgender-applicants#gender%20identity  [https://perma.cc/3QH7 
-AZAW].
  120. Rabail Baig, A First for Pakistan’s Third Gender, Foreign Pol’y (Mar. 30, 2012), http://
foreignpolicy.com/2012/03/30/a-first-for-pakistans-third-gender/ [https://perma.cc/W5F2-JJQG]. Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 241
ments that reveal the complexity of sex. Reliance on the binary results in the legal 
exclusion of those who do not fit neatly within the categories, such as intersexed 
individuals. Hofman explores a number of possible solutions to this issue, but 
maintains that “the best solution would be to eliminate sex as a category that 
determines peoples’ rights” (p.19). 
Knouse, Jessica. “Intersexuality and the Social Construction of Anatomical Sex.” 
Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 135–54. 
The author first identifies three major areas of law that depend on sex-based 
distinctions: (1) official documentation, such as passports, birth certificates, and 
driver’s licenses; (2) marriage rights; and (3) protection from discrimination. 
The legal definition of sex as applied within these areas of law prescribes a male/
female binary. According to Knouse, this is just one example of society’s attempts 
to eradicate biological diversity. Another example is the medical treatment of 
intersex individuals and, in particular, genital-normalization surgeries. Knouse 
proposes a complete eradication of sex assignment, which she argues will enable 
biological diversity and liberate individuals from repressive categorization. 
McGrath, James. “Are You a Boy or a Girl? Show Me Your REAL ID.” Nevada Law 
Journal 9 (2009): 368–406. 
The REAL ID Act of 2005 requires states to adhere to federally mandated require-
ments in the issuance of all state identification cards and driver’s licenses. One of 
the minimum requirements prescribed by the statute is an identification of the 
individual’s gender. In this article, McGrath criticizes the gender identification 
requirement for two main reasons: (1) the statutory construction of this require-
ment bars any state from attempting to eliminate the gender identifier in an effort 
to protect its gender-variant citizens and reduce complications; and (2) gender is 
not an accurate method of verifying a person’s identity. Further, McGrath argues 
that requiring a gender identification enforces the gender binary and may pres-
sure parents of intersex individuals to consent to unnecessary gender assignment 
surgeries. Finally, McGrath argues that the gender identification requirement 
should be considered discriminatory against particular sexual minorities. 
Reilly, Elizabeth. “Radical Tweak—Relocating the Power to Assign Sex: From 
Enforcer of Differentiation to Facilitator of Inclusiveness: Revising the Response 
to Intersexuality.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 297–335. 
This  author’s  proposal  is  crystal  clear:  “[W]e  must  cease  using  the  Birth 
Certificate to assign sex to a child” (p.308). Reilly illuminates three distinct rea-
sons why assigning sex at birth is problematic: (1) an individual’s sexual identity 
is not determinable at birth, nor is it unchanging; (2) the medium on which the 
assignment is made—an official legal document—has permanent legal implica-
tions; and (3) sex is assigned by medical professionals, further enforcing the fal-
lacy that biological sex is easily determinable. Reilly’s proposal calls for complete 
removal of the sex category from the birth certificate, stating that data related to 
sex identity will be reported only for medical and health purposes in a specific 
vital statistics section that accompanies all birth certificates. Under this model, 
the formalization of sex identity will be self-reported on other documents, such 
as passports and driver’s licenses. 
Vanderhorst, Blaise. “Whither Lies the Self: Intersex and Transgender Individuals 
and a Proposal for Brain-Based Legal Sex.” Harvard Law & Policy Review 9 
(2015): 241–74.
This article explores how the intersex and transgender movements have increased 
the recognition of sexual indeterminacy and shattered the assumptions about sex 242 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
and gender that the entire U.S. legal system is built on. The failure to recognize 
sexual diversity in the law has created a legal uncertainty for transgender and 
intersex individuals, and has further marginalized both groups. This author 
argues that “[g]ender is truly between the ears, not between the legs” (p.245) and 
endorses gender self-identity as the sole criterion for the determination of legal 
sex. Calling for the elimination of all sex assignment, and sex-assignment surger-
ies in particular, the author acknowledges the challenges of implementing such 
radical changes, yet maintains that gender self-identification is the “only rational 
and humane criteria for legal sex” (p.246). 
Discrimination
Discrimination Generally
¶42 Individuals with intersex traits frequently find themselves facing discrimi-
nation if their intersexuality becomes known or if they are recognized as gender 
nonconformists. Laws against discrimination do not generally address discrimina-
tion against intersexual individuals, leaving them unprotected in an array of envi-
ronments,  such  as  healthcare,  education,  public  services,  employment,  and 
sports.121 The U.N. Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner urges that we 
“prohibit discrimination on the basis of intersex traits, characteristics or status . . . 
and address such discrimination through relevant anti-discrimination initiatives.”122
Annotated Bibliography
Antonopoulos,  Nicole.  “The  Unconstitutionality  of  the  Current  Housing 
Arrangements for Intersex Prisoners.” Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly 
42 (2015): 415–42.
This student note discusses the ways that prison officials house and treat intersex 
prisoners. Potential constitutional challenges and equal protection claims are 
analyzed in light of housing classifications. The author suggests that intersex 
discrimination is a form of sex discrimination; thus, a classification differentiat-
ing intersex persons from non-intersex persons is one that merits heightened 
scrutiny to determine whether there is a violation of the Equal Protection Clause. 
The author examines various prison system approaches in an attempt to find a 
humane solution for housing intersex individuals.
Berghausen,  Mark  E.  “Intersex  Employment  Discrimination:  Title  VII  and 
Anatomical Sex Nonconformity.” Northwestern University Law Review 105 
(2011): 1281–315. 
This student comment sets out to answer the general question of whether an 
intersex individual is protected from sex discrimination under Title VII or by 
state antidiscrimination laws that prohibit discrimination based on sex. After 
providing a brief background of what he identifies as sexual minorities, the 
author discusses the limited relevant case law, most of which pertains to trans-
sexual individuals. The author advances the argument that the most sensible 
  121. See  infra  “Foreign  Approaches  to  Intersex  Rights—Discrimination,”  ¶¶  73–78,  for  a 
discussion of foreign jurisdictions that address discrimination.
  122. U.N.  Office  of  the  High  Comm’r  for  Human  Rights,  Free  &  Equal  Campaign  Fact 
Sheet:  Intersex,  https://unfe.org/system/unfe-65-Intersex_Factsheet_ENGLISH.pdf  [https://perma 
.cc/XS84-HS73].Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 243
interpretation of Title VII protects an intersex individual and argues for a cause 
of action for discrimination based on anatomical nonconformity. 
Ezie, Chinyere. “Deconstructing the Body: Transgender and Intersex Identities and 
Sex Discrimination—The Need for Strict Scrutiny.” Columbia Journal of Gender 
& Law 20 (2011): 141–99.
Highlighting the parallels between race discrimination and sex discrimination, 
this author proposes that sex categories be recognized as suspect classifications 
for the purposes of the equal protection doctrine. Ezie acknowledges that the 
idea is not novel, but contends that the approach—“asserting that the constructed 
character of sex, and its mutability, provide an independent basis for finding sex 
classifications suspect” (p.179)—is new and is not without support. Recognition 
of sex as a social construction for the purposes of an equal protection sex dis-
crimination analysis, Ezie argues, will foster a greater understanding of gender 
discrimination in general. 
Gelfman, Ilana. “Because of Intersex: Intersexuality, Title VII, and the Reality of 
Discrimination ‘Because of . . . [Perceived] Sex.’” New York University Review of 
Law & Social Change 34 (2010): 55–122.
This author criticizes previous scholarly work that suggests adding a third cat-
egory specifically for intersex individuals, stating that instituting such an idea 
would perpetuate gender stereotyping and further reinforce the notion that sex 
and gender categories should and do exist. As an alternative, Gelfman proposes a 
model that interprets Title VII protections to extend to an individual’s “perceived 
sex.” Perceived sex is defined in the article as “the gender assignment applied by 
the discriminating party to the employee” and “the gender assignment applied 
by the discriminating party to the gender expressions of the employee” (p.111). 
According to Gelfman, this interpretation is flexible and sensitive to the social 
reality of discrimination, which is why it is appropriate in the context of sex and 
gender. 
Greenberg, Julie A. “Health Care Issues Affecting People with an Intersex Condition 
or DSD: Sex or Disability Discrimination?” Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review 
45 (2012): 849–907.
Greenberg chronicles the historical and current medical treatment of intersex 
individuals and the unique healthcare issues confronting the intersex commu-
nity. Greenberg focuses on the movement’s primary goal to stop certain medical 
procedures from being performed on infants with DSD. Now that courts have 
recognized statutory protections against sex discrimination based on sex and 
gender stereotypes, Greenberg argues that a similar framework could be applied 
to bar the medical procedures. Greenberg writes, “If physicians and hospitals 
recommend these procedures because they decide that a child is not sufficiently 
masculine or feminine, they are arguably engaging in a form of sex discrimina-
tion” (p.896). Greenberg goes beyond the sex discrimination analysis by exploring 
whether current medical procedures performed on infants with DSD could also 
be considered a form of disability discrimination. 
Greenberg, Julie A. “What Do Scalia and Thomas Really Think About Sex? Title 
VII and Gender Nonconformity Discrimination: Protection for Transsexuals, 
Intersexuals, Gays and Lesbians.” Thomas Jefferson Law Review 24 (2002): 
149–59.
This article tracks the early Supreme Court decisions that first opened the door 
for the potential inclusion of sex and gender nonconformists under Title VII. 244 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
Greenberg reveals that while most legislative acts use the word “sex,” courts, 
legislators, and others replace the word “sex” with “gender.” Even though the two 
terms are understood to be different, in the legal realm, “sex” and “gender” are 
used interchangeably. The failure to distinguish between the two, and to further 
acknowledge the existence of other individuals along a sex and gender spectrum, 
reflects the law’s failure to adequately protect the sex and gender nonconformists. 
Along with the terminology issues, Greenberg states that most of the early case 
law was entirely undeveloped. In her conclusion, she urges scholars to encourage 
the courts to adopt a coherent theory of sexual harassment law that would protect 
all sexual minorities. 
Menon, Yamuna. “The Intersex Community and the Americans with Disabilities 
Act.” Connecticut Law Review 43 (2011): 1221–51.
This student note examines whether the Americans with Disabilities Act, particu-
larly in light of recent amendments to the statute, provides an intersex individual 
with legal protection against discrimination. Menon highlights a section of the 
statute that excludes certain categories of individuals from its scope of protec-
tion, including individuals who identify as gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgender. 
Menon argues that absent any express reference to the intersex community, this 
section opens the door for the intersex, provided the individual is able to meet 
the other statutory requirements. Whether the ADA is an ideal avenue for the 
intersex community to pursue legal protection, Menon writes, remains a critical 
question. 
Discrimination in Sports
¶43 Female athletes with intersex traits face many difficulties. They may have 
their sex disputed and find themselves excluded from competitions because of 
intersex traits, and many have been disgraced, disqualified, or forced to give back 
medals once their intersexuality became known.123 Females with body shapes that 
are more male-like or who display extreme speed or strength may have their sex 
called into question; it may be conjectured that the athlete possesses a distinct edge 
in a competition as a result of sex characteristics. It is possible in some instances 
that the athlete is intersex.
¶44 Sex verification was initiated at the Olympics in 1968 with confirmation by 
physical examination; verification was later made using chromosome testing. This 
issue presented many problems for intersex athletes, as there are females who pos-
sess XY chromosomes (such as individuals with CAIS or PAIS) and males who 
possess XX chromosomes.124 Additionally, there are genes on chromosomes other 
than the X or Y that also affect sex development. Simply determining whether an 
athlete has XX or XY or some other variation will not determine definitively the 
individual’s sex. 
  123. For example, Santhi Soundarajan, an Indian athlete who competed in the 800-meter 
race at the 2006 Asian Games, was forced to return her silver medal when she did not pass a sex veri-
fication test because she had androgen insensitivity syndrome. Other athletes’ sex is questioned after 
death, such as happened to Stanisława Walasiewicz. Daniel Gandert et al., The Intersection of Women’s 
Olympic Sport and Intersex Athletes: A Long and Winding Road, 46 Ind. L. Rev. 387, 395–96 (2013).
  124. This condition occurs when a gene of the Y chromosome resides on an X chromosome, 
which results in the X chromosome operating more like a Y chromosome. Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 245
¶45 These problems with chromosomal sex verification became apparent to the 
International Olympic Committee (IOC) in 1996, when they confronted difficult 
decisions with the results of sex testing. Seven of the eight women who were found 
to have male chromosomes had androgen insensitivity syndrome,125 and, thus, were 
unable to use the testosterone they made. It is worth remembering that most of us 
know whether we are men or women even though we have no idea what our “sex 
chromosomes” are. Gender identity is about who you know yourself to be, not 
about how your sex chromosomes look on a microscope slide. Doctors look at the 
“sex chromosomes” of people with DSD as part of coming up with a diagnosis, but 
they do not treat the “sex chromosomes” alone as a simple answer to anything. Our 
“sex chromosomes” are just part of the picture of who we are.
¶46 Therefore, in 1999, since it was impossible to identify an athlete as com-
pletely male or female, the IOC eliminated “compulsory” sex verification. However, 
the IOC and the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) reserved 
the right to test an athlete’s chromosomes if uncertainty about her sex emerged and 
to require a hormonal test, a gynecological exam, and a psychological assessment. 
¶47 The IAAF, in 2011, instituted testing for hyperandrogenism126 in women 
athletes, due in large part to the Caster Semenya controversy.127 Testing is done 
when there are reasonable grounds for believing that a woman has the condition. A 
female athlete who possesses testosterone levels within the male range is prohibited 
from competition, unless either she is insensitive to testosterone or she decreases 
her testosterone.
¶48 Similarly, IOC officials instituted testosterone level testing for the 2012 
Olympic Games. The testing is not used for “all” athletes in women’s competitions; 
this testing is done only when requested by the chief medical officer of a national 
Olympic committee or by a member of the IOC’s medical commission when an 
individual’s sex identification is called into question. Female athletes are barred 
from women’s events if testing shows testosterone levels in the normal range for 
males.128 Those athletes with CAIS are permitted to participate in the games.
  125. J.C. Reeser, Gender Identity and Sport: Is the Playing Field Level?, 39 Brit. J. Sports Med. 
695, 696 (2005).
  126. Hyperandrogenism is a condition in which the body produces higher than normal lev-
els of hormones called androgens, particularly testosterone. Joanna Marchant, Women with High Male 
Hormone Levels Face Sport Ban, Nature (Apr. 14, 2011), http://www.nature.com/news/2011/110414 
/full/news.2011.237.html.
  127. Caster Semenya is a South African runner. She won gold at the World Championships 
in 2009 in the women’s 800-meter race. Due to her appearance, she was subjected to gender verifica-
tion testing by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF). The results were not 
released, but unconfirmed reports claim that although physically appearing to be a woman, she has 
internal testicles and does not have a uterus or ovaries. Ariel Levy, Either/Or, New Yorker, Nov. 30, 
2009, at 46, 48–49. Semenya was suspended for nearly a year by the IAFF before being cleared to run 
in 2010. Runner Wins Three Titles in Four Hours, N.Y. Times, Apr. 17, 2016, at SP6. 
  128. This IOC policy is discriminatory on its face because there are no guidelines on what 
is an acceptable level of testosterone for men competing in men’s events. For example, the intersex 
condition Diplo (XYY) causes higher levels of testosterone than in nonintersex men, yet the IOC 
policy does not ban men with Diplo from events, and these men could also be seen as having an unfair 
physical advantage. Kathryn E. Henne, Testing for Athlete Citizenship: Regulating Dope and Sex 
in Sport 91 (2015).246 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
¶49 Scholars have criticized hyperandrogenism testing in female athletes, stat-
ing that it is significantly flawed.129 There are privacy concerns the athletes will 
face. The testing means that many women athletes will face mandatory, but unnec-
essary, hormonal therapy, or have undescended testes surgically removed, if they 
want to continue to participate in competition. It is likely that “sex policing” will 
become more rampant. Recommendations have been made that athletes be allowed 
to participate in accordance with their legal sex130 or their gender identity.131
¶50 In 2014, the British Medical Journal reported on a study of four young 
female athletes with 5-ARD who had gonadectomy and partial clitoridectomy 
procedures to participate in athletics after testing showed elevated androgen lev-
els.132 The study maintains that this invasive and irreversible medical interven-
tion was not medically necessary and undermines ethical care. All four athletes 
reside in developing countries where they may likely have difficulty with receiv-
ing lifetime hormone replacement therapy. The OIC and IAAF testosterone-
based eligibility policies that mandate intervention conflict with the medical 
approach to hyperandrogenism, which considers the athlete’s health, symptoms, 
and fertility goal.
¶51 In July 2015, the International Court of Arbitration of Sport, the ultimate 
arbiter for conflict in sports, ruled that the IAAF’s policy regarding natural testos-
terone is not supported by current scientific research.133 The court acknowledged 
that while natural testosterone may impact competitive advantage, exactly what 
that impact is, and how significant it is, is unclear at this time. The court declared 
that 
while the evidence indicates that higher levels of naturally occurring testosterone may 
increase athletic performance, [the court] is not satisfied that the degree of that advantage is 
more significant than the advantage derived from the numerous other variables which the 
parties acknowledge also affect female athletic performance: for example, nutrition, access 
to specialist training facilities and coaching, and other genetic and biological variations.134 
¶52 Thus, the court found that mandating medical intervention for participa-
tion in sports was indefensibly discriminatory and suspended the IAAF’s testoster-
one policy. The court provided the IAAF time to substantiate the claim that natu-
rally high testosterone in females is equivalent to men’s advantage in sports. If such 
proof does not materialize by July 2017, the testosterone policy will be declared 
void.135
  129. See generally Karkazis et al., supra note 29, at 3.
  130. Hida Viloria, Article: Hida Speaks About Her Involvement with the IOC in the Global 
Herald, HidaViloria (Apr. 11, 2011) http://hidaviloria.com/hida-speaks-about-here-involvement 
-with-the-ioc-in-the-global-herald/.
  131. Erin Buzuvis, Hormone Check: Critique of Olympic Rules on Sex and Gender, 31 Wis. 
J.L. Gender & Soc’y 29, 50 (2016).
  132. Rebecca Jordan-Young et al., Sex, Health, and Athletes, 348 BMJ 20 (May 10, 2014).
  133. Chand v. Athletics Fed’n of India (AFI), CAS 2014/A/3759, http://www.tas-cas.org/file 
admin/user_upload/AWARD_3759__FINAL___REDACTED_FOR_PUBLICATION_.pdf.  [https://
perma.cc/EHM7-7L3E]; see also Ruth Padawer, Too Fast to Be Female, N.Y. Times (Mag.), July 3, 2016, 
at MM32.
  134. Chand v. Athletics Fed’n of India (AFI), CAS 2014/A/3759.
  135. Id.Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 247
¶53 Although the IOC relied upon the same science in its testosterone policy, it 
did not immediately suspend its policy, as the IAFF was compelled to do. In Febru-
ary 2016, the IOC did agree that it would not police women’s natural testosterone 
levels until the controversy is settled.136 The IOC encouraged the IAAF to substanti-
ate its claim before the policy could be declared void, so that the IOC could reinsti-
tute their policy.137
Annotated Bibliography
Adair, Jessica L. “In a League of Their Own: The Case for Intersex Athletes.” Sports 
Lawyers Journal 18 (2011): 121–51. 
This article examines the legal remedies available to intersex athletes who are 
excluded from competition based on the intersex condition. As the author points 
out, as a preliminary matter, not all student athletes are protected equally under 
the law, which provides a significant hurdle for intersex individuals who have 
been discriminated against. Nevertheless, the article explores the potential legal 
causes of action, including equal protection and due process claims, as well as 
federal and state civil rights protections. Adair is not optimistic that a court will 
produce a favorable outcome for intersex individuals, but is hopeful that the dis-
crimination of intersex individuals will be recognized by the judicial system in 
the future. 
Gandert, Daniel, et al. “The Intersection of Women’s Olympic Sport and Intersex 
Athletes: A Long and Winding Road.” Indiana Law Review 46 (2013): 387–423. 
The authors use the personal narratives of multiple Olympic athletes who have 
been stigmatized following compulsory sex testing to illustrate the many issues 
associated with defining sex and gender in the realm of competitive sports. This 
article examines the history of sex testing in athletic competitions and the exist-
ing policies in Olympic sports. As the authors point out, regulations as applied to 
intersex athletes are particularly challenging due to the diverse nature of intersex 
conditions. The authors caution against future regulations that would be discrimi-
natory in nature, such as the initiation of testing based on an athlete’s appearance 
and any regulation that would unintentionally adopt or reinforce traditional sex 
stereotypes. 
Glazer, Samantha. “Sporting Chance: Litigating Sexism Out of the Olympic Intersex 
Policy.” Journal of Law & Policy 20 (2012): 545–80. 
In this student note, Glazer criticizes the traditional justifications for sex-testing 
Olympic athletes—the existence of the sex binary and the notion that fairness in 
sport requires separation of sexes—and argues that they “reflect a flawed under-
standing of sex and competitive advantage” (p.546). Glazer argues that sex-testing 
Olympic athletes for hyperandrogenism predominantly discriminates against 
women. Specifically, any policy requiring only female athletes to undergo sex test-
ing for hyperandrogenism is facially discriminatory because it fails to address the 
acceptable level of androgen for male athletes. Glazer concludes that a discrimina-
tion lawsuit challenging the hyperandrogenism policy may be an effective avenue 
for female athletes to pursue. 
  136. Padawer, supra note 133.
  137. Id.248 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
Karkazis, Katrina, et al. “Out of Bounds? A Critique of the New Policies on 
Hyperandrogenism in Elite Female Athletes,” American Journal of Bioethics 12 
(June 2012): 3–16.
This article examines the IOC’s and IAFF’s policies on hyperandrogenism. 
Karkazis and her colleagues question the legitimacy of these policies on three 
grounds. First, the underlying scientific assumption that atypically high levels of 
testosterone in females creates an unfair advantage is notably flawed. “[T]here is 
no scientific evidence showing that successful athletes have higher testosterone 
levels than less successful athletes” (p.8). Second, the policymaking process was 
flawed because the IOC and IAFF relied mainly on the expertise of those indi-
viduals connected to the questionable policies of the prior two decades. Third, 
the policies raise unsettling concerns about the potential to achieve fairness for 
female athletes, given the documented harms that female athletes have faced with 
evaluation and sex testing. It is unlikely that these policies will protect against 
breaches of privacy and confidentiality due to inconsistencies and suspension 
when undergoing evaluation. The authors believe that true consideration of 
fairness would promote a strategy that permits all legally recognized females to 
compete with other females, regardless of hormonal levels, as long as the hor-
mones are naturally produced. The author urges that the IOC and IAFF policies 
be rescinded.
Zaccone, Laura A. “Policing the Policing of Intersex Bodies: Softening the Lines in 
Title IX Athletic Programs.” Brooklyn Law Review 76 (2010): 385–438. 
This student note questions the place of intersex under Title IX, examining the 
statute’s prohibition against sex discrimination specifically in the context of ath-
letics. Zaccone notes the complexity of identifying biological distinctions within 
athletics, highlighting as a preliminary matter that one standard is not appropri-
ate for all sports. Further, she argues that even sex-based differences, including 
those rooted in biology, are influenced by social and cultural judgments. Relying 
on the courts’ history of interpreting Title IX as analogous to Title VII, Zaccone 
hypothesizes that recent case law prohibiting discrimination under Title VII 
against a transgender employee for failure to conform to the employer’s gender 
expectations should open the door for intersex protection under Title IX. Under 
this theory, she argues that a student’s self-identified gender should determine 
eligibility in Title IX athletics. 
Human Rights 
¶54 Numerous local, national, and international human rights institutions; 
health institutions; national ethics bodies; and civil society organizations have 
been closely scrutinizing medical practices and discrimination faced by individ-
uals with intersex traits. Generally, these organizations advocate for an end to 
nonconsensual genital “normalizing” interventions, viewing them as human 
rights abuses.138 Research in the field of human rights acknowledges an increas-
ing consensus that there is a wide array of biological variation in the human 
  138. Many of these organizations have published investigations and reports on the human 
rights of intersex people. For example, the Human Rights Commission of San Francisco published 
one of the first human rights reports on the treatment of intersex individuals. City & Cty. of S.F. 
Human Rts. Comm’n, A Human Rights Investigation into the Medical “Normalization” of 
Intersex People 17 (Apr. 2005) (concluding that genital-normalization surgeries performed without 
an individual’s informed consent are inherent human rights violations).Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 249
body, even if some of these are uncommon.139 Because their bodies are viewed as 
different, children and adults with intersex traits are often stigmatized and sub-
jected to multiple human rights violations. In addition to discrimination and 
unequal treatment, these areas of concern include infringement of the right to 
health and physical integrity, the right to be free from torture and ill-treatment,140 
and the right to procreate.141 
¶55 In 2013, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, Juan Mendez, reported that genital- 
normalization surgery was an abuse in medical care that crosses a threshold of 
mistreatment commensurate with torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
ment or punishment, and disguised as forms of reparative therapies.142 The report 
calls for all states to “repeal any law allowing intrusive and irreversible treatments, 
including forced genital-normalizing surgery . . . when enforced or administered 
without the free and informed consent of the person concerned.”143
¶56 The World Health Organization (WHO) joined with other U.N. organiza-
tions in 2014 to condemn the forced sterilization of persons with intersex traits, 
stating that “if possible, irreversible invasive medical interventions should be post-
poned until a child is sufficiently mature to make an informed decision, so that they 
can participate in decision-making and give full, free and informed consent.”144 
¶57 The U.N. Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), 
in 2015 recognized genital-normalization surgery as an irreversible, unnecessary 
intervention to enforce the sex binary, which can result in “severe, long-term physi-
cal and psychological suffering.”145
¶58 During 2015, the Council of Europe,146 the European Union Agency for 
Fundamental Rights,147 and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights148 
  139. Pediatric Gender Assignment: A Critical Reappraisal 155–56 (Stephen Zderic et al. 
eds., 2002).
  140. For example, when a surgeon surgically creates a vagina, children must suffer through 
regular procedures on a lifetime basis where dilators must be inserted to maintain the vaginal structure. 
This has been described as a “routine sexual invasion.” Irene Habich, Boy, Girl, Other: Intersex Advo-
cates Call for Surgery Ban, Spiegel Online Int’l (Nov. 1, 2013), http://www.spiegel.de/international 
/germany/intersex-activists-call-for-ban-on-surgical-operations-on-children-a-931213.html  [https://
perma.cc/97XF-JRE8].
  141. Many,  but  “[n]ot  all  children  with  intersex  conditions  are  sterilized.  Some  are  born 
infertile, and some retain fertility after medical treatment.” Anne Tamar-Mattis, Sterilization and 
Minors with Intersex Conditions in California Law, 3 Calif. L. Rev. Circuit 126, 129 (2012).
  142. Juan E. Méndez, Report of the Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment ¶ 76, U.N. Doc. A/HRC/22/53 (Feb. 1, 2013), 
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session22/A.HRC.22.53 
_English.pdf [https://perma.cc/ZCU6-NR8F].
  143. Id. ¶ 88.
  144. World  Health  Org.,  Eliminating  Forced,  Coercive  and  Otherwise  Involun-
tary Sterilization: An Interagency Statement  7–8  (2014),  http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream 
/10665/112848/1/9789241507325_eng.pdf [https://perma.cc/YSC4-7FCL]. 
  145. U.N.  High  Comm’r  for  Human  Rts.,  Discrimination  and  Violence  Against 
Individuals Based on Their Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity ¶ 53 (May 4, 2015).
  146. Council of Europe, supra note 103, at 19.
  147. European  Union  Agency  for  Fundamental  Rts.,  The  Fundamental  Rights  Situ-
ation of Intersex People  (Apr.  2015),  http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra-2015-focus-04 
-intersex.pdf [https://perma.cc/NEA8-3A3K].
  148. Comisión  Interamericana  de  Derechos  Humanos,  Violencia  Contra  Personas 250 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
also each called for a review of the unnecessary medicalization of intersex traits, 
which interfere with the individual’s right to health, noting many of the human 
rights issues intersex people confront—forced sterilization; pain; incontinence; loss 
of sexual sensation; and lifelong mental suffering, including depression. Recogniz-
ing the adverse effect on physical integrity and autonomy, the recommendation 
was to cease genital-normalization surgery without the consent of the affected 
person.
¶59 In the same year, 2015, the Astraea Lesbian Foundation for Justice estab-
lished the first Intersex Human Rights Fund supporting organizations, projects, 
and campaigns led by intersex activists working worldwide to ensure the human 
rights, bodily autonomy, physical integrity, and self-determination of people with 
intersex traits.149
¶60 The African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, in 2016, also 
expressed concern over the treatment of intersex people, considering bodily integ-
rity, autonomy, freedom, and security of the individual related to nonconsensual, 
medically unnecessary treatment of intersex infants, children, and adolescents.150
¶61 The Asia Pacific Forum on National Human Rights Institutions, in its 2016 
report, discussed the rights to physical integrity, nondiscrimination, recognition 
before the law, and effective remedies and redress.151
¶62 German and Swiss ethics institutions have also reported on this issue. A 
Swiss National Advisory Commission on Biomedical Ethics report argues against 
genital-normalization surgery due to the effect on physical and psychological 
integrity, and advocates for the delivery of better psychosocial support.152 The 
Swiss report advocates that all “(non-trivial) sex assignment treatment decisions 
which have irreversible consequences but can be deferred should not be taken until 
the person to be treated can decide for him/herself.”153 The report also suggests that 
questions  of  criminal  sanctions  for  sex  assignment  interventions  should  be 
examined. 
¶63 The German Ethics Council reported that intersex people should be recog-
nized, supported, and protected from discrimination.154 Noting the importance of 
the right to physical integrity, preservation of sexual and gender identity, and right 
Lesbianas, Gay, Bisexuales, Trans e Intersex en América (Nov. 12, 2015), http://www.oas.org/es 
/cidh/informes/pdfs/ViolenciaPersonasLGBTI.pdf [https://perma.cc/5MWT-G4FT].
  149. Introducing  the  Intersex  Fund  Team  at  Astraea!,  Astraea Lesbian Found. for Just. 
(June  16,  2015),  http://www.astraeafoundation.org/news/344/60/Introducing-the-Intersex-Fund 
-team-at-Astraea [https://perma.cc/J9WH-SHC7].
  150. African Comm’n on Human & People’s Rts., Report on the Civil, Political and 
Socio-Economic Rights of Transgender and Intersex Persons in South Africa Under the 
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights in Response to the Second Combined Periodic 
Report of the Government of South Africa and the Initial Report Under the Protocol to 
the African Charter on the Rights of Women in Africa (Apr. 2016), http://genderdynamix.org 
.za/wp-content/uploads/ACHPR-Transgender-and-Intersex-Shadow-Report-April-2016.pdf [https://
perma.cc/QFU6-YPWX].
  151. Promoting  and  Protecting  Human  Rights  in  Relation  to  Sexual  Orientation,  Gender 
Identity and Sex Characteristics, APF: Asia Pac. F. of Nat’l Human Rts. Insts. (June 2016), http://www 
.asiapacificforum.net/resources/manual-sogi-and-sex-charactersitics/.
  152. Swiss Nat’l Advisory Comm’n on Biomedical Ethics, supra note 15, at 1.
  153. Id. at 18.
  154. German Ethics Council, Intersexuality: Opinion  125  (Feb.  23,  2012),  http://www 
.ethikrat.org/files/opinion-intersexuality.pdf [https://perma.cc/K2FW-HE9B].Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 251
to an open future and procreative freedom, the German Ethics Council recom-
mended that irreversible medical sex assignment in persons of ambiguous gender 
should be taken only by the individual concerned; in the case of a minor, the Ethics 
Council stated that 
[i]n the case of an affected individual who has not yet attained decision-making capacity, 
such measures should be adopted only after thorough consideration of all their advantages, 
disadvantages and long-term consequences and for irrefutable reasons of child welfare. 
Such a reason at any rate applies if the measure concerned serves to avert a grave concrete 
risk to the life or physical health of the affected individual.155 
¶64 While these various reports and recommendations are all positive steps  
for  the  human  rights  of  individuals  with  intersex  traits,  it  is  the  enactment,  
codification, and administration of human rights protections that is vital in each 
country’s judicial opinions, statutes, and regulations. This process has been more 
measured.156 
Annotated Bibliography
Bird,  Jo.  “Outside  the  Law:  Intersex,  Medicine  and  the  Discourse  of  Rights.” 
Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 65–80.
The premise of this article rests on the notion that one must have a classifiable sex 
to be considered as a human by the law. Bird argues that an intersex child—born 
without a classifiable sex—is not considered human, and therefore the human 
rights of the intersex child are regarded as nonexistent. She evaluates the applica-
bility of international human rights discourse to intersex individuals, particularly 
the regulation of medical ethics under international law. Bird concludes that 
human rights law has failed to make a space for intersex individuals, rendering 
them invisible to the law and the human rights violations against them unrecog-
nized.
Ehrenreich, Nancy, and Mark Barr. “Intersex Surgery, Female Genital Cutting, and 
the Selective Condemnation of ‘Cultural Practices.’” Harvard Civil Rights-Civil 
Liberties Law Review 40 (2005): 71–140.
Over the last twenty-five years, opponents of female genital mutilation (FGM) 
have successfully lobbied to have the practice banned by federal statute in the 
United States, formally condemned by the United Nations, prohibited by many 
European countries, and deemed illegal in a majority of the countries where it 
is commonly practiced. Yet, FGM opponents fail to recognize a different type of 
genital cutting that occurs in their well-developed countries. This article chal-
lenges the mainstream anti-FGM activists’ refusal to embrace intersex causes. The 
authors argue that the plight of the two communities are similar; genital-normal-
ization surgeries parallel the cultural FGM surgeries in that they are largely medi-
cally unnecessary and result in similar side effects such as sexual dysfunction. 
While both practices are rooted in cultural behavior, the selective condemnation 
of the anti-FGM discourse is grounded upon Western/North American excep-
tionalism. The intersection of these two issues, the authors argue, demonstrates 
the “pitfalls of narrow, group-focused activism” (p.79). 
  155. Id. at 164.
  156. See  infra  “Foreign  Approaches  to  Intersex  Rights,”  ¶¶  73–83,  for  country-specific 
action.252 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
Holmes,  Morgan.  “Distracted  Attentions:  Intersexuality  and  Human  Rights 
Protections.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 127–33. 
This article discusses the reasons why intersexuality has been primarily consid-
ered a medical issue rather than a fundamental human rights concern. The author 
examines two of the first “identifiable official document[s]” (p.127) that address 
the treatment of intersex individuals as an issue of human rights: a report by the 
San Francisco Human Rights Commission and a Colombia Constitutional Court 
decision. Holmes advances the idea that not only should intersex be considered 
principally a human rights issue, but more narrowly, as a children’s rights issue. 
Intersex Activist Movement
Intersex Activist Movement Generally
¶65 Intersex organizations and activist groups have been in existence since the 
mid-1980s. The groups concentrate on providing peer and family support and 
addressing health concerns and human rights. In the United States, there are several 
such organizations: Accord Alliance,157 interACT Advocates for Intersex Youth,158 
and Organization Intersex International USA (OII-USA).159 These organizations all 
support the goal of ending the medical standard of cosmetic, nonconsensual genital 
“normalizing” surgeries. There are many foreign and international organizations as 
well.
¶66 Since 2011, three International Intersex Forums have been held, supported 
by the ILGA (International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association) 
and ILGA-Europe. Intersex activists and organizations from all over the globe con-
vened and released joint statements about human rights and bodily autonomy. In 
2013, the third statement advocated for a cessation of genital-normalization sur-
geries.160 Intersex activists have frequently been disfigured and suffered trauma 
from genital surgeries themselves; they advocate that these surgeries end, or at least 
that decisions be postponed, in the face of normative standards and cultural pres-
sure. The position held by these organizations is that intersexuality is not an 
anomaly that needs to be met with an automatic “fix.”
  157. Accord Alliance (http://www.accordalliance.org/) took the place of the Intersex Soci-
ety of North America (http://www.isna.org/). 
In 2007, ISNA sponsored and convened a national group of health care and advocacy professionals 
to establish a nonprofit organization charged with making sure the new ideas about appropriate 
care are known and implemented across the country. This organization, Accord Alliance, opened 
its doors in March, 2008, and will continue to lead national efforts to improve DSD-related health 
care and outcomes.
Dear ISNA Friends and Supporters, supra note 34. 
  158. InterACT  Advocates  for  Intersex  Youth  (http://interactadvocates.org/)  works  to  raise 
intersex visibility, empowering young intersex advocates and promoting laws and policies that protect 
intersex youth. It was formerly known as Advocates for Informed Choice.
  159. Organization  Intersex  International  (http://oii-usa.org/)  is  a  multi-gendered,  multi-
orientation, multi-racial NGO working for human rights for intersex people, particularly the rights 
to bodily integrity, self-determination, legal recognition, and depathologization of intersex traits and 
nonbinary identities in medicine and society. Its goal is to create a world where all intersex people are 
viewed and treated equally.
  160. Public Statement by the Third International Intersex Forum, OII Europe (Dec. 1, 2013), 
http://oiieurope.org/public-statement-by-the-third-international-intersex-forum/  [https://perma.cc 
/8QH3-5LHY]. Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 253
¶67 Intersex activists argue that while psychosocial reasons are often the reason 
given to perform genital-normalization surgery, this type of treatment is socially 
driven and, therefore, ethically questionable. When surgery and hormone treat-
ments are considered, healthcare professionals must ask themselves whether they 
are truly needed for the benefit of the child or are being offered to allay parental 
distress.161 
¶68 Intersex activists have worked tirelessly to educate society about these 
issues. They have publicized their stories via mass media, reaching many people; 
they have also connected with the healthcare industry by working with researchers, 
presenting at medical conferences, and reaching out to medical students.162 While 
it may appear that this work will succeed and one day eradicate, or at least limit, 
nonconsensual genital “normalizing” surgeries, the formation of new standards of 
care take a long time to impact actual medical practices.163 This slow evolution is 
taking too much time for much of the intersex community, who desire an immedi-
ate ban on genital-normalization surgery. This position is shared by many legal 
scholars.164
Annotated Bibliography
Hupf, Robert. “Allyship to the Intersex Community on Cosmetic, Non-Consensual 
Genital ‘Normalizing’ Surgery.” William & Mary Journal of Women and the Law 
22 (2015): 73–104.
Hupf first acknowledges the difficult role that encompasses being an ally to any 
given community. Acting as an ally requires an individual to place the lived expe-
riences of harmed individuals at the forefront of any movement and requires a 
challenging balancing act between enthusiastic goals and the immediate needs of 
the community’s individuals. Hupf asserts that the intersex community continues 
to call for a moratorium on all cosmetic, nonconsensual genital-normalizing sur-
geries as its main objective. This article explores this proposal, as well as alternate 
proposals by intersex activists, allies, and other scholars. Through examination 
of the adoption and implementation of several of the proposed solutions, Hupf 
argues, “[u]ntil there is a prohibition on the practice of cosmetic, non-consensual 
genital normalizing surgery, proposals for an alternative solution must take a step 
back” (p.104). 
Preves, Sharon E. “Out of the O.R. and into the Streets: Exploring the Impact of 
Intersex Media Activism.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 247–88. 
This article traces the history of the intersex movement and explores the role of 
mass media in the increased recognition of the intersex identity. Preves focuses 
on one organization in particular, the Intersex Society of North America (ISNA). 
Preves identifies ISNA as one of the pioneers of the intersex movement, highlight-
ing the organization’s polarizing transition from peer support group to political 
activist group. Preves credits ISNA and its use of mass media as a tool for advanc-
ing their political platform for the increased awareness of intersex issues. Preves 
  161. What  Does  INSA  Recommend  for  Children  with  Intersex?,  ISNA: Intersex Soc’y of 
North Am., http://www.isna.org/faq/patient-centered [https://perma.cc/N3GG-83MA]. 
  162. What’s  the  History  Behind  the  Intersex  Rights  Movement?,  ISNA: Intersex Soc’y of 
North Am., http://www.isna.org/faq/history [https://perma.cc/Q8A9-7QZB].
  163. Anne Tamar-Mattis, Exceptions to the Rule: Curing the Law’s Failure to Protect Intersex 
Infants, 21 Berkeley J. Gender L. & Just. 59, 78 (2006).
  164. Id.254 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
admits that this recognition is not without controversy, foreshadowing the move-
ment’s tensions over where discourse of the intersex people belongs. 
Stone, Moonhawk River. “Approaching Critical Mass: An Exploration of the Role 
of Intersex Allies in Creating Positive Education, Advocacy and Change.” 
Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 353–66.
This article is borne out of the author’s personal experience as an ally working 
on behalf of intersex people. Stone maintains that the current tightrope that allies 
must walk—advocating for the interests of the group and gathering emotional 
information regarding injustices, while recognizing the limitations of personally 
understanding an individual’s struggles—requires a careful balancing of attitudes 
and behaviors to facilitate effective advocacy. Since intersex people are only a 
small percentage of the population, Stone argues that allies will be crucial to the 
intersex movement.
Intersection with Other Movements: LGBT and Same-Sex Marriage
¶69 The general public has been made more aware of the variations of gender 
and sexual orientation due to the LGBT and same-sex marriage movements. With 
the increased openness about sexual orientation and the growing visibility of the 
LGBT community and their challenge to expectations about gender roles and iden-
tity, there has been increasing social acceptance for individuals who do not fit the 
traditional classifications of gender and sexuality. This awareness that sexual 
anatomy does not dictate an individual’s gender identity or sexual orientation has 
benefited the intersex movement’s progress. “[T]ransgender165 identity [is] far less 
of a story than it used to be,”166 while intersexuality is now the more marginal clas-
sification, in need of increased public awareness. 
¶70 However, the transgender community and the intersex community some-
times have disparate objectives. The intersex community’s focus is not about mak-
ing decisions on whether to have surgical intervention to “normalize” their bodies 
to their correct gender; the concern is about decisions regarding their biology 
being made with a lack of consent on their part.167 This has created some worries 
among the intersex community about the development of LGBT groups that 
include an “I” for the inclusion of persons with intersex traits. Other concerns are 
that including the “I” would encourage the public to assume that individuals with 
intersex traits should automatically be considered lesbian, gay, bisexual, or trans-
gender.168 Some fear that parents of intersex infants who might reach out for assis-
tance and education would not do so with an LGBT group, and might even be more 
  165. Transgender is “[a]n umbrella term for people whose gender identity and/or gender 
expression differs from what is typically associated with the sex they were assigned at birth.” GLAAD 
Media Reference Guide—Transgender, GLAAD, http://www.glaad.org/reference/transgender [https://
perma.cc/V8VZ-PNZE].
  166. Greenhouse, supra note 10.
  167. Noa Ben-Asher, The Necessity of Sex Change: A Struggle for Intersex and Transsex Lib-
erties, 29 Harv. J.L. & Gender 51, 51 (2006) (“Transsex individuals often desire the future body that 
they should have, while intersex individuals often mourn the body they had before an unwarranted 
normalizing surgery interfered with it.”).
  168. Intersex individuals, like all people, have various sexual orientations and gender iden-
tities. Paulo Sampaio Furtado et al., Gender Dysphoria Associated with Disorders of Sex Development, 
9 Nat’l Rev. Urology 620, 622 (2012). Furtado states that between 8.5% and 20% of individuals with 
intersex traits may realize gender dysphoria due to their sex assignment at birth; this figure is depen-
dent on the type of DSD. Id. at 626.Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 255
likely to advocate for genital normalization for their children out of fear about their 
later sexuality or gender identity.169 Intersex activists are also concerned that their 
identity would be lost if joined with the larger LGBT movement, and believe that it 
is critical that the intersex movement gain visibility and provide specific resources 
for their own community.170 
¶71 Despite divergent paths, the transgender movement and the intersex move-
ment do intersect in some ways. In both movements, individuals find their bodies 
are pathologized in a way analogous to the way psychiatry viewed homosexuality 
decades ago. Transgender individuals may still find themselves categorized as hav-
ing a “gender identity disorder.” From this perspective, intersexuality is simply a 
different sexual minority that is considered “abnormal” and is pathologized.171
¶72 Another similarity in both movements is that surgical intervention for 
intersexuality is prompted by prejudice, discrimination, and fear of homosexuality. 
Our society’s healthcare system determines the functionality of male and female 
genitals by the ability to engage in heterosexual intercourse.172 The fact of the mat-
ter is that the LGBT movement, same-sex marriage movement, and other social 
movements have all helped spur on the intersex movement. Social change requires 
evolution, and whatever the sequence, it is clear that diverse expressions of gender 
and sexuality are becoming more accepted and mainstream.
Annotated Bibliography
Ben-Asher,  Noa.  “The  Necessity  of  Sex  Change:  A  Struggle  for  Intersex  and 
Transsex Liberties.” Harvard Journal of Law & Gender 29 (2006): 51–98.
This author examines the tensions between intersex and transsex advocacy groups 
by deconstructing each group’s distinct advocacy goal and the medical-scientific 
theories employed to support them. The transsex movement generally promotes 
surgeries and, more specifically, seeks to obtain Medicaid coverage for sex reas-
signment medical procedures. In contrast, the intersex movement generally 
opposes surgeries and calls for a moratorium on genital-normalization proce-
dures on intersex infants and young children. At the center of the controversy 
is the distinction between sex and gender, the subject of a two-sided ongoing 
medical-scientific debate. Ben-Asher describes the main litigation propositions 
and structures of the two movements as the “legal representations of opposing 
medical positions and (perhaps more importantly) experts who have been chal-
lenging each other for years regarding meanings of sex and gender” (p.90). The 
author advances the idea that both movements should sever their reliance on 
medical-scientific theories and instead formulate legal arguments based on posi-
tive and negative liberties. According to Ben-Asher, this shift in framework would 
not only reconcile the two movements, but also liberate their respective legal 
arguments from the control of the scientific community. 
  169. Emi Koyama, Adding the “I”: Does Intersex Belong in the LGBT Movement?, Intersex 
Initiative, http://www.intersexinitiative.org/articles/lgbti.html [https://perma.cc/E2V9-HRYH].
  170. Id.
  171. Id. 
  172. Id.256 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
Cruz, David B. “Getting Sex ‘Right’: Heteronormativity and Biologism in Trans and 
Intersex Marriage Litigation and Scholarship.” Duke Journal of Gender Law & 
Policy 18 (2010): 203–22. 
This essay provides an extensive overview of U.S. judicial decisions in marriage-
related cases that turn on the legal recognition of a litigant’s sex change. The 
author criticizes the majority of the lawyers’ arguments and judicial opinions as 
either advancing heterosupremacy or reinforcing the notion of sex as a biological 
fact by ignoring the root of the legal issue. According to the author, the greater 
issue here is the use of sex as a regulatory tool to determine what identities and 
relationships to legally recognize. He further condemns the academic realm for 
limited-scope investigations that fail to consider the larger circumstances and 
continue to give the control of legal determinations to the medical community. 
The author argues, “It misdirects our focus, to someone’s political detriment, to 
appeal to the natural or to ‘the facts’ of sex (as proclaimed by medical practitio-
ners) as the basis for what are really political judgments about what identities and 
relationships to recognize” (p.217). 
Greenberg, Julie A. “Intersex and Intrasex Debates: Building Alliances to Challenge 
Sex Discrimination.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 99–116. 
This article examines two sources of tensions relating to intersex activists: the 
“intrasex debate” and “intersex disagreements” (p.102). The intrasex debate 
stems from the intersex community’s wide separation on the issue of whether to 
call for a complete moratorium on all infant intersex surgeries. Intersex disagree-
ments encompass the intersex movement’s interactions with other activist groups 
related to sex and gender discrimination and specifically the conflicts that arise 
from decisions about whether to form alliances with certain groups. Greenberg 
argues that the intersex movement, to endure as a successful social justice move-
ment, must embrace other groups that share a common goal of ending sex and 
gender discrimination. 
Kajstura, Aleks. “Sex Required: The Impact of Massachusetts’ Same-Sex Marriage 
Cases on Marriages with Intersex and Transsexual Partners.” Cardozo Journal 
of Law & Gender 14 (2007): 161–84.
In this student note, the author considers the application of same-sex marriage 
statutes in cases involving a transsex or intersex party and the unintended and 
often unreasonable outcomes that follow. Through her analysis of two leading 
Massachusetts cases, the author concludes that even a legal right to same-sex 
marriage may fail to consider the rights of transsex and intersex individuals. The 
author argues that the most comprehensive solution to this problem would be the 
elimination of a binary legal system of sex and gender. 
Kogan, Terry S. “Transsexuals, Intersexuals, and Same-Sex Marriage.” BYU Journal 
of Public Law 18 (2004): 371–418.
By looking at a series of marriage cases involving a transsexual or intersex indi-
vidual, Kogan sets out to challenge the assumption that an opposite-sex marriage 
requirement is easily enforced. Kogan argues that “these cases illustrate the diffi-
culty and even foolishness in looking to a person’s sex as a criterion for marriage” 
(p.371). Kogan specifically highlights several insights from the transsexual and 
intersexual marriage cases. For example, Kogan deduces that the determination 
of an individual’s sex is not related to the goals of marriage and does not help a 
court enforce legal prohibitions against same-sex marriage. Kogan concludes that 
the ultimate lesson derived from the transsexual and intersexual marriage cases is 
that marriage should be available to all couples. Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 257
Rosin, Michael L. “Intersexuality and Universal Marriage.” Law & Sexuality: A 
Review  of  Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual  and  Transgender  Legal  Issues  14  (2005): 
51–133.
Rosin traces the history of intersexuality alongside the history of the courts’ 
attempts to define sex in the context of marriage cases. Rosin highlights two courts 
that use different single-factor tests to determine whether an individual should be 
classified as a woman or a man. The single-factor approach, Rosin argues, is not 
always decisive and can have unintended legal consequences. The author argues 
that sex is analogous to race and is thus a social construct that cannot be confined 
to clear-cut categories. Rosin advances the concept of “‘universal marriage,’ the 
right of any two unmarried (not closely related) adult persons to marry each other 
and enjoy the legal benefits (and obligations) of marriage regardless of the genital 
activities made possible and impossible by their sexual anatomies” (pp.56–57). 
Foreign Approaches to Intersex Rights
Discrimination
¶73 Individuals with intersex traits are frequently stigmatized and suffer a vari-
ety of human rights abuses. The international community has been working effec-
tively to change standards on an international level. Presently, four countries pro-
tect “intersex” people from discrimination: South Africa, Australia, the island of 
Jersey, and the United States (on a very limited basis); three other countries protect 
such discrimination on the grounds of “sex characteristics”: Malta, Greece, and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
¶74 In South Africa, which expressly protects against sex discrimination in its 
constitution, the Judicial Matters Amendment Act, 2005 amended the Promotion 
of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000 (Act 4 of 2000) to 
incorporate intersex within its definition of sex.173 The Promotion of Equality and 
Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act begins with a schedule of definitions, and 
two new definitions were added: (1) “sex” includes “intersex,” and (2) “intersex 
means a congenital sexual differentiation which is atypical, to whatever degree.” 
This change made intersex part of the meaning of “sex” in the equality clause, thus 
protecting intersexual individuals from discrimination. 
¶75 In Australia, “intersex status” was added in 2013 as a protected biological 
attribute in the Sex Discrimination Amendment (Sexual Orientation, Gender Iden-
tity and Intersex Status) Act on August 1, 2013, differentiating intersex status from 
sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex.174 This legislation protects intersex 
individuals as a stand-alone prohibited ground of discrimination.175 Similarly, the 
island of Jersey added “intersex status” to its definition of sex in 2015.176 Since dis-
crimination on the basis of sex is prohibited, intersex status is protected in Jersey.
  173. Judicial Matters Amendment Act 22 of 2005 § 16.
  174. Sex  Discrimination  Amendment  (Sexual  Orientation,  Gender  Identity  and  Intersex 
Status) Act 2013, (Cth) s 4(1).
  175. U.N. Office of the High Comm’r for Human Rts., supra note 122.
  176. States of Jersey (2015), Discrimination (Sex and Related Characteristics) (Jersey) Reg-
ulations 201, sched. 1, para. 7.3; see also Dan Christian Ghattas, Standing Up for the Rights of 
Intersex People 15 (Dec. 2015), http://www.ilga-europe.org/sites/default/files/how_to_be_a_great 
_intersex_ally_a_toolkit_for_ngos_and_decision_makers_december_2015_updated.pdf  [https://
perma.cc/7ZSJ-XBL5].258 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
¶76 The United States issued a much narrower protection when the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services provided a response to a comment 
clarifying section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act.177 This response stated that 
when dealing with health programs administered by the Department of Health and 
Human Services, “the prohibition on sex discrimination extends to discrimination 
on the basis of intersex traits or atypical sex characteristics.”178
¶77 In 2015, Malta adopted the Gender Identity, Gender Expression and Sex 
Characteristics (GIGESC) Act that protects intersex individuals from discrimina-
tion on grounds of “sex characteristics.”179 The Maltese act states that “public ser-
vice has the duty to ensure that unlawful sexual orientation, gender identity, gender 
expression and sex characteristics discrimination and harassment are eliminated, 
whilst its services must promote equality of opportunity to all, irrespective of sex-
ual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics.”180
¶78 The GIGESC Act was a landmark piece of legislation in Europe.181 Greece182 
and Bosnia-Herzegovina183 also categorize “sex characteristics” as a prohibited 
basis of discrimination. 
Genital Surgery Practices
¶79 Colombia and Malta have legally addressed the practice of nonconsensual 
genital surgery. The United States currently has a pending court case that addresses 
this issue and will likely be litigated in 2017.184
¶80 The Constitutional Court in Colombia addressed this issue judicially by 
considering consent standards for such surgery with the country’s constitution and 
  177. InterACT,  Federal  Government  Bans  Discrimination  Against  Intersex  People  in  Health 
Care,  InterAct  Blog  (May  23,  2016),  http://interactadvocates.org/federal-government-bans 
-discrimination-against-intersex-people-in-health-care/ [https://perma.cc/L6FZ-3C7L].
  178. Nondiscrimination in Health Programs and Activities, 81 Fed. Reg. 31389 (May 18, 
2016).
  179. Individuals with intersex traits are covered under the language of “sex characteristics” 
because “[i]ntersex people are born with sex characteristics (including genitals, gonads and chromo-
some patterns) that do not fit typical binary notions of male or female bodies.” Gender Identity, 
Gender Expression and Sex Characteristics Act of 2015, No. XI. This act also acknowledges a right to 
bodily integrity and physical autonomy; U.N. Office of the High Comm’r for Human Rts., supra note 
122; see also infra “Genital Surgery Practices,” ¶¶ 79–83. 
  180. Gender Identity, Gender Expression and Sex Characteristics Act of 2015 ¶ 2.
  181. Malta Adopts Ground-Breaking Trans and Intersex Law, TGEU: Transgender Europe 
(Apr.  1,  2015),  http://tgeu.org/malta-adopts-ground-breaking-trans-intersex-law/  [https://perma 
.cc/9DAC-P5UG].
  182. ILGA-Europe,  Annual  Review  of  the  Human  Rights  Situation  of  Lesbian,  Gay, 
Bisexual, Trans and Intersex People in Europe 12 (May 2016), http://www.ilga-europe.org/sites 
/default/files/Attachments/annual_review_2016-for_web.pdf  [https://perma.cc/K8XB-DP4U];  see 
also Ghattas, supra note 176, at 15.
  183. ILGA-Europe,  supra  note  182,  at  49;  see  also  Anti-Discrimination  Law  Updated—
Great Step Forward in Bosnia and Herzegovina, ILGA Europe (July 14, 2016), http://ilga-europe.org 
/resources/news/latest-news/anti-discrimination-law-updated-bosnia-herzegovina  [https://perma 
.cc/TG9S-ZKBP]; Bosnia & Herzegovina Amends Its Anti-Discrimination Law; Intersex People Offered 
Protection for the First Time, Equal Rts. Ass’n for W. Balkans & Turk. (July 14, 2016), http://www 
.lgbti-era.org/latest-news/bosnia-herzegovina-amends-its-anti-discrimination-law-intersex-people 
-offered-protection-for-the-first-time [https://perma.cc/J7GB-F5MB].
  184. See  supra  “Medical  Intervention  and  Its  Legal  Framework—Constitutional  Rights,” 
¶¶ 26–31.Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 259
international norms in mind.185 Originally, the court declared that genital surgery 
was an infringement on one’s fundamental right to human dignity and gender iden-
tity, and it demanded that the patient him- or herself must provide the informed 
consent.186  In  two  later  cases,187  the  court’s  holding  was  narrowed,  allowing 
informed written parental consent for children younger than five years old, if the 
doctors provided parents with detailed information about the risks and benefits of 
surgery, and time to deliberate.188 Even though the final holding does not safeguard 
the rights of the youngest citizens, the controversy was acknowledged, and a height-
ened level of consent was required by the court.189
¶81 In 2015, Malta became the first country to legislatively prohibit medically 
unnecessary genital surgery and treatment on the sex characteristics of minors 
without their informed consent, strengthening the rights of intersex persons.190 The 
legislation acknowledges a right to bodily integrity and physical autonomy, and 
directly bans surgical intervention driven by social factors. The Maltese Parliament 
advises other states to reassess and reform their legislation similarly.
¶82 Other countries and government entities have recognized the issues at stake 
but not taken any formal legal action, as can be seen in the government findings of 
Australia, Kenya, Chile, Argentina, and the United States. The Australian Senate, in 
2013, issued a report recommending that genital-normalization surgery be deferred 
until the individual can give his or her own fully informed consent.191 A Kenyan 
court, in 2014, found that medical intervention on intersex infants should face 
regulation, but then punted the issue to Parliament, stating that Parliament was the 
proper body to administer these regulations.192 Chile’s Ministry of Health193 and 
  185. Kate Haas, Who Will Make Room for the Intersexed?, 30 Am. J.L. & Med. 41, 50 (2004). 
Colombian law provides much more protection for intersex children than current U.S. law. The 
Colombia Constitutional Court relied on the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child, one of 
the primary authorities used to challenge nonconsensual genital-normalization surgery. The United 
States has not ratified the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. Id. at 66.
  186. Id. at 49–55. In that case, in 1995, the “court ruled that doctors could not alter the 
gender of a patient, regardless of the patient’s age, without the patient’s own informed consent.” Id. at 
50. 
  187. Julie  A.  Greenberg  &  Cheryl  Chase,  Colombia’s  Highest  Court  Restricts  Surgery  on 
Intersex Children, Intersex Soc’y of N. Am., http://www.isna.org/colombia/background.html [https://
perma.cc/VP78-XDH4] (synthesizing in English the three Colombian cases). 
  188. The court called for the institution of what could be called “exceptional informed con-
sent” before the performance of sex-assignment surgery. Hofman, supra note 57, at 13–14. 
  189. Haas, supra note 185, at 54.
  190. Kieran Guilbert, Surgery and Sterilization Scrapped in Malta’s Benchmark LGBTI Law, Reuters.
com (Apr. 1, 2015), http://www.reuters.com/article/us-gay-rights-malta-idUSKBN0MS4ZE20150401 [https://
perma.cc/LXM4-AMAS]; see also Malta Adopts Ground-Breaking Trans and Intersex Law, supra note 181.
  191. Senate  Community  Affairs  References  Comm.,  Involuntary  or  Coerced  Ster-
ilization of Intersex People in Australia  (Oct.  25,  2013)  (Austl.),  http://www.aph.gov.au 
/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Community_Affairs/Involuntary_Sterilisation/Sec 
_Report/index [https://perma.cc/3BMJ-YSAT].
  192. Baby “A” v. Atty. Gen., Kenyatta Nat’l Hosp., Petition No. 266 (H.C.K. 2013), http://
kenyalaw.org/caselaw/cases/view/104234/ [https://perma.cc/T2CR-TAGV]. 
  193. Instruye Sobre Ciertos Aspectos de la Atencion de Salud a Ninos y Ninas Intersex, Cir-
cular No. 18 (Dec. 22, 2015), https://oii.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Circular-08-22.12.15 
-Instruye-Sobre-Ciertos-Aspectos-de-la-atencion-de-Salud-a-Ninos-y-Ninas-Intersex.pdf  [https://
perma.cc/T7DL-ZKMR]; see also Michael K. Lavers, Chilean Officials Oppose Intersex Children 
“Normalization”  Surgery,  Wash. Blade  (Jan.  11,  2016),  http://washingtonblade.com/2016/01/11 
/chilean-officials-oppose-normalization-surgery-for-intersex-children/ [https://perma.cc/VJ7S-UUZF].260 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
Argentina’s National Institute Against Discrimination, Xenophobia and Racism194 
(a government agency) acted in a similar fashion after examination of this matter. 
¶83 Most recently, the U.S. Department of State, on October 26, 2016, issued a 
statement on Intersex Awareness Day, noting that intersex individuals “routinely 
face forced medical surgeries that are conducted at a young age without free or 
informed consent. These interventions jeopardize their physical integrity and abil-
ity to live free.”195 While the recommendations, reports, and statements above do 
not involve legal action or legislation, they do help to spread awareness of the 
human rights issues involved and show leadership while many individuals with 
intersex traits await stronger protections.
Annotated Bibliography
Beh, Hazel Glenn, and Milton Diamond. “Individuals with Differences in Sex 
Development: Consult to Colombia Constitutional Court Regarding Sex and 
Gender.” Wisconsin Journal of Law, Gender & Society 29 (2014): 421–45.
In 2012, author Milton Diamond received a consultation request from the 
Constitutional Court of Colombia regarding the case of an intersex individual 
and the Colombia system of national registration. The questions posed by the 
Colombia court related to the gender binary, such as whether the state should rec-
ognize a category other than male and female, and who would be in the best posi-
tion to decide an individual’s categorical placement. In this article, Diamond and 
co-author Hazel Glenn Bah expand on the answers provided to the Colombian 
courts. The article also explores recent changes in Nepal and Germany, such as 
the right to self-identify and the right to select an indeterminate sex designation 
on birth records, respectively. 
Bochenek, Michael, and Kyle Knight. “Establishing a Third Gender Category in 
Nepal: Process and Prognosis.” Emory International Law Review 26 (2012): 
11–41.
This article centers on the decision in Pant v. Nepal, the landmark case that 
declared full, fundamental rights for all sexual minorities in Nepal and legally 
established a third gender category. The authors focus on the implementation of 
the new policy, comparing the process to other countries that have changed sex 
and gender documentation (e.g., Australia, India, New Zealand, and Pakistan). 
Highlighting some of the early challenges in Nepal, the authors write, “The 
bureaucratic processes of implementing an identity-based third gender category 
shed light on the complexity of such a category existing in a society” (p.34). 
  194. Instituto  Nacional  contra  la  Discriminación,  la  Xenofobia  y  el  Racismo—
Documento  Temático  INADI:  Intersexualidad  (2015),  https://100porciento.files.wordpress 
.com/2015/07/intersexualidadinadi.pdf [https://perma.cc/DM2S-5DAD]. 
  195. U.S.  Dept.  of  State  Recognition,  Intersex  Day,  http://intersexday.org/en/state-dept 
-recognition-2016/ [https://perma.cc/ZM8V-BBVD]. Intersex Awareness Day is internationally cel-
ebrated on October 26 to bring attention to human rights issues faced by intersex people. Intersex 
Day, http://intersexday.org/en/ [https://perma.cc/A6PG-7DTL].Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 261
Gurney, Karen. “Sex and the Surgeon’s Knife: The Family Court’s Dilemma . . . 
Informed  Consent  and  the  Specter  of  Iatrogenic  Harm  to  Children  with 
Intersex Characteristics.” American Journal of Law & Medicine 33 (2007): 
625–61.
This article provides a comprehensive look at a series of Australian High Court 
opinions involving the doctrine of informed consent, specifically where a parent 
or guardian is acting on behalf of a child. After exploring a number of different 
circumstances invoking this doctrine, Gurney surmises that the only credible 
basis for the judicial involvement of the Family Court is when irreversible surgi-
cal procedures, such as sex assignment surgery, are involved. Gurney argues that 
parents cannot be allowed to consent for sex assignment surgeries because there 
is no definitive way to determine the child’s innate sexual identity. According to 
Gurney, the risk of error is therefore too high to justify surgeries in the absence of 
an immediate threat to life. 
Haas, Kate. “Who Will Make Room for the Intersexed?” American Journal of Law 
& Medicine 30 (2004): 41–68.
After noting the lack of case law available in the United States, the author surveys 
three Colombian court cases involving the legality of genital reconstruction sur-
geries performed without the child’s consent. The cases resulted in a new standard 
for parental consent, one that prohibits parental consent for genital reconstruc-
tion on children over the age of five. In regard to decisions made on behalf of 
intersexed children under five years old, Colombian law now requires parents to 
be fully informed prior to giving consent. The author urges the United States to 
follow Colombia’s lead in addressing the situation, but to take it one step further 
by prohibiting genital reconstruction surgeries altogether. 
Rellis, Jennifer. “‘Please Write “E” in This Box’: Toward Self-Identification and 
Recognition of a Third Gender: Approaches in the United States and India.” 
Michigan Journal of Gender & Law 14 (2008): 223–58.
Rellis’s article tells the story of India’s sexual minority group called the hijras. The 
hijras, a group composed of intersexed, transgendered, or transvestite men who 
identify as women, have undertaken efforts to engage in the political sphere by 
running for elected positions on an antidiscrimination platform. Rellis credits 
the hijras’ grassroots advocacy efforts with the increased recognition of a third 
gender in India, demonstrated by the inclusion of a third gender identity option 
on Indian passports. According to Rellis, India’s third gender identity option is 
particularly noteworthy because it allows the individual to self-identity. 
Thorn, Erin D. “Drop the Knife! Instituting Policies of Nonsurgical Intervention for 
Intersex Infants.” Family Court Review 52 (2014): 610–21.
This article describes recent legislative changes to the treatment of intersex indi-
viduals in Germany and Colombia. In Germany, a law now provides the option 
to identify sex as “X” on an infant’s birth certificate. Colombia has passed legisla-
tion that restricts a parent’s ability to consent to infant genitalia surgeries and has 
recommended following Germany’s lead in allowing for an intersex designation 
on birth certificates. Thorn also looks to advocacy efforts at the U.N. level and by 
the European Union to contrast the lack of action being taken to protect intersex 
children in the United States. After drawing attention to the efforts made by other 
countries to address the policy of infant intersex surgeries, Thorn concludes by 
urging the United States to follow suit. 262 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
U.S. Reform/Recommendations
¶84 Some scholars have proposed mandatory judicial oversight whenever par-
ents pursue genital-normalization surgery for their child.196 This would assure the 
best interest of the child is the exclusive focus of a neutral decision maker, provid-
ing sufficient procedural and substantive due process protections.197 Another pro-
posal is that a two-step approach be instituted that would necessitate guidance 
from an ethics board (including psychiatrists, pediatricians, and other relevant 
experts) and a recommendation by the court prior to any surgery.198 In her pro-
posal, Julie Greenberg suggests that the board would provide an advisory opinion 
to the court, and the court would make the final determination.199 Greenberg’s 
proposal also includes that a child advocate be appointed by the court to advocate 
for the child’s interests.200 In the face of the above judicial oversight proposals, par-
ents may argue that the U.S. Supreme Court acknowledges parents have a protected 
liberty  interest  in  the  way  they  raise  their  children  under  the  Fourteenth 
Amendment;201 however, this right has been found to have its limitations.202
¶85 It is also possible that hospitals and physicians may take action to advocate 
for court review before performing genital-normalization surgeries, as they start to 
be aware of the increasing possibility of litigation by former patients who are dis-
satisfied with their surgery results.203 The criticisms of immediate surgery on 
infants have been made known more broadly, and, over time, it is becoming 
increasingly uncertain exactly what risks physicians are required to acknowledge to 
conform to the standard for informed consent.204
¶86 Although unpopular in the legal literature, there are those scholars who 
argue that genital-normalization surgery, if requested by parents, should not be 
prohibited.205 Instead, this minority of scholars argues primarily that parents need 
to be informed of known risks and different treatment options.206 Some scholars 
suggest a model that focuses largely on parental and familial needs, requiring doc-
tors to openly discuss the intersex condition with parents, as well as inform parents 
of all available remedies from a neutral standpoint.207 
¶87 Some scholars believe that it is the legislature, not the judiciary, that is the 
appropriate venue for protecting infants “with any power or consistency.”208 Schol-
ars and intersex activists urge a complete legislative moratorium on early genital-
normalization surgeries on children, contending that parents lack the authority to 
  196. Hofman, supra note 57, at 11. 
  197. Curtis, supra note 85, at 849.
  198. Greenberg, supra note 2, at 42.
  199. Id.
  200. Id. at 43.
  201. Meyer v. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390 (1923).
  202. These  limitations  are  seen  in  cases  concerning  organ  donation  and  sterilization  of 
minors. Alison Davidian, Beyond the Locker Room: Changing Narratives on Early Surgery for Intersex 
Children, 26 Wis. J.L. Gender & Soc’y 1, 18 (2011).
  203. Tamar-Mattis, supra note 163, at 107–08.
  204. Id. at 108.
  205. E.g., Laura D. Hermer, A Moratorium on Intersex Surgeries? Law, Science, Identity, and 
Bioethics at the Crossroads, 13 Cardozo J.L. & Gender 255, 256 (2007).
  206. Id.
  207. Id. at 256–57.
  208. Hofman, supra note 57, at 16.Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 263
consent to these practices because they compromise the children’s fundamental 
right  to  procreate  and  the  right  to  bodily  integrity.209  Children  can  manifest 
informed consent autonomously at a later time if they desire treatment.210 
¶88 Some scholars express concern that a moratorium avoids the issue of psy-
chosocial damage to children with intersex traits who must wait for years until 
decision making becomes finalized.211 Other scholars believe that banning genital-
normalization surgeries without also pursuing reconstruction of our societal per-
spective toward sex and gender “puts the proverbial cart before the horse.”212 Schol-
ars advocate legislation recognizing the right to self-identify as a third gender, while 
codifying the expansive judicial interpretations of Title VII in response to the 
increasing awareness of human biological variation. 213 “Statutory reform in the U.S. 
can be an immediate remedy while advocates begin building a constitutional right 
to self-identify outside the gender binary based on the fundamental right to privacy 
and bodily integrity derived from the 14th amendment’s Due Process Clause.”214
¶89 There has been a bit of attempted reform at the state legislative level. In 
2016, Indiana State Representative Ed Clere proposed a bill focused on intersex 
children in state custody or under state supervision to prevent medically unneces-
sary surgery done to “normalize” a child’s physical appearance. While Clere pre-
vented the controversy between parental rights and children’s rights from impeding 
this issue by focusing solely on children in state custody, he believes this will even-
tually be an unavoidable debate.215
Annotated Bibliography
Aliabadi, Sara A. “Gender Assignment Surgery for Intersexed Infants: How the 
Substantive  Due  Process  Right  to  Privacy  Both  Supports  and  Opposes  a 
Moratorium.” Virginia Journal of Social Policy & the Law 12 (2004): 170–96.
Looking through the lenses of the fundamental right to privacy, this student 
author asks whether the privacy doctrine supports or opposes a moratorium 
on early gender assignment surgery. Aliabadi ultimately concludes that propo-
nents on both sides of the debate could use the privacy doctrine to support their 
  209. Beh & Diamond, supra note 7, at 59.
  210. E.g., Uslan, supra note 104, at 304.
  211. Robert M. Blizzard, Intersex Issues: A Series of Continuing Conundrums, 110 Pediatrics 
616, 619 (2002).
  212. Hermer, supra note 205, at 261 n.35.
  213. Rellis, supra note 111, at 255.
  214. Id. at 256–57.
  215. Henriques, supra note 22. Clere’s bill did not receive a hearing before the Committee 
on Family, Children and Human Affairs and died during the 2016 session. H. 1242, 2016 Sess. (Ind. 
2016). The bill also provides that 
A juvenile court having jurisdiction over the intersex child may allow the intersex child 
to provide consent for a gender differentiation procedure if: 
(1) the intersex child has undergone an evaluation by: 
(A) a psychologist; and 
(B) a physician; 
who are each experts in the treatment of intersex conditions; 
(2) the intersex child has been provided full knowledge of the possible risks and 
benefits of the gender differentiation procedure; and 
(3) the court believes that the intersex child has the maturity to provide informed 
consent.
H. 1242 § 4.264 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
respective arguments. However, Aliabadi herself argues that the imposition of a 
moratorium would be premature and would fail to adequately protect the intersex 
individual as it would be grossly overinclusive in denying all intersexed infants 
the opportunity to undergo surgery until they were old enough to competently 
choose surgery for themselves.
Aliabadi, Sara A. “You Make Me Feel Like a Natural Woman: Allowing Parents to 
Consent to Early Gender Assignment Surgeries for Their Intersexed Infants.”  
William & Mary Journal of Women and the Law 11 (2005): 427–59.
The author acknowledges in her student note the complications and risks of 
gender assignment surgeries, recognizing that surgeries often fail the interests of 
the intersex individual, but nevertheless argues that a legal moratorium should 
not be placed on the surgeries. A “one-size-fits-all judgment” (p.429) by courts 
and legislators to impose a moratorium, she argues, would be “inappropriate, 
premature, and potentially harmful to a large number of individuals” (p.428). 
According to this analysis, parents, with the help of doctors and other medical 
professionals, are better suited to make a medical decision based on the needs of 
the specific intersexed individual. She supports her argument by examining the 
legal tradition of deference to parental wishes in regards to their ability to consent 
to medical procedures on behalf of their minor children. 
Bishop,  Emily  A.  “A  Child’s  Expertise:  Establishing  Statutory  Protection  for 
Intersexed Children Who Reject Their Gender of Assignment.” New York 
University Law Review 82 (2007): 531–68. 
This student author utilizes juvenile law to propose a statutory framework that 
would allow intersex minors to consent to a gender transition, removing the 
necessity for parental consent. The framework would also include a provision 
equating any active parental interference with the child’s desire to transition with 
neglect. Historically, minor consent laws regard a minor as competent to consent 
to certain medical treatments as long as the minor is aware of the procedure and 
the consequences, as well as any treatment alternatives. The author highlights 
that this model would presume that intersex minors could legally consent to 
counseling and to assistance with a social gender transition. The note’s conclu-
sion enumerates potential unresolved issues with this framework, but nonetheless 
maintains that it would be a step in the right direction.
Curtis, Skylar. “Reproductive Organs and Differences of Sex Development: The 
Constitutional Issues Created by the Surgical Treatment of Intersex Children.” 
McGeorge Law Review 42 (2011): 841–72. 
This article explores the legal approach to parental consent to certain medical 
treatments on behalf of individuals with mental disabilities who do not have the 
legal capacity to consent for themselves. Courts have held that parental consent 
is inadequate to authorize certain types of medical procedures for the mentally 
disabled, specifically procedures such as intentional sterilization that place a 
fundamental right at stake. In these circumstances, many states require a judicial 
hearing in which a third party is appointed to represent the interests of the minor 
child prior to the approval of the intentional sterilization. Curtis parallels infant 
intersex surgeries and the potential deprivation of the child’s fundamental rights, 
ultimately arguing for the expansion of required judicial hearing procedures to 
protect intersex children. Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 265
Davidian,  Alison.  “Beyond  the  Locker  Room:  Changing  Narratives  on  Early 
Surgery for Intersex Children.” Wisconsin Journal of Law, Gender & Society 26 
(2011): 1–22.
In this article, Davidian distinguishes between parental intentions and interests 
by raising the question of whose interests are actually being protected under an 
informed parental consent model. Looking further into the idea of parental con-
sent, Davidian highlights the fact that the authority of parents to make medical 
decisions on behalf of their children is not absolute. Generally, parents are unable 
to authorize the sterilization of children without a court order, based largely on 
the rationale that the right to procreation is a fundamental right. The author 
argues that similar judicial approval should be required for intersex surgeries. 
Davidian acknowledges that the court may not prove a better decision maker, 
but argues that it will develop a better decision-making process. According to the 
author, “Moving the debate into the courtroom also has the potential to make 
public what has been shrouded in secrecy, behind a medical veil” (p.19).
Hermer, Laura D. “A Moratorium on Intersex Surgeries? Law, Science, Identity, 
and Bioethics at the Crossroads.” Cardozo Journal of Law & Gender 13 (2007): 
255–72.
Hermer responds to two proposals published in the Cardozo Journal of Law & 
Gender’s 2005 Symposium—one by Jo Bird and the other by Hazel Glenn Beh and 
Milton Diamond—which either advocate for, or would result in, a moratorium on 
intersex surgeries. Hermer believes both approaches fall short in addressing the 
deeper issues related to intersex surgeries, citing social and psychological reasons 
as examples. She also argues that either proposal would eliminate ongoing sci-
entific research focused on intersex treatment practices. Hermer’s own position 
is consistent with that of her earlier work and calls for greater counseling of the 
parents prior to any decision making. She thinks that parents need to be informed 
of the risks and benefits of a myriad of treatment options, including immediate 
and delayed “cosmetic” genital treatment options. According to Hermer, a parent 
should then be able to elect for their child’s early “cosmetic” genital surgery. 
Hermer, Laura. “Paradigms Revised: Intersex Children, Bioethics & the Law.” 
Annals of Health Law 11 (2002): 195–236.
This author argues for an approach to intersex treatment that balances the inter-
sex individuals’ rights (as expressed by intersex activists) with other concerns 
such as parental interests, cultural considerations, and family dynamics. Hermer 
first evaluates medical malpractice and informed consent actions, ultimately 
concluding that neither legal avenue will provide adequate relief for the intersex 
individual. In its place, Hermer proposes a model that focuses largely on parental 
and familial needs, which Hermer argues may be just as critical as the intersex 
individuals’ needs. The model requires physicians to openly discuss the intersex 
condition with parents, as well as inform parents of all available remedies from 
a neutral standpoint. Hermer states that parents, together with the physician, 
should choose the gender of the child. Notably excluded from her model is any 
moratorium on infant surgeries, which Hermer believes should remain a treat-
ment option for intersex infants. 
Lloyd, Erin. “From the Hospital to the Courtroom: A Statutory Proposal for 
Recognizing and Protecting the Legal Rights of Intersex Children.” Cardozo 
Journal of Law & Gender 12 (2005): 155–95.
This student note contends that the most immediate and effective way to remedy 
the harms suffered by intersex individuals and change treatment protocol for 266 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 109:2  [2017-12]
the future is through legislation. Lloyd proposes a model statute that subjects 
intersex surgeries to judicial order, requiring a parent or guardian of an intersex 
individual to file an application for consent with a specific court. Among other 
requirements, the statute mandates the court to appoint an uninterested party to 
provide legal counsel to and represent the interests of the intersex child. Under 
the guidelines of the model statute, for a judgment to be entered in favor of sur-
gery, the judge must find that: “(1) The surgery proposed is an accepted method 
within the particular field to address the intersex condition presented; and  
(2) That the proposed surgery is medically necessary to protect the health or life 
of the intersex child; and (3) That the potential benefits substantially outweigh 
the risks and potential adverse effects on the intersex child” (p.194). 
Ouellette, Alicia. “Shaping Parental Authority over Children’s Bodies.” Indiana Law 
Journal 85 (2010): 955–1002.
This author illustrates the broad discretion afforded to parents through the per-
sonal narratives of four children who underwent medical and surgical interven-
tions at the election of their parents. Ouellette is critical of the current legal model 
because it allows parents to subordinate their child’s interests to their own. As an 
alternative legal model, Ouellette proposes a trust-based construct, in which par-
ents are the trustees, bound by fiduciary duties to act on behalf of the child’s best 
interest. Under Ouellette’s framework, any decisions that might serve a parental 
interest at the expense of the child would be subjected to a neutral third-party 
review. 
Tamar-Mattis, Anne. “Exceptions to the Rule: Curing the Law’s Failure to Protect 
Intersex Infants.” Berkeley Journal of Gender, Law & Justice 21 (2006): 59–110.
Because genital-normalizing surgery is medically unnecessary and carries real 
risks of parental conflict of interest, the author proposes that courts should have 
jurisdiction to intervene and protect the fundamental rights of the infant in the 
same way they do for children who are potential organ donors or who face elec-
tive sterilization. Tamar-Mattis looks to these existing categorical exceptions for 
a model of decision making that she suggests will ensure independent consider-
ation of the child’s interests. Factors that make genital-normalizing surgeries an 
appropriate case for a categorical exception are noted, along with benefits and 
possible objections to the use of this model. The author argues that the categorical 
exception model provides a protective and proven structure for making difficult 
medical decisions affecting the fundamental rights of children when their parents 
face a conflict of interest, thus helping to ensure that intersex children’s funda-
mental rights are protected until they have the ability to decide for themselves.
Uslan, Samantha S. “What Parents Don’t Know: Informed Consent, Marriage, and 
Genital-Normalizing Surgery on Intersex Children.” Indiana Law Journal 85 
(2010): 301–23.
In this student note, Uslan stresses the effects of gender-normalizing surger-
ies and their potential interference with a child’s fundamental right to an open 
future, specifically the fundamental right to marriage. According to Uslan, paren-
tal consent to a child’s surgery should not be allowed where the fundamental right 
of a child may be compromised by the decision. Further, she argues that even 
judicial oversight alone will not sufficiently protect the rights of intersex children. 
Instead, Uslan calls for a legislative ban on all genital-normalizing surgeries that 
are not consented to by the intersex individuals themselves, except in the case of 
a medical emergency. Vol. 109:2  [2017-12] INTERSEXUALITY AND THE LAW: AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 267
Conclusion
¶90 Recently, there has been heightened interest in the issue of intersexuality 
among government, nongovernmental organizations, and policymakers. The gen-
eral public is exposed now to much more media coverage and human rights state-
ments about intersexuality. The subject is of burgeoning interest in the legal arena. 
This annotated bibliography abstracts articles to provide a reference point as well as 
an understanding of the history of the scholarship in this area. As scholars continue 
to examine intersex issues and various strategies to abolish discriminatory systems, 
I plan to continue building this collection of articles. I fervently hope that scholars 
will continue to document the struggle and continue to propose solutions to enable 
the law to move forward to stop the unfortunate practices that have injured chil-
dren with intersex traits.