LAW OF THE SEA AND  
UNCREWED MARITIME VEHICLES
Articles 39 and 40 of UNCLOS set  Rule 22 imposes 
Rule 5 provides  
Article 20 of UNCLOS requires 
out activities prohibited during  How this rule might apply to UMVs,   requirements for masthead 
that every vessel   Further watchkeeping 
underwater UMVs to be able 
transit passage. This is not as  and whether the capactiy to remotely control   lights, sidelights, stern 
shall always maintain   requirements can  
to travel on the surface when 
extensive as activities prohibited  the vessel is necessary, is contested. lights, towing lights and 
a proper look-out by   be found in STCW.
navigating territorial seas.
during innocent passage.  all-round lights depending 
sight and hearing.
on vessel length.
Article 19 of UNCLOS prohibits 
certain activities during innocent  Regulation 11 in Chapter V  
passage (allowing for transit  provides it must be possible to 
through the territorial sea  immediately establish human  
of another state), including  control of the ship’s steering in  
Lighting 
intelligence gathering and  areas of high traffic density.
 requirements
military exercises.
Rule 33 requires vessels 
of 12 metres or more in 
UMVs must be able to 
length to be provided 
turn off some of their 
with a whistle and bell.
functions, or change the 
Article 94 of UNCLOS sets out 
way they are operating, 
obligations of the ‘flag State’.  SOLAS establishes  
Look-out  
during certain types 
This includes the requirement to  important safety requirements 
requirements
of passage in order to 
take measures to ensure ships  for the navigation of ships  
comply with law.
flying its flag have the necessary  in high traffic areas.
Rule 33 further requires 
construction, equipment and 
that vessels of 100 metres 
manning to ensure safety at 
or more in length are 
sea. There is some debate about 
additionally provided 
whether UMVs can satisfy these 
with a gong.
categories.
COLREGs impose  
obligations on UMVs to 
Will the UMV be  prevent collisions at sea.   Sound  
To have the rights of a 
Key navigational  
It also requires vessels to  requirements
‘ship’, devices must be  rights are set out in  operating in high 
have certain design features.
entitled by a State to fly 
UNCLOS and are only 
traffic areas?
that State’s flag. UNCLOS 
available to ‘ships’.
sets out the conditions for 
‘flagging’ a ship.
Will the UMV be 
Will the UMV  
travelling through 
be navigating  
the territorial waters 
on the ocean?
of other States?
Some conventions – including 
Warships are the only vessels 
SOLAS, COLREGS, STCW and 
that have belligerent rights - 
MARPOL – do not apply to 
meaning they are permitted 
HOW DOES 
warships, but are nonetheless 
to conduct offensive attacks. 
Other vessels are limited to  Government vessels (and  followed by many states as  
Vessels are warships if they 
support functions. INTERNATIONAL  warships) not operating for  a matter of policy.
meet the criteria from Article 
commercial purposes are not 
29 of UNCLOS. They must (1) 
LAW   bound by the same set of 
belong to the armed forces of 
treaties as commercial vessels.
a State, (2) bearing external  Will the UMV  
marks distinguishing the ship  REGULATE  
Is the UMV   be used  
Being classified as a  of its nationality, (3) be under 
warship means that a  the command of an officer  a warship? UMVS for commercial 
vessel has more rights  duly commissioned by the  purposes?
and a more secure claim  government of the State and 
?
to sovereign immunity. (4) be crewed by members 
Commercial vessels  
of the armed forces. Whether 
are bound by  
UMVs can satisfy these 
the requirements  
requirements is contested.
of the STCW.
Masters and chief mates must 
Article 32 of UNLCOS protects the  hold appropriate certification 
soverign immunity of warships.  on a ship, based on the vessel’s 
Further, article 95 provides that  weight category.
Will the UMV have  Will the UMV be 
warships on the high seas are 
only subject to the jurisdiction of  people on board  carrying dangerous 
the State whose flag they fly.
(including as  goods or generating 
passengers)? polluting waste?
Requirements for  
electrical installations are   UNCLOS
set out in Regulation 2  
The following  
of Chapter II-1.
Conventions set out a  
SOLAS establishes safety 
range of environmental 
requirements for ships 
Safety of passengers and crew   protection obligations.
Article 192 
carrying people onboard.
from electrical hazards  
provides that states have 
must be assured.
an obligation to protect 
and preserve the marine 
environment.
MARPOL
Services essential for safety  
must be maintained during  
Convention on the   Annex I, Regulation 15(D)(9)
emergency conditions.
Prevention of  provides that no discharge 
Marine Pollution of  into the sea shall contain 
chemicals or substances 
Dumping of Wastes
which are hazardous to the 
marine environment.
SOLAS
Ships must protect   Fire protection 
means of escape, and   requirements are set  
provide readily available   out in Regulation 2  
fire-extinguishing appliances. of Chapter II-2.
Annex VI, Regulation 12 
provides that deliberate 
Regulation IV(1)(a) provides 
Chapter VII,   Annex VI, Regulation 18(1) emission of ozone depleting 
that prohibition on the 
Requirements for   Regulations 3-6   dumping of wastes including  provides that fuel oil for  substances is prohibited.
Lifeboats, liferafts and   provides that dangerous  combustion shall be blends 
life saving appliances are  crude oil, fuel oil and materials 
buoyant apparatus must   goods shall be safely packed,  of hydrocarbons derived 
set out in Regulation 4   produced for biological and 
be readily available. labelled and stowed. from petroleum refining. 
of Chapter III. chemical warfare.
The ocean is governed by a network of  •  United Nations Convention on the Law of the  •  International Convention for the Prevention   the device, it is unclear if and how UMVs will be 
international law treaties as well as customary  Sea (‘UNCLOS’),  of Pollution from Ships (‘MARPOL’),  able to meet these treaty requirements. There is 
international law. Each treaty has a different  debate amongst international and maritime lawyers 
•  International Convention for the Safety of Life  •  Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution 
focus: some apply broadly to all ships and  about how strictly the treaties should be read. 
at Sea (‘SOLAS’),  of Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter.
vessels, whereas others only apply to vessels of 
There is a considerable amount of work underway 
•  Convention on the International Regulations   The purpose of this flowchart – which is by no 
a particular size. This means determining how 
to clarify the situation. The International Maritime 
for Preventing Collisions at Sea (COLREGs),  means comprehensive – is to give an indication of 
international law regulates a particular uncrewed 
Organization is completing a Regulatory Scoping 
the kinds of factors that influence the application of 
maritime vehicle (UMV) depends on the design of  •  International Convention on Standards of 
Exercise to determine how best to regulate 
the law, and the sorts of requirements imposed by 
the device and how they are intended to be used.  Training, Certification, and Watchkeeping  
autonomous shipping, which may provide further 
treaties in order to access certain rights. As many of 
Relevant treaties include:  for Seafarers (‘STCW’), 
clarity on the use of UMVs. 
the treaties assume there will be people on-board  
Produced by Dr Simon McKenzie and Isabelle Peart, Law and the Future of War research group, The University of Queensland School of Law, 2020.   law.uq.edu.au/future-war