JUDICIAL IMPARTIALITY IN AN EMPIRICAL ERA 
Tigran W. Eldred 
The psychological dimensions of judicial impartiality is a topic of 
considerable interest, with a growing body of scholarship focused on the 
reasons  judges  often  are  unable  to  perceive  their  own  biases.1  The 
attention is not on why judges intentionally downplay factors that can 
undermine their own objectivity, but rather on the empirical reasons that 
everyone, judges included, tend to be unaware of the impact of their 
own biases. This “bias blind spot,”2 a product of a series of unconscious 
cognitive and motivational factors, is at the center of the discussion, 
with  even  the  Supreme  Court  making  passing  reference  to  the 
pernicious influence of unconscious psychological factors in its recent 
disqualification jurisprudence.3 
Professor  Robertson’s  article,  Judicial  Impartiality  in  a  Partisan 
Era,4 makes a significant contribution to this topic by deftly integrating 
the psychology of judicial decision-making into the larger conversation 
about the partisan threat, real and perceived, to judicial impartiality. Her 
analysis emphasizes the psychological dimensions of identity theory, a 
 
    Professor of Law, New England Law | Boston. Many thanks to my colleague, Jordan 
Singer, for his helpful comments on this response. 
  1.  See., e.g., Debra Lyn Bassett, Three Reasons Why the Challenged Judge Should Not 
Rule on a Judicial Recusal Motion, 18 N.Y.U. J. LEGIS. & PUB. POL’Y 659, 659–60 (2015); 
Debra Lyn Bassett & Rex R. Perschbacher, The Elusive Goal of Impartiality, 97 IOWA L. REV. 
181,  184  (2011);  Melinda  A.  Marbes,  Reshaping  Recusal  Procedures:  Eliminating 
Decisionmaker Bias and Promoting Public Confidence, 49 VAL. U. L. REV. 807, 809–10 (2015) 
[hereinafter Reshaping Recusal]; Melinda A. Marbes, Refocusing Recusals: How the Bias 
Blindspot Affects Disqualification Disputes and Should Reshape Recusal Reform, 32 ST. LOUIS 
U. PUB. L. REV. 235, 237 (2013) [hereinafter Bias Blindspot]; W. Bradley Wendel, Campaign 
Contributions and Risk-Avoidance Rules in Judicial Ethics, 67 DEPAUL L. REV. 255, 255 
(2018). 
  2.  Bassett, supra note 1, at 670–71; Bias Blindspot, supra note 1, at 249; Wendel, supra 
note 1, at 255. 
  3.  See, e.g., Williams v. Pennsylvania, 136 S. Ct. 1899, 1906 (2016) (“There is . . . a risk 
that the judge ‘would be so psychologically wedded’ to his or her previous position as a 
prosecutor that the judge ‘would consciously or unconsciously avoid the appearance of having 
erred or changed position.’”) (citation omitted); Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U.S. 
868, 883–84 (2009) (“In defining [the constitutional] standards [for recusal], the Court has 
asked whether, ‘under a realistic appraisal of psychological tendencies and human weakness,’ 
the interest ‘poses such a risk of actual bias or prejudgment that the practice must be forbidden 
if the guarantee of due process is to be adequately implemented.’”) (citation omitted). For a 
discussion of how the Supreme Court has missed an opportunity to cite scientific authority for 
these observations, see Tigran W. Eldred, The Psychology of Conflicts of Interest in Williams 
v. Pennsylvania,  NEW  ENG.  L.  REV.  FACULTY  BLOG  (June  20,  2016), 
https://newenglrev.com/2016/06/20/faculty-blog-the-psychology-of-conflicts-of-interest-in-
williams-v-pennsylvania/ [https://perma.cc/N83W-SK8X]. 
  4.  Cassandra Burke Robertson, Judicial Impartiality in a Partisan Era, 70 FLA. L. REV. 
739 (2018). 
 
1302019]  JUDICIAL IMPARTIALITY IN AN EMPIRICAL ERA  131 
 
field of study that explores how people behave based on the social 
groups  to  which  they  belong.5  As  she  explains,  judicial  identity  is 
closely wrapped in the self-perception of impartiality, the foundational 
feature  of  the  rule  of  law,  so  that  any  non-verifying  feedback 
threatening that identity can be expected to produce “emotional distress 
and a tendency to employ cognitive strategies that discount or discredit 
such feedback.”6 The bias blind spot is one such cognitive response, 
which allows judges to maintain a belief in their own objectivity, even 
when  there  is  evidence  to  the  contrary.7  Partisanship,  like  all 
motivations, can do its work without any conscious awareness of its 
deleterious effects.8 
Professor  Robertson  also  makes  the  compelling  argument  that 
recusal is a weak tool to protect against the appearance of judicial bias 
for a number of reasons, including the malleability of determining how 
a reasonable person might perceive the effects of a judge’s partisan 
leanings.9 As she states:  
 
The appearance of impartiality, after all, is in the eye of the 
“reasonable”  beholder—and  as  the  public  grows  more 
partisan, views of judicial conduct will likewise split along 
party lines. . . . When the public is so polarized, it becomes 
extremely difficult to identify the view of a “reasonable” 
person.10  
 
Indeed, she notes that allegations of partisan bias may even do more 
harm  than  good  by  further  undermining  public  confidence  in  an 
impartial judiciary.11 
As with any strong analysis based on empirical claims, Professor 
Robertson’s article raises additional questions to be explored. To begin 
with is the extent and scope of judicial partisan bias, a topic of vast 
exploration among legal academics, political scientists, and others.12 
The near consensus  of  most research is  that political  orientation  of 
judges  often  matters  in  judicial  decisions—reinforcing  the  belief  of 
 
  5.  See id. at 746–51. 
  6.  Id. at 760. 
  7.  See id. at 749, 762–63. 
  8.  See Ziva Kunda, The Case for Motivated Reasoning, 108 PSYCHOL. BULL. 480, 480 
(1990) (discussing the power of motivated reasoning). 
  9.  See Robertson, supra note 4, at 768. 
  10.  Robertson, supra note 4, at 768–69. 
  11.  Id. at 769.  
  12.  See  Jeffrey  J.  Rachlinski  et  al.,  Judicial  Politics  and  Decisionmaking:  A  New 
Approach, 70 VAND. L. REV. 2051, 2052, 2055 (2017). 132  FLORIDA LAW REVIEW FORUM  [Vol. 70 
 
some critics that judges are merely “politicians in robes.”13 If so, then 
Professor Robertson’s project is all the more important, as it addresses 
fundamental  questions  and  proposes  solutions  to  threats  to  the 
foundation of democratic legitimacy.  
But what if political orientation is less powerful a factor in judicial-
decision  making  than  conventional  wisdom  suggests?  A  number  of 
recent  re-assessments  of  the  role  of  judicial  partisanship  raise  this 
possibility.14  For  instance,  researchers  who  have  done  much  of  the 
ground-breaking work on the psychology of judicial decision-making 
question the methodology of almost all of the relevant research, which 
narrowly focuses on assessing partisan bias by reviewing and parsing 
judicial  decisions  rather  than  by  using  experimental  design.15  The 
problem with this approach, they note, is that drawing inferences about 
the  effects  of  political  ideology  from  single  decisions  has  inherent 
limitations given the wide variability of circumstances between cases.16 
Analysis of multi-member courts, including the Supreme Court, attempt 
to address this problem by combining cases for assessment, but this can 
result  in  errors  that  are  very  difficult  to  control  for  in  statistical 
analysis.17 Other experts in the psychology of decision-making have 
made similar critiques, noting many of the limits posed by research that 
does  not  employ  experimental  design  to  study  behavior  of  actual 
judges.18  The  bottom  line  of  these  critiques  is  that,  even  if  certain 
statistical formulas point towards findings of extensive partisan bias in 
how judges render decisions, the actual evidence of such bias is difficult 
to document. 
But  there  is  more:  in  an  effort  to  move  away  from  the 
methodological  problems  of  the  past,  researchers  have  started  to 
conduct experimental studies in an effort to determine the extent of 
partisan bias in judicial decision-making.19 And the results complicate 
conventional wisdom. For example, a series of twenty-five controlled 
 
  13.  Id.  at  2051–53;  see  also  Lee  Epstein  &  Jack  Knight,  Reconsidering  Judicial 
Preferences, 16 ANN. REV. POL. SCI. 11, 14 (2013) (“Among political scientists, not only is it 
uncontroversial to say that judges seek to etch their political values into law—it would be near 
heresy to suggest otherwise.”). 
  14.  See, e.g., Rachlinski et al., supra note 12, at 2055. 
  15.  See id. 
  16.  Id. 
  17.  See id. at 2055–56. Interestingly, two of the authors reporting these studies have stated 
elsewhere that they “accept the conclusion that judges are political actors whose beliefs 
influence their judgment.” Jeffrey J. Rachlinski & Andrew J. Wistrich, Judging the Judiciary by 
the Numbers: Empirical Research on Judges, 13 ANN. REV. LAW SOC. SCI. 1, 5 (2017). 
  18.  See  Dan  M.  Kahan  et  al.,  “Ideology”  or  “Situation  Sense”?  An  Experimental 
Investigation of Motivated Reasoning and Professional Judgment, 164 U. PA. L. REV. 349, 410–
12 (2016). 
  19.  See, e.g., Rachlinski et al., supra note 12, at 2051. 2019]  JUDICIAL IMPARTIALITY IN AN EMPIRICAL ERA  133 
 
experiments of over 2,200 judges (mostly from trial courts) conducted 
over nearly twenty years reveal that “political attitudes have exhibited a 
weak  effect  on  judicial  decision-making.”20  Significantly,  the  fact 
patterns  in  the  studies—which  involve  a  wide  range  of  subjects, 
including bankruptcy, criminal law, and certain civil cases—are salient 
in  that  they  implicate  politics  in  meaningful  ways.21  In  another 
experimental study of actual judges, a set of leading researchers focused 
on  the  effects  of  motivated  cultural  cognition  on  judicial  decision-
making, with results that were “strongly at odds with the conclusion that 
judges are influenced by political predispositions when they engage in 
legal reasoning.”22 The researchers attributed these findings to a type of 
“situation sense” produced by professional training and experience that 
helps to immunize judges from extraneous factors such as ideological 
predispositions when deciding cases.23 While it is premature for any 
firm conclusions from these studies, they do raise important questions 
and the need for further experimental study about the extent to which 
political bias affects judicial decision-making. 
The possibility that partisan affiliation matters less to judges than 
previously thought also opens the door to many other perspectives in 
assessing  judicial  behavior.  For  instance,  two  leading  scholars  have 
recently called upon the political  science  community to  recast  their 
efforts from the almost exclusive focus on judicial policy preferences 
toward  the  wider  web  of  motivations  that  have  been  identified  as 
relevant  to  how  judges  make  decisions.24  Organized  into  five 
overarching  categories,  these  motivations  include  job  satisfaction, 
external  satisfactions,  leisure,  salary/income,  and  promotion.25  Other 
relevant  considerations  may  include  the  personal  demographic 
characteristics of judges, which tend to matter in salient situations.26 
Then  there  is  the  growing  body  of  empirical  research  into  the 
unconscious, emotional, and intuitive factors that can influence and bias 
the judicial mind.27 Many studies, for instance, have documented the 
role  of  heuristics  and  cognitive  biases  in  judicial  decision-making, 
including  confirmation  bias,  hindsight  bias,  anchoring,  and  framing 
 
  20.  Id. at 2097. 
  21.  Id. at 2058. 
  22.  Kahan et al., supra note 18, at 354. 
  23.  Id. at 354–55. 
  24.  Epstein & Knight, supra note 13, 12–13. 
  25.  Id. at 19. 
  26.  Rachlinski & Wistrich, supra note 17, at 5 (“[D]emographic characteristics—e.g., 
religion,  gender,  race,  and  past  employment—all  influence  judges.  The  influence  of 
demographics follows a predictable pattern: Judges tend to decide cases that present issues 
salient to their demographic characteristics in ways that favor their demographic profile.”). 
  27.  See id. at 9–14. 134  FLORIDA LAW REVIEW FORUM  [Vol. 70 
 
effects, to name just a few.28 Together, these and other avenues of 
research will continue to help mold a realistic, three-dimensional view 
of judicial decision-making that, as one author has noted, will move past 
the dichotomous focus on whether policy preferences of judges do, or 
do not, predict case outcomes.29 
Professor Robertson’s recommendation that judicial impartiality is 
best protected by mechanisms other than weak recusal rules is well 
suited for this rich empirical environment. Even if the results of future 
research downgrades the importance of politics in judicial decision-
making, the growing partisan divide in the country suggests there will 
be no shortage of claims that judges appear to be, if not actually are, 
politicians in robes. Curbing judicial discretion through the types of 
remedies she identifies—such as brighter line rules and the emerging 
idea of some form of preemptory challenges for judges in appearance 
cases—can, as she notes, help “ameliorate the perception of political 
bias in the judiciary.”30 And the procedural safeguards that she cites, 
including the jury process and the accountability effects of appellate 
review, can be important to counteract those instances where judicial 
partisan bias rears its head.31 
To these I would add two more. First, as long as judges tie their 
social identity to the ideal of judicial impartiality, any allegations of 
bias—whether based on partisanship or otherwise—can be expected to 
produce the type of non-verifying feedback that Professor Robertson 
has described. The point here is not that bias will go undetected (it may 
or  may  not),  but  rather  that  judges,  like  the  rest  of  us,  are  poorly 
equipped to make accurate self-assessments of their own objectivity. As 
a  result,  and  as  Professor  Robertson  notes,  this  has  led  some 
commentators to argue that the judge, against whom bias is alleged, not 
be  the  sole  arbiter  of  whether  recusal  is  warranted.32  This  sensible 
approach to reducing the power of the bias blind spot, both on actual 
and  perceived  bias,  would  need  to  take  into  account  any  potential 
adverse effects, including risks to collegiality between members of the 
bench who might be called upon to render judgments about each other’s 
impartiality.33 Second, if it turns out, as preliminary research suggests,34 
that judges are less influenced by partisanship than has been generally 
 
  28.  See id. at 18–19, 23, 26. 
  29.  See Charles Gardner Geyh, Can the Rule of Law Survive Judicial Politics?, 97 
CORNELL L. REV. 191, 211–14 (2012). 
  30.  Robertson, supra note 4, at 772. 
  31.  Id. at 772–73. For studies discussing the role of appellate review as an accountability 
mechanism for judicial decision-making, see Rachlinski & Wistrich, supra note 17, at 9–11. 
  32.  Robertson, supra note 4, at 765 n.167. 
  33.  For further discussion of such options, see Reshaping Recusal, supra note 1, at 849–
52. 
  34.  See supra notes 16–19 and accompanying text. 2019]  JUDICIAL IMPARTIALITY IN AN EMPIRICAL ERA  135 
 
believed, then educating the public about that result should be a top 
priority.35 Indeed, it may be that one of the biggest threats caused by 
public  perceptions  of  judicial  partisan  bias  is  the  faulty  empirical 
premise upon which it rests. 
 
  35.  I do not suggest this task will be easy, as it must overcome what has been called the 
“Neutrality Communication Problem,” namely identifying ways to overcome the public’s 
perception of judicial partiality in cases where cultural anxiety is expected to be significant. See 
Kahan et al., supra note 18, at 419–22. 