– DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
 
What is Left of User Rights? – Algorithmic 
Copyright Enforcement and Free Speech in 
the Light of the Article 17 Regime 
 
Sebastian Schwemer* and Jens Schovsbo† 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Article 17 of the Directive on copyright and related rights in the Digital Single 
Market (the DSM Directive) has strengthened the protection of copyright holders. 
Moving forward, online content-sharing providers will be responsible for copyright 
infringement unless the use of works on their platforms is authorized or if they have 
made ‘best efforts’ to obtain an authorization and prevent the availability of unli-
censed works. At the same time, the Directive has made it clear that users of 
protected works shall be able to rely on the existing limitations and exceptions 
regarding quotation, criticism and review and caricature, parody or pastiche. The 
Directive even casts these limitations and exceptions as user rights. This paper 
points out that copyright’s limitations and exceptions have traditionally consti-
tuted a corner stone in the internal balancing of the interests of users against rights 
holders and with a clear view of safeguarding the interests of free expression and 
information protected by the Charter. Given the overall purpose of the DSM Di-
rective in strengthening the position of rights holders, there is a dire risk that the 
benefits of the limitations and exceptions evaporate in the attempts of platform 
operators to escape liability by use of algorithmic enforcement. The article uses the 
recent decisions of the CJEU in Pelham, Funke Medien and Spiegel Online to draw 
attention to the central importance of the limitations and exception as the primary 
channel for fundamental rights analyses in copyright. It is finally pointed out how 
the DSM Directive –despite of its on-the-paper recognition of users’ rights– is most 
likely going to lead to a devaluation of those same rights. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Industrial PostDoc, Ph.D., Centre for Information and Innovation Law (CIIR), University of Copenhagen. 
† Professor, LL.D., Ph.D., Centre for Information and Innovation Law (CIIR), University of Copenhagen. 
  1 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Article 17 of the Directive on copyright and related rights in the Digital Single Market1 (here-
inafter ‘DSM Directive’) aims to strengthen the position of copyright holders vis-à-vis platform 
to fill an alleged value gap which has been argued to have arisen because of legal uncertainty 
and inefficient enforcement mechanisms. Seen from the perspective of fundamental rights, such 
an endeavour is in itself unproblematic or even laudatory: After all, the Charter of Fundamen-
tal Rights of the European Union’s2 (hereinafter ‘Charter’) Article 17(2) recognizes copyright 
as a fundamental right itself and mechanisms which ensure that copyright functions as antici-
pated by the legislator should be hailed as a natural extension of the acceptance of the system 
in itself.  
 
However, it is important to bear in mind that there is an intimate relationship between sub-
stantive law and enforcement mechanisms, or to phrase it more succinctly: between law as it 
appears in the books and law in action. As seen from such a perspective, legal analyses should 
include i.a. the institutional setting of the substantive law. This setting may either be ‘too 
weak’ in the sense that rights holders are not actually able to enforce their rights against users 
to the extent that the legislator has anticipated. Also, it may be ‘too strong’ in the sense that 
rights holders are able to overextend protection to claim more than their share e.g. by limiting 
user rights. Both positions – the former of ‘under enforcement’ and the latter of ‘over enforce-
ment’ – are problematic.  
 
It is our starting point for the following, that whereas Article 17 may be seen as a response to 
a problem of ‘under enforcement’, the role which online sharing platforms are supposed to play 
implies a risk of ‘over enforcement’.3 These risks have been pointed out many times in the long 
and at times tumultuous process which led to the adoption of Article 17 and the debate is far 
from over. By way of example, just a week after the Directive had been published in the Official 
Journal, Poland brought an action under Article 263 TFEU against Article 17 before the Court 
of Justice seeking partial annulment.4 Specifically, the action is directed against the Article’s 
provision regarding best efforts to ensure the unavailability unlicensed works as well as the 
prevention of re-uploads after takedowns respectively.5 The action is based on the Republic’s 
view that the provision infringes the freedom of expression and the freedom of information 
guaranteed in Article 11 of the Charter.6 In a similar vein, in March 2019, the UN Special 
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, 
David Kaye, criticized the provision for its incompatibility with human rights, noting that 
‘[m]isplaced confidence in filtering technologies to make nuanced distinctions between copyright 
 
1 Directive (EU) 2019/790 on copyright and related rights in the Digital Single Market [2019] OJ L 130, pp. 92–
125.  
2 Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union [2012] OJ C 364, pp. 1–22. 
3 See in this context e.g. CJEU in C-360/10, Belgische Vereniging van Auteurs, Componisten en Uitgevers CVBA 
(Sabam) v Netlog, ECLI:EU:C:2012:85, para. 50, that measures ‘could potentially undermine freedom of infor-
mation, since that system might not distinguish adequately between unlawful content and lawful content.’ 
4 Case C-401/19, Republic of Poland v European Parliament and Council of the European Union (2019/C 
270/24), OJ C 270, p. 22. The Polish action is also to be seen against the national political background. The Di-
rective’s Article 17 has been a prominent topic in the general public and during national elections. 
5 Art. 17 (4)(b) and Art. 17 (4)(c), in fine. 
6 Interestingly, the Republic chose not to invoke the right to conduct business. 
  2 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
violations and legitimate uses of protected material would escalate the risk of error and cen-
sorship’.7 Also, the German Minister of Justice, Katharina Barley, had expressed concerned 
about the compatibility of Article 17 with fundamental rights, but had given in to vote in 
favour. Germany, in its extensive statement accompanying its Council vote, noted that ‘[t]he 
aim must be to make the “uploadfilter” instrument largely superfluous.’8 Going even further, 
this is substantiated by the Council vote, where The Netherlands, Luxembourg, Poland, Italy 
and Finland voted against the Directive due to concerns that ‘the final text of the Directive 
fails to deliver adequately on the above-mentioned aims’ and ‘[m]ost notably we regret that 
the Directive does not strike the right balance between the protection of right holders and the 
interests of EU citizens and companies.’9 The scholarly community, too, has since early in the 
legislative process raised fundamental rights concerns in relation to the European Commission’s 
proposal from September 2016 as well as the final text from May 2019.10 Senftleben, for exam-
ple, criticizes the ‘remarkable transformation of the function of copyright law … [which] degen-
erates into a censorship and filtering instrument.’11  
 
In this contribution, we join the conversation. Article 17 addresses the triangular relation be-
tween rights holders, online content-sharing service providers (OCSSPs) and users. Much of 
the criticism is related to the Article’s interface with the E-Commerce Directive’s12 prohibition 
of general monitoring obligations13 and fundamental rights. Here, we are not addressing the –
principal– upstream question of compatibility of potential content filtering with fundamental 
rights. Instead, we focus on the relation between OCSSPs and the issues of freedom of expres-
sion, freedom of information and freedom of arts. More specifically, we focus on the role of 
copyright’s limitations and exceptions in the scheme set up by Article 17. These provisions, 
which stem from the international copyright conventions where they are anchored in the three-
 
7 UNHR, EU must align copyright reform with international human rights standards, says expert (11 March 
2019), https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=24298&LangID=E. 
8 Council of the European Union, Statement by Germany, (5 April 2019), point 8, https://data.consilium.eu-
ropa.eu/doc/document/ST-7986-2019-ADD-1/en/pdf. 
9 Council of the European Union, Joint statement by the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Poland, Italy and Finland, (5 
April 2019), https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-7986-2019-ADD-1/en/pdf. 
10 See e.g. Sophie Stalla-Bourdillon et.al., Open Letter to the European Commission - On the Importance of Pre-
serving the Consistency and Integrity of the EU Acquis Relating to Content Monitoring within the Information 
Society (September 30, 2016), https://ssrn.com/abstract=2850483; Martin Senftleben et al., The Recommendation 
on Measures to Safeguard Fundamental Rights and the Open Internet in the Framework of the EU Copyright Re-
form, 40 E.I.P.R. 3 (2018), pp. 149–163; Christina Angelopoulos, On Online Platforms and the Commission's New 
Proposal for a Directive on Copyright in the Digital Single Market, (January 2017), https://ssrn.com/ab-
stract=2947800; João Quintais et al., Safeguarding User Freedoms in Implementing Article 17 of the Copyright in 
the Digital Single Market Directive: Recommendations From European Academics, (November 11, 2019), 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3484968. 
11 Martin Senftleben, Bermuda Triangle – Licensing, Filtering and Privileging User-Generated Content Under the 
New Directive on Copyright in the Digital Single Market, (April 4, 2019), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3367219, p. 
5. 
12 Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of 
information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market [2000] OJ L 178, pp. 1–16 
(hereinafter the ‘E-Commerce Directive’ or ‘ECD’). 
13 Art. 15 ECD. 
  3 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
step-test, have traditionally constituted a centrepiece of copyright’s internal safeguards of us-
ers’ interests. In the following we revisit the limitations and exceptions14 in the light of Article 
17, which has at the same time instituted a regime of algorithmic enforcement and bolstered 
the system of limitations and exceptions by recasting some of them as user rights and imposing 
procedural obligations on OCSSPs to safeguard those rights.  
 
 
2.  THE REGIME OF ARTICLE 17 
 
2.1.  Introduction 
The background for Article 17 DSM Directive on the ‘Use of protected content by online 
content-sharing service providers’ is a peculiar one: the intermediary liability exemption rules 
of the E-Commerce Directive have allegedly led to a failure in the copyright market:15 based 
on the notice-and-takedown regime, online content sharing platforms have been argued to have 
enjoyed an unfair advantage when negotiating (music) licensing deals with rights holders.16 In 
a nutshell, this very specific issue of a potential ‘value gap’ in relation to the use of musical 
works on platforms like Youtube17, is the context of Article 17.  
 
According to Article 17(1) DSM Directive, Member States shall provide that an OCSSP per-
forms an act of communication to the public or an act of making available to the public for 
the purposes of this Directive when it gives the public access to copyright-protected works or 
other protected subject matter uploaded by its users.18 In other words, affected services are 
directly liable for copyright infringements by user uploads. In these situations, the horizontal 
liability exemption rules are thrown overboard.19 Thus, affected platforms can no longer invoke 
Article 14 E-Commerce Directive for the copyright-relevant acts of their users and licensing 
 
14 The DSM Directive introduces several new limitations and exceptions. Given our focus on the specific Art. 17-
context, these are outside the scope of our contribution. Also, Article 25 DSM Directive on the relationship with 
exceptions and limitations provided for in other directives is outside the scope.  
15 It is notable that the question whether Youtube can be considered ‘passive’ and thus falls under the liability 
exemption rules of Art. 14 ECD, has only recently been subject to a reference to the CJEU, see case C-682/18,  
Youtube and case C-500/19, Puls 4 TV. Related question had previously been answered by the Court in Joined 
Cases C-236/08 to C-238/08, Google AdWords, ECLI:EU:C2010:159 at para. 107, and Case C-324/09 (eBay) 
ECLI:EU:C:2011:474, para. 113. 
16 See e.g. Stan Liebowitz, Economic Analysis of Safe Harbor Provisions (prepared for CISAC, February 27, 2018). 
See also the problem definition in the Commission’s Impact Assessment: ‘Rightholders have no or limited control 
over the use and the remuneration for the use of their content by services storing and giving access to large 
amounts of protected content uploaded by their users’, European Commission, Commission Staff Working Docu-
ment, Impact Assessment on the modernisation of EU copyright rules, Brussels, 14.9.2016 SWD (2016) 301 final, 
PART 1/3, p. 137 and p. 143. 
17 Effectively, the scope of Art. 17 is broader, though: ‘online-content sharing service providers’ (OCSSPs) defined 
in Art. 2 nr. 6 DSM Directive, likely also encompasses other platforms like Facebook, Slideshare (sharing of 
presentations), Pinterest (image sharing), Snapchat, Instagram, erotic streaming sites like Pornhub etc. 
18 The unclarity of what constitutes a communication to the public has also been identified as obstacle by Com-
mission in European Commission, Towards a modern, more European copyright framework, COM(2015) 626 final, 
p. 9. On case law on communication to the public more broadly, see João Pedro Quintais, Untangling the hyper-
linking web: In search of the online right of communication to the public, 21 J. World Intell. Prop. 5-6 (2018), pp. 
385–420. 
19 Art. 17(3) DSM Directive.  
  4 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
becomes the legislative default option for the use of copyright-protected works in these situa-
tions, too.20 
 
Instead of the traditional Article 14 E-Commerce Directive liability exemption regime for ‘host-
ing’21, Article 17(4) stipulates the cumulative conditions under which an OCSSP is not liable 
for content uploaded by its users.22 Firstly, Article 17(4)( a) stipulates that affected services 
need to demonstrate their best effort to obtain licenses for user-uploaded content. This is the 
main trajectory foreseen by the Directive to achieve its goals.23 Secondly, according to Article 
17(4)(b) DSM, affected services need also to have ‘made, in accordance with high industry 
standards of professional diligence, best efforts to ensure the unavailability of specific works 
and other subject matter for which the rightholders have provided the service providers with 
the relevant and necessary information’. Thirdly, in any event, affected services need to have 
‘acted expeditiously, upon receiving a sufficiently substantiated notice from the rightholders, 
to disable access to, or to remove from their websites, the notified works or other subject 
matter, and made best efforts to prevent their future uploads in accordance with point (b)’ 
according to Article 17(4)(c).24 
 
In this way it follows from Article 17 that it is the duty of OCSSPs to ‘filter’ unlicensed works 
and prevent their upload or re-upload. Compared to earlier versions in the legislative process, 
where technical means were directly mentioned, the final version of the Directive refrains from 
prescribing that the mechanism is implemented by using algorithmic solutions. Thus, there 
exists in fact no ex lege obligation for the affected parties to rely on algorithms. However, given 
the practical infeasibility of handling the large number of user uploads, the difficulty to identify 
previously blocked content without technical means, and the reference to ‘high industry stand-
ards’25, the use of such algorithmic solutions is likely, akin to a de facto imposition. 
 
 
20 On licensing, see Martin Husovec & João Quintais, How to License Article 17? Exploring the Implementation 
Options for the New EU Rules on Content-Sharing Platforms, IViR Working Paper (1 October 2019), 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3463011. 
21 Art. 14(1) E-Commerce Directive on hosting reads: ‘Where an information society service is provided that con-
sists of the storage of information provided by a recipient of the service, Member States shall ensure that the ser-
vice provider is not liable for the information stored at the request of a recipient of the service, on condition that:  
(a) the provider does not have actual knowledge of illegal activity or information and, as regards claims for dam-
ages, is not aware of facts or circumstances from which the illegal activity or information is apparent; or  
(b) the provider, upon obtaining such knowledge or awareness, acts expeditiously to remove or to disable access to 
the information.’ 
22 On the one hand, Art. 17 (4) DSM Directive is somewhat awkward in the context of copyright, systematically 
it fits with much better within the E-Commerce Directive, where intermediary liability exceptions are horizontally 
addressed and to which Art. 17 is represents a sector-specific carve-out. On the other hand, Art. 17 (1) DSM Di-
rective introduces a substantive right and Art. 17 (2) DSM Directive a limitation of that right.  
23 I.e. to ‘foster the development of the licensing market between rightholders and ... .’, see Recital 61 DSM Di-
rective. See also Statement by Germany, supra note 8, para. 10, ‘in the European compromise, licensing is the 
method chosen to achieve… .’ 
24 Art. 17(5) specifies that ‘best efforts’ have to be ‘proportionate’, meaning that the concept should take into ac-
count the type and size of the service, the type of content, and the costs of rights clearance given the existing li-
censing options on the market.  
25 Youtube, for example, has had an algorithmic content regulation system, ‘ContentID’, in place since 2007. For 
an overview on content identification technologies, see Annex 12 in European Commission, Commission Staff 
Working Document, Impact Assessment on the modernisation of EU copyright rules, Brussels, 14.9.2016 SWD 
(2016) 301 final, PART 3/3, pp. 164–174. 
  5 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
Outside this novel liability exemption scheme in Article 17(4) DSM Directive, the sharing of 
user uploads is given Article 17(1) DSM Directive thus only permissible if a) permission has 
been granted or b) the use is covered by a specific limitation or exception.  
 
2.2.  Article 17’s fundamental rights interface and limitations and exceptions 
The protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) is enshrined in Article 17(2) of the Charter 
where after ‘Intellectual property shall be protected [as property]’. As it will be explained below 
on the ‘constitutionalisation’ of EU IPR, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) 
has established a reading where after IPRs are neither inviolable nor offer ‘absolute protec-
tion’.26 Instead courts should balance the (property) rights of rights holders against the pro-
tection of other fundamental rights such as the protection of personal data and of private life 
(EU Charter Articles 7 and 8) and the freedom of expression and information (Charter Article 
11).  
 
Compared to earlier IP-related secondary EU legislation such as the InfoSoc Directive, funda-
mental rights are referenced explicitly in the DSM Directive.27 In recital 84, for example, the 
DSM Directive stipulates broadly: 
‘This Directive respects the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in par-
ticular by the Charter. Accordingly, this Directive should be interpreted and applied in ac-
cordance with those rights and principles.’28  
In addition to the general acknowledgment of fundamental rights, the Directive comes with 
several specific references related to the Article 17-mechanism, notably in recital 70 (emphasis 
added): 
‘The steps taken by online content-sharing service providers in cooperation with rightholders 
should be without prejudice to the application of exceptions or limitations to copyright, in-
cluding, in particular, those which guarantee the freedom of expression of users. Users should 
be allowed to upload and make available content generated by users for the specific purposes 
of quotation, criticism, review, caricature, parody or pastiche. That is particularly important 
for the purposes of striking a balance between the fundamental rights laid down in the Charter 
of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’), in particular the freedom of 
expression and the freedom of the arts, and the right to property, including intellectual prop-
erty. Those exceptions and limitations should, therefore, be made mandatory in order to 
ensure that users receive uniform protection across the Union. It is important to ensure that 
 
26 See Case C-70/10, Scarlet Extended SA v Société belge des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs SCRL (SABAM), 
ECLI:EU:C:2011:771, para. 43. See also the EU Charter Art. 17(1) in fine which makes it clear that the ‘use of 
property may be regulated by law in so far as is necessary for the general Interest protection’. This also applies to 
IPR. 
27 Since the Lisbon Treaty, also other recent secondary legislation unrelated to IP, acknowledges fundamental 
rights and more specifically the freedom of expression, see e.g. recitals 16 and 48 of Directive 2010/13/EU on the 
coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States con-
cerning the provision of audiovisual media services [2010] OJ L 95, pp. 1–24 (Audiovisual Media Services Di-
rective) and recital 153 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the pro-
cessing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data 
Protection Regulation) [2016] OJ L 119, pp. 1–88. 
28 And in the same wording already in the Commission’s proposal from September 2016, see European Commis-
sion, Proposal for a Directive on copyright in the Digital Single Market, COM/2016/0593 final - 2016/0280 
(COD), (Brussels, 14.9.2016), recital 45. 
  6 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
online content-sharing service providers operate an effective complaint and redress mechanism 
to support use for such specific purposes.’ 
Compared to the Commission’s Proposal from September 2016, this constitutes a significant 
strengthening of user rights. In its Explanatory Memorandum, the Commission commented on 
the improved bargaining situation of rightsholders and noted that ‘the Directive has a limited 
impact on the freedom to conduct a business and on the freedom of expression and information, 
as recognised respectively by Articles 16 and 11 of the Charter, due to the mitigation measures 
put in place and a balanced approach to the obligations set on the relevant stakeholders.’29 
 
The most distinct feature relates to this latter point, namely the balancing within Article 17 
(7) and (9), which has only been introduced relatively late in the legislative process. As it has 
already been explained above, under the DSM Directive, sharing of user uploads is only per-
missible if a) permission has been granted or b) if the use is covered by a specific limitation or 
exception. Additionally, Article 17 (7) stipulates: 
‘The cooperation between online content-sharing service providers and rightholders shall not 
result in the prevention of the availability of works or other subject matter uploaded by users, 
which do not infringe copyright and related rights, including where such works or other subject 
matter are covered by an exception or limitation. 
Member States shall ensure that users in each Member State are able to rely on any of the 
following existing exceptions or limitations when uploading and making available content 
generated by users on online content-sharing services: 
quotation, criticism, review; 
use for the purpose of caricature, parody or pastiche.’ 
As it can be seen (cf. the word ‘shall’), the exceptions or limitations regarding quotation, 
criticism, review and use for the purpose of caricature, parody or pastiche, which we know from 
the InfoSoc Directive, are mandatory in the sense that Member States shall ensure that users 
are able to rely on them.30 Whereas it has been argued previously in the literature by Geiger 
that the CJEU had already in earlier decisions provided for (substantive) ‘users right’s’31, it is 
quite remarkable that recital 70 makes the point so clear.32 
 
29 Ibid., Explanatory Memorandum, p. 9. See also European Commission, supra note 16, pp. 154–155, noting that 
‘[t]he freedom of expression and information may be affected negatively in cases where the services limit user up-
loaded content in an unjustified manner (for example when an exception or a limitation to copyright applies or 
the content is in public domain) or when the technologies fail to identify the content correctly.’ 
30 It has been suggested that the concepts (quotation: Art. 5(3)(d) InfoSoc Directive; caricature, parody or pas-
tiche: Art. 5(3)(k) InfoSoc Directive) in Art. 17(7) should be considered autonomous EU concepts which are to be 
interpreted consistently across the directives and in line with CJEU case law, see João Quintais et al., supra note 
10. 
31 Christophe Geiger and Elena Izyumenko, The Constitutionalization of Intellectual Property Law in the EU and 
the Funke Medien, Pelham and Spiegel Online Decisions of the CJEU: Progress, But Still Some Way to Go!, Cen-
tre for International Intellectual Property Studies (CEIPI) Research Paper No. 2019-09, (21 October 2019), p. 10 
ff.; Senftleben, supra note 11, p. 8, more critically, notes that ‘the scope of this obligation and the consequences of 
insufficient support for relevant copyright limitations remain unclear. The expression “are able to rely on” need 
not be understood in the sense of a hard obligation to ban filter systems that are incapable of distinguishing be-
tween a permissible parody and an infringing copy.’ 
32 In relation to consumer rights, it has been noted that ‘consumers remained largely off copyright law’s radar 
screen’, see Bernt Hugenholtz & Natali Helberger, No Place Like Home for Making a Copy: Private Copying in 
European Copyright Law and Consumer Law, 22 Berkeley Technology Law Journal 1061 (2007), p. 1077. In 2014, 
  7 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
 
Apart from strengthening the specific limitations and exceptions by casting them as user rights, 
Article 17 also contains procedural safeguards of these rights, which we explore in depth below. 
OCSSP’s are thus obliged to support users when they engage in quotation etc., see recital 70. 
Additionally, platforms are required to inform users in their terms and conditions of the user’s 
right to use works under exceptions or limitations.33 
 
2.3.  The role of limitations and exceptions in the light of the case law of the CJEU 
In order to understand the background to the Directive we now turn to the case law of the 
CJEU on the interface between copyright and fundamental rights and the ‘constitutionalisa-
tion’34 of EU IPR. The literature on this topic is abundant and here we focus just on the most 
recent developments (namely Pelham, Funke Medien and Spiegel Online). Suffice therefore to 
note that following the decisions from the CJEU in Promusicae35, Scarlet Extended,36 UPC 
Telekabel37 and Deckmyn38, the Court had established a balancing of interests as the central 
mechanisms for the ‘constitutionalisation’ of IPR.39 Unlike in a traditional IPR analysis, the 
constitutional balancing uses the –as seen form a copyright perspective– external norms and 
values of fundamental rights’ norms to interpret copyright law. As seen in this perspective, the 
weight on the rights holder’s side of the scale is provided by the right to property. On the other 
side of the scale, one might find the rights to freedom of expression and information. The 
nature of the interests and their weights cannot, however, be gauged once and for all but must 
be determined through a case-by-case analysis. The test is based on a principle of neutrality 
(no ‘absolute protection of IPR’) and it’s open-endedness lies at the very heart of the test and 
enables court to draw on arguments found outside of the IPR framework and well-established 
basic assumptions (the ‘author-centeredness of copyright’).40 These position now have to be re-
evaluated in the light of the most recent developments in the case law from the CJEU.  
 
the copyright unit within the European Commission was moved from its traditional proximity to other property 
rights in DG MARKT to the DG CONNECT, meaning a closer proximity to units working on Internet- and inter-
nal market related aspects, see Sebastian Felix Schwemer, Licensing and Access to Content in the European Un-
ion, (Cambridge University Press 2019), pp. 15–16.  
33 Art. 17(9) para. 4 DSM Directive. 
34 See on the term ‘constitutionalisation’ the foundational paper Christophe Geiger, ‘Constitutionalising’ Intellec-
tual Property Law? The Influence of Fundamental Rights on Intellectual Property in the European Union, Inter-
national Review of Intellectual Property and Competition Law (2006) 37(4), pp. 371–406. 
35 Case C-275/06, Productores de Música de España (Promusicae) v Telefónica de España SAU, 
ECLI:EU:C:2008:54.  
36 Supra, note 26. 
37 Case C-314/12, UPC Telekabel Wien GmbH v Constantin Film Verleih GmbH and Wega Filmproduk-
tionsgesellschaft mbH, ECLI:EU:C:2014:192. 
38 Case C-201/13, Johan Deckmyn and Vrijheidsfonds VZW v Helena Vandersteen and Others, 
ECLI:EU:C:2014:2132.  
39 On the ‘fair balance’ doctrine, see e.g. Christina Angelopoulos & Stijn Smet, Notice-and-fair-balance: how to 
reach a compromise between fundamental rights in European intermediary liability, Journal of Media Law, 8:2 
(2016), pp. 266 ff. 
40 Based on Jens Schovsbo, "Mark My Words"—Trademarks and Fundamental Rights in the EU, 8 U.C. Irvine L. 
Rev. 555 (2018). 
  8 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
 
2.3.1.  Pelham41, Funke Medien42 and Spiegel Online43 
The three judgments were handed down on the same day (29 July 2019) by the Great Chamber 
and all were based on Opinions from Advocate General (AG) M. Szpunar. The facts of the 
‘trinity’ of cases are quite diverse: Pelham (or Metall auf Metall case) concerned the sampling 
of a piece of music composed by the German band ‘Kraftwerk’44; Funke Medien dealt with the 
right to use allegedly copyright protected ‘parliament briefings’ (‘the Afghanistan papers’); and 
Spiegel Online with hyperlinking to copyright protected material as part of the reporting by a 
media outlet. However, the answers in all cases had to be found in the intersection between 
national and EU copyright and fundamental rights law.  
 
As seen from the perspective of this contribution, the central aspect of the judgments was the 
way the CJEU limited the freedom of national courts to rely on the Charter to go ‘outside’ of 
the catalogue of exceptions established by the InfoSoc Directive. By way of example in Funke 
Medien, the Court stated that the freedom of information and freedom of the press, enshrined 
in Article 11 of the Charter, ‘are not capable of justifying, beyond the exceptions or limitations 
provided for in Article 5(2) and (3) of [the InfoSoc Directive], a derogation from the author’s 
exclusive rights of reproduction and of communication to the public, referred to in Article 2(a) 
and Article 3(1) of that directive respectively.’ In other words: The fair balancing between 
creators’ interests and users’ interests, which lies at the core of the ‘constitutionalisation’, has 
been internalized via the limitations and exceptions. It is in interpreting those provisions that 
courts may draw on various legal sources e.g. fundamental rights. In this way, one can describe 
the decision as leaving the door open to the constitutionalisation but also making clear that 
the constitutional door only gives way to a room which has been built according to the blue-
print found in the InfoSoc Directive.  
 
When it comes to the interpretation of the limitations and exceptions themselves, the freedom 
of Member States depends on the wording of the individual provisions. Even if some discretion 
is left to national courts, however, the CJEU in Funke Medien made it clear that such freedom 
would often be (even at some points ‘highly) ‘circumscribed’ in several regards (paras. 45 ff.) 
e.g. by ‘the general principles of EU law, which include the principle of proportionality, from 
which it follows that measures which the Member States may adopt must be appropriate for 
attaining their objective and must not go beyond what is necessary to achieve it’ (para. 49). 
Also Member States cannot rely on any discretion enjoyed by them according to a directive so 
as to ‘compromise the objectives of that directive’ (para. 50). At the same time, however, 
Member States must make sure that the effectiveness of the exceptions and limitations is safe-
guarded and a fair balance of rights and interests between the different categories of rights 
holders, as well as between the different categories of rightholders and users of protected subject 
matter, is secured (para. 51). Furthermore, a fair balance must to be struck between the various 
 
41 Case C-476/17, Pelham GmbH and Others v Ralf Hütter and Florian Schneider-Esleben, ECLI:EU:C:2019:624. 
42 Case C-469/17, Funke Medien NRW GmbH v Bundesrepublik Deutschland, ECLI:EU:C:2019:623. 
43 Case C-516/17, Spiegel Online GmbH v Volker Beck, ECLI:EU:C:2019:625. 
44 The original Kraftwerk song can be accessed here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JlatOPOMlyA. The 
sampling song “Nur mit Dir” here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_KQLxP-UX_Y. In the national German 
Metall auf Metall saga and music sampling see also Bernd Justin Jütte and Henrike Maier, A human right to 
sample–will the CJEU dance to the BGH-beat?, Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice (2017), pp. 784–
796. 
  9 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
fundamental rights protected by the European Union legal order (para. 53). Importantly even 
the ‘three-step-test’ in InfoSoc Directive Article 5(5) –which here serves to limit the effect of 
the limitations– is seen as constituting an element of the overall fair balancing (para. 61).  
 
The effectiveness of limitations and exceptions depends not just on their exact wording but 
also on the willingness of national courts to consider the conditions for the application to be 
fulfilled. As seen from a traditional and dogmatic view, Kur has pointed out that there is a 
‘normative drag’ from IPR’s inner structure and hierarchy of norms and interests that, so to 
speak, compels a narrow interpretation of limitations and limitations.45 Such an interpretation 
of course limits the impact of the limitations and exceptions and would as seen from a norma-
tive perspective furthermore stress the secondary importance of users’ interests vis-à-vis those 
of rights holders. It has been argued that as seen from a ‘constitutional’ (and thus ‘neutral’) 
starting point one would need to give up on any presupposed modality for the interpretation 
of limitations and exceptions: If users’ interests in access are as highly ranking as rights holders’ 
interests in protection, then the baseline for establishing which is the ‘main rule‘ – ‘freedom of 
information’ or ‘exclusivity’ – has evaporated and one is left with empty scales and a balancing 
of interests.46 In such a situation, one cannot a priori indicate whether to interpret the norm 
favouring users or authors ‘narrowly’ (or ‘broadly’).47  
 
The CJEU has on several occasions made it clear that limitations and exceptions should be 
interpreted narrowly based on what we called a ‘traditional and dogmatic’ argumentation 
above.48 The Court revisited the issue in Funke Medien where it was asked to consider whether 
(as the Court decided to frame the question) a national court may under certain circumstances 
‘depart from a restrictive interpretation of [an exception] in favour of an interpretation which 
takes full account of the need to respect freedom of expression and freedom of information, 
enshrined in Article 11 of the Charter’ (para. 65). In answering that question, the Court first 
remarks that ‘is certainly the case, as the referring court notes, that any derogation from a 
general rule must, in principle, be interpreted strictly’ (para. 89). This reconfirms the starting 
point of strict interpretation of limitations and exceptions. It is only against this backdrop that 
 
45 See in particular Annette Kur, Limitations and exceptions under the three-step test – how much room to walk 
the middle ground?, pp. 208–261 in: Annette Kur and Marianne Levin, Intellectual Property Rights in a Fair 
World Trade System – Proposals for Reform of TRIPS, (Edward Elgar 2011), pp. 212 ff. 
46 See Christophe Geiger et al., Limitations and Exceptions as Key Elements of the Legal Framework for Copy-
right in the European Union – Opinion on the Judgment of the CJEU in Case C-201/13 Deckmyn, International 
Review of Intellectual Property and Competition Law (2015) 46(3), 93–101, point 23-27; Jonathan Griffiths, Tak-
ing power tools to the acquis – the Court of Justice, the Charter of Fundamental Rights and European Union cop-
yright law, pp. 144–174 in Christophe Geiger, Craig Allen Nard and Xavier Seuba, Intellectual property and the 
Judiciary (Edward Elgar, 2018), and Jens Schovsbo, Constitutional Foundations and Constitutionalization of IP 
Law - A Tale of Different Stories?, [2015] ZGE/IPJ 7 383, p. 391. 
47 This view is even supported by the case law of the European Court of Human Rights in Ashby Donald v. 
France App No. 36796/08 (ECtHR 2013), which according to Thom Snijders and Stijn van Deusen, The Road 
Not Taken – the CJEU Sheds Light on the Role of Fundamental Rights in the European Copyright Framework – 
a Case Note on the Pelham, Spiegel Online and Funke Medien Decisions, IIC (2019) 50, pp. 1176–1190, p. 1185 
‘frames copyright enforcement measure in general as derogations from the freedom of information and freedom of 
expression’ and as such open to external scrutiny via Art. 10 ECHR.  
48 E.g. C-527/15, Stichting Brein v Jack Frederik Wullems, ECLI:EU:C:2017:300, paras. 62 f. and C-265/16, 
VCAST Limited v RTI SpA, ECLI:EU:C:2017:913, paras. 31 f. See also C-435/12, ACI Adam BV and Others v 
Stichting de Thuiskopie and Stichting Onderhandelingen Thuiskopie vergoeding, ECLI:EU:C:2014:254, paras. 20 
ff.  
  10 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
the Court states that even the limitations and exceptions could be said to ‘confer rights on the 
users of works or of other subject matter’ (para. 70). Also those rights, however, should be 
balanced in a fair manner against ‘the rights and interests of rights holders, which must them-
selves be given a broad interpretation’ (ibid.). Having thus established narrowness as the prin-
ciple of interpretation for limitations and exceptions and broadness as the principle for the 
rights and interests of rights holders, the Court concludes that the interpretation of the excep-
tions and limitations involved in the case must allow ‘their effectiveness to be to safeguarded 
and their purpose to be observed’ in order ‘to ensure observance of fundamental freedoms’ 
(para. 71).  
 
In this way the Court would seem to assume the traditional hierarchal view on the interests of 
rights holders at the top and users’ interest below. Thus, even though the Court apparently 
accepts that sometimes conflicts between IPR and fundamental rights may occur, one should 
–when within the copyright system– assume that priority has been given to the exclusionary 
powers of rights holders at the immediate expense of users. This is the baseline, and that 
position, which constitutes copyright’s pièce de résistance, cannot be challenged on the basis 
of the Charter.49 
 
Arguably these remarks, which seem to diminish the role and function of the limitations and 
exceptions and to subscribe to the traditional and dogmatic perception of copyright as being a 
system ‘for the protection of rights holders’, are not easy to align with the statements that the 
limitations and exceptions aim at securing an overall fair balance (above) and with the con-
ceptualization of limitations and exceptions as user rights.50 
 
2.3.2.  Summing up 
At the same time that the Court canonised the inclusion of fundamental rights to copyright’s 
internal analyses, it also gave a kiss of death to any attempts to rely on fundamental rights 
analyses to provide for an external system of checks and balances to be used to e.g. expand or 
substitute the predefined system of copyright protection or to deviate from the settled practice 
of a narrow interpretation of limitations and exceptions.  
 
In this way, and as pointed out by Geiger and Izyumenko, the judgments emphasize the central 
function of limitations and exceptions to the overall balancing of fundamental rights concerns 
into the copyright analyses.51 The judgements primarily achieves this in two ways: 
 
Firstly, the CJEU states that the limitations in Article 5 of the InfoSoc Directive ‘confer rights 
of the users of works or other subject matter’52: limitations and exceptions, in other words, 
constitute user rights. What the Court had hinted at in earlier decision is here being unfolded. 
 
49 On this central point the CJEU may be on collision course with the ECtHR, see ECtHR, 10 January 2013, 
Ashby Donald and Others v. France, CE:ECHR:2013:0110JUD003676908 and to this point Geiger & Izyumenko, 
supra note 31, p. 26. This might also be the view of AG Spuznar in Funke Medien, see point 40: ‘However, there 
may be exceptional cases where copyright, which, in other circumstances, could quite legitimately enjoy legal and 
judicial protection, must yield to an overriding interest relating to the implementation of a fundamental right or 
freedom.’  
50 Geiger & Izyumenko, supra note 31, pp. 20 f.  
51 Ibid., p. 6. 
52 Funke Medien, supra note 42, para. 70, and Spiegel Online, supra note 43, para. 54. 
  11 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
The decisions anchor the limitations and exceptions from the InfoSoc Directive rules on the 
use by the press (Article 5(3)(c)) and quotation for criticisms and review (Article 5(3)(d)) 
directly in the Charter. Arguably, Article 17 DSM Directive has already anticipated this de-
velopment by making it clear that the specific limitations concerning quotation, criticism, re-
view, caricature, parody or pastiche are mandatory (‘unwaiveable’), see above.  
 
Secondly, the importance of limitations and exceptions is underlined by the Court’s rejection 
of the use by national courts of fundamental rights as external balancing tools. The Court thus 
makes it clear that it is the Directive that in an exhaustive way indicates the pathway for 
finding a ‘fair balance between, on the one hand, the interest of the holders of copyright and 
related rights in the protection of their intellectual property rights and, on the other hand, the 
protection of the interests and fundamental rights of users of protected subject matter as well 
as of the public interest.’53 Therefore, the full lifting of the fundamental rights interests and 
concerns has to be done by the internal balancing tools i.e. limitations and exceptions.  
 
 
3.  PROCEDURAL SAFEGUARDS OF LIMITATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS 
Besides the copyright-internal balancing system of limitations and exceptions, Article 17 DSM 
Directive also foresees an institutionalized system of checks and balances in form of procedural 
safeguards. These mechanisms do not concern substantive copyright, but rather its exercise 
and are foreseen at several levels: (1) at the platform level, (2) at the out-of-court level, and 
(3) at the judicial authority or court level. 
 
At the platform level, Member States are in Article 17(9) DSM Directive mandated to provide 
that ‘online content-sharing service providers put in place an effective and expeditious com-
plaint mechanism that is available to users of their services in the event of disputes over the 
disabling of access to, or the removal of, works or other subject matter uploaded by them.’54 
The mechanisms of this first procedural safeguard are further circumscribed in Article 17(9) 
para. 2 DSM Directive, where after complaints ‘shall be processed without undue delay, and 
decisions to disable access to or remove uploaded content shall be subject to human review.’55 
Especially the latter human review-criterion is interesting, as it implies that everything leading 
up to a dispute can be processed by the platform in an automated fashion by algorithms.56 It 
is further specified in recital 70, that these mechanisms should allow ‘users to complain about 
the steps taken with regard to their uploads, in particular where they could benefit from an 
exception or limitation to copyright in relation to an upload to which access has been disabled 
 
53 Pelham, supra note 41, para. 59, no identical wording in Funke Medien, supra note 42, but see para. 57 and 
also para. 74 (with reference to Ashby Donald and Others v. France and on this supra note 49).  
54 Emphasis added. Note that the requirement is on Member States, compared to the ensuring of unavailability 
which is on the platforms. This first aspect resembles the Commission’s original proposal from September 2016, 
where it suggested in Art. 13(2) that ‘Member States shall ensure that the service providers ... put in place com-
plaints and redress mechanisms that are available to users in case of disputes over the application of the measures 
... .‘, see European Commission, supra note 28. 
55 Emphasis added. On a critique of the ‘elastic timeframe’ see Senftleben, supra note 11, p. 9. In its Council vote, 
Germany suggests the timeframe to be understood ‘as rapidly as possible’, see Statement by Germany, supra note 
8, point 7. 
56 See similarly Commission Recommendation (EU) 2018/334 of 1 March 2018 on measures to effectively tackle 
illegal content online, 6.3.2018, [2018] L 63/50, points 20 and 27 in relation to proactive measures on human over-
sight and in the context of data protection see e.g. Art. 22 (3) GDPR. 
  12 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
or that has been removed’ (emphasis added). Furthermore, the provision stipulates a justifica-
tion-duty on rights holders. The reasons for a rights holder’s request to make content unavail-
able needs to be ‘duly justified’.57 The decision at this level remains with the platform, but as 
Senftleben notes, ‘[t]he underlying legal assessment, however, is likely to be cautious and de-
fensive … [and] a generous interpretation of copyright limitations serving freedom of expression 
seems unlikely, even though a broad application of the right of quotation and the parody 
exemption would be in line with CJEU jurisprudence.’58 In other words, there exists a risk of 
over enforcement.59 
 
In addition to the platform-based procedural safeguards, also out-of-court redress mechanisms 
for the impartial settlement of disputes are to be put in place by Member States.60 Finally, this 
out-of-court mechanism is ‘without prejudice to the rights of users to have recourse to efficient 
judicial remedies … .’61 Specifically in relation to exceptions and limitations, ‘Member States 
shall ensure that users have access to a court or another relevant judicial authority to assert 
the use of an exception or limitation to copyright and related rights.’62 Member States enjoy a 
considerable amount of discretion when implementing the procedural safeguards and such 
mechanisms might also be informed by the stakeholder dialogues and the Commission’s guid-
ance on the application of Article 17.63 
 
Conceptually, it is unclear whether these procedural safeguards should be understood as inde-
pendent additions to the limitation and exception safeguards or rather as a further specification 
of those safeguards. Recital 70 of the DSM Directive puts Article 17(9) in the context of situ-
ations where ‘in particular [users] could benefit from an exception or limitation’ (emphasis 
added). Thus, one the one hand, the existence of these specific procedural safeguards relating 
to the institutional setting can be interpreted as an admirable attempt to create procedural 
transparency and safeguards. Without such setup, user rights might end up under- or even 
unenforced. The existing regime under the E-Commerce Directive does not directly put any 
restrictions on platforms on what content they remove. Seen in a broader European interme-
diary liability exemption perspective, where the notice-and-takedown regime based on Article 
 
57  Art. 17(9) para. 2 DSM Directive. 
58 Senftleben, supra note 11, p. 9. 
59 For empirical work on over-enforcement see e.g. Kris Erickson & Martin Kretschmer, Empirical approaches to 
intermediary liability, CREATe Working Paper 2019/6, (2019), p. 10 ff.; Jennifer Urban, Joe Karaganis, & Bri-
anna Schofield, Notice and Takedown: Online Service Provider and Rightsholder Accounts of Everyday Practice, 
64 J Copyright Soc'y (2017); Sharon Bar-Ziv and Niva Elkin-Koren, Behind the Scenes of Online Copyright En-
forcement: Empirical Evidence on Notice & Takedown, 50 Connecticut Law Review (2017); specifically in the con-
text of YouTube and parodies, see Kris Erickson & Martin Kretschmer, This Video is Unavailable: Analyzing 
Copyright Takedown of User-Generated Content on YouTube, 9 JIPITEC 75 (2018) and Sabine Jacques et al., 
An Empirical Study of the Use of Automated Anti-Piracy Systems and Their Consequences for Cultural Diver-
sity, 15(2) SCRIPTed (2018), pp. 277–312.  
60 Art. 17(9) para. 2 DSM Directive. 
61 Ibid. 
62 Art. 17(9) para. 2 DSM Directive. 
63 Art. 17(10) DSM Directive reads: ‘As of 6 June 2019 the Commission, in cooperation with the Member States, 
shall organise stakeholder dialogues to discuss best practices for cooperation between online content-sharing ser-
vice providers and rightholders. … When discussing best practices, special account shall be taken, among other 
things, of the need to balance fundamental rights and of the use of exceptions and limitations. For the purpose of 
the stakeholder dialogues, users' organisations shall have access to adequate information from online content-shar-
ing service providers on the functioning of their practices with regard to paragraph 4’ (emphasis added). 
  13 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
14 of the E-Commerce Directive has lacked a counter-notice idea or general procedural safe-
guards, such attempt is to be welcomed and strengthening the enforcement of user rights vis-
à-vis content moderation practices by large online platforms. On the other hand, however, their 
very existence implies an understanding of Article 17(7) that the mechanisms foreseen in Article 
17(4) DSM Directive will inevitably lead to false-positives, i.e. to situations where platforms 
will falsely take-down or block content which is covered by a limitation or exception.64 In other 
words, it can also be understood as a confession that –in practice– automatically distinguishing 
copyright violations from legitimate uses will be a challenging exercise.  
 
At least from the lawmaker’s perspective, procedural safeguards in themselves are seen as a 
means of mitigating negative impact on fundamental rights. Already the Commission’s Impact 
Assessment accompanying the Proposal from 2016, for example, noted that procedural safe-
guards will mitigate the negative impact on freedom of expression and information.65 Similarly, 
Germany in its Statement accompanying its Council vote notes that ‘[e]ach permanent “stay 
down” mechanism (“uploadfilter”) must comply with the principle of proportionality. Proce-
dural guarantees, in particular, could be considered, for example when users notify that they 
are lawfully uploading content from third parties.’66 In other words, the procedural safeguards 
are in itself a weight on the scale of the fundamental rights balance. 
 
 
4.  CONCLUDING REMARKS: WHAT IS LEFT OF USER RIGHTS? 
The limitations and exceptions contained in Article 5 InfoSoc Directive constitute user rights 
and courts are obliged to interpret those in the light of fundamental rights norms. In relation 
to these user rights, as seen, the DSM Directive’s Article 17 contains both an internalized 
system of checks and balances with limitations and exceptions and a somewhat externalized 
system of procedural safeguards. For the specific limitations and exceptions consisting of ‘quo-
tation, criticism, review, caricature, parody or pastiche’, the DSM Directive has made it clear 
that these are unwaivable and also that OCSSP’s are under a specific obligation to safeguard 
those. The Commission’s proposal for the Directive from September 2016 did not contain the 
reference to limitations and exceptions and neither procedural safeguards to the same extent 
as the final provision in the DSM Directive from May 2019. Previously optional limitations 
and exceptions from the InfoSoc Directive are fully harmonized within the Article 17-frame-
work. And both, internalized and externalized safeguards, act as an expression of user rights 
as a balancing factor in the reconciliation of fundamental rights. But do these safeguards 
enough to balance the tensions between conflicting fundamental rights?  
 
On a more principal level, a first aspect relates to a more upstream issue of the Article 17 
mechanism. Both strands of safeguards, limitations and exceptions as well as procedural safe-
guards, come in at a relatively late stage. However, neither address the one very central –
upstream– challenge of Article 17 from a fundamental rights perspective: the de lege reliance 
 
64 In the Council vote, Germany lays outs its reading of Art. 17(7) and (8) ‘that protective measures must not 
impede the permitted use of protected content’, see Statement by Germany, supra note 8, point 7. To this point 
see also European Commission, Impact Assessment, supra note 16, pp. 153 ff. 
65 European Commission, Impact Assessment, supra note 16, pp. 153–154, reading ‘[t] his negative impact should 
be mitigated by the fact that the services would be obliged to put in place the necessary procedural safeguards for 
the users which in the majority of cases already exist in the related context of notice and take down requests.’ 
66 Statement by Germany, supra note 8, point 8. 
  14 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
onstay down mechanisms and de facto reliance on filtering algorithms in the first place.67 As 
Elkin-Koren points out: ‘Algorithmic copyright enforcement has tilted the balance of copyright 
law. It has changed copyright default: if copyrighted materials were once available unless 
proven to be infringing, today materials that are detected by algorithms are removed from 
public circulation unless explicitly authorized by the right holder.’68 This more principal issue 
is not directly dealt with by the two –downstream– safeguards we have addressed in this 
contribution. Instead, a third user-oriented safeguard is coming into play with Article 17(8), 
where it is stipulated in a somewhat declaratory fashion that the application of Article 17 DSM 
Directive may not lead to any general monitoring obligation. This prohibition of general mon-
itoring contained in Article 15 E-Commerce Directive69 is again to be seen as a result of a 
balancing between fundamental rights (in particular Articles 7 and 8, 9, 10, and 14 of the 
Charter).70 Could an explanation be that the balancing of interests in limitations and excep-
tions is somehow relevant ‘upstream’ and ‘overrides’ or already contains the balancing of con-
flicting fundamental rights in relation to Article 15 E-Commerce Directive, too? 
 
To further explore this argument, let us take one step back from the specific copyright system 
for a moment: The takedown of unlawful (or even unwanted) content has become topical in 
relation to a variety of subject matter such as hate speech71, terrorist content and others. In 
this development, there is a call for ‘enhanced responsibility’.72 In the Commission’s Recom-
mendation (EU) 2018/334, proactive –i.e. algorithmic content– mechanisms, akin the one in-
troduced in Article 17 of the DSM Directive, are subject to a variety of safeguards and consid-
erations.73 Similarly, also the Commission’s proposal for a Regulation on Terrorist Content74, 
compared to Article 17 DSM Directive, is much more reluctant as to the instances when inter-
mediaries should rely on proactive mechanisms in the first place.75 The DSM Directive, on the 
 
67 On the issue of notice and stay-down in relation to freedom of expression, see e.g. Jennifer M. Urban, Joe Kara-
ganis, & Brianna L. Schofield, Notice and Takedown in Everyday Practice, UC Berkeley Public Law Research Pa-
per No. 2755628 (2016). On the applicability and compliance of the Commission’s proposed Art. 13 in relation to 
notice and stay-down with Art. 8 and 10 of the ECHR, see Felipe Romero-Moreno, ‘Notice and staydown’ and 
social media: amending Article 13 of the Proposed Directive on Copyright, International Review of Law, Comput-
ers & Technology, (2019), 33:2, pp. 187–210, p. 194 f.  
68 Niva Elkin-Koren, Fair Use by Design, UCLA Law Review 64 (2017), pp. 1082–1100, p. 1093. 
69 The prohibition of general monitoring in Art. 15 ECD has been subject to a surprisingly low number of refer-
ences before the Court of Justice. In a case unrelated to IP rights, the Court of Justice recently ruled that plat-
forms can be ordered to remove information that is ‘identical’ or ‘equivalent’ to content which is declared unlaw-
ful, see case C-18/18 Glawischnig-Piesczek v. Faebook Ireland Limited, [2019] ECLI:EU:C:2019:821, para. 53. 
70 In Scarlet v Sabam, supra note 26, and Sabam v Netlog, supra note 3, for example, the Court of Justice refers 
to the right to protection of personal information (Art. 8 of the Charter) and the freedom to receive or impart in-
formation (Art. 11 of the Charter). 
71 On the freedom of expression and hate speech, see Federica Casarosa, Freedom of Expression and Countering 
Hate Speech, Handbook on the Techniques of Judicial Interactions in the Application of the EU Charter, Euro-
pean University Institute, (2019). 
72 European Commission, Communication on Tackling Illegal Content Online - Towards an enhanced responsibil-
ity of online platforms, COM(2017) 555 final, (Brussels, 28.9.2017). 
73 See e.g. Commission Recommendation (EU) 2018/334, supra note 56, points 19 and 20. 
74 On the proposed Terrorist Content Regulation, see also Alexandra Kuczerawy, The proposed Regulation on 
preventing the dissemination of terrorist content online: safeguards and risks for freedom of expression, CiTiP (5 
December 2018). 
75 See Thomas Riis & Sebastian Felix Schwemer, Leaving the European Safe Harbor, Sailing Towards Algorithmic 
Content Regulation, 22 Journal of Internet Law 7, (2019), pp. 12–16. 
  15 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
other hand, offers little discretion: once an online content sharing platform falls within the 
scope of the Directive, the Article 17 regime applies.  
 
This raises the question, why the enforcement of copyright-protected works requires less safe-
guards to be reconciled with conflicting fundamental rights. Besides a political reality, which 
is outside our scope, a simple answer at hand is that limitations and exceptions, which are to 
be respected by and partly harmonized by the Directive, are already an expression of that 
internalized balancing of conflicting fundamental rights. Or put differently: in a copyright-
specific context, limitations and exceptions are the ‘only’ tool for finding a fair balance between 
conflicting fundamental rights. And this, indeed, is in line with the Court of Justice’s case law 
confirmed in Pelham, Funke Medien and Spiegel Online on these ‘user rights’ and the extent 
to which fundamental rights can (not) be invoked as external limitations to copyright. 
 
On a more granular level, a second aspect relates to the importance of procedural safeguards 
in the Article 17-regime. If procedural safeguards in itself are relied upon as a weight in the 
balancing of fundamental rights as described above, the ‘default’-scale is leaning towards right 
holders’ protection: users are, in a way, awarded a secondary procedural protection in an at-
tempt to find a new equilibrium. As Frosio notes, ‘the introduction of a complaint and redress 
mechanism turns a traditionally ex ante review mechanism into an ex post mechanism while 
content is taken down proactively regardless of the fairness of the use of the protected content, 
the application of exceptions or limitations or the public domain status of the works.’76 But 
then, non-derogatory user rights and procedural safeguards –undoubtedly a good intention and 
a strengthening in itself– are hardly more than a drop in the bucket. If in the context of Article 
17(4) DSM Directive, indeed, over-enforcement is unavoidable, the system comes with great 
legal uncertainty and wiggle room in practice. Article 17 DSM Directive constitutes a change 
of perspective from alleged under-enforcement copyright-protected works in certain situations, 
to a situation where over-enforcement via algorithmic content enforcement is deemed accepta-
ble given safeguards (limitations and exceptions and procedural). So, what is left of user rights? 
 
According to the DSM Directive, Member States shall ensure that users are able to rely on the 
exceptions and limitations, see Article 17(7). Also, the Directive shall ‘in no way affect legiti-
mate uses’ and platforms shall inform users that they can use works under limitations and 
exceptions, see Article 17(9). In this way, the DSM Directive provides users with procedural 
safeguards. It is, however, far from clear how users should enforce their rights under the Di-
rective. The DSM Directive does not specify the legal consequences of a platform’s failure to 
live up to its obligations to ensure user rights. This stands in stark contrast to the situation of 
rights holders, where both international and EU legislation have boosted enforcement during 
the past many years. The TRIPS agreement77, for instance, devotes a full part (No. III) to the 
‘Enforcement of IPR’, which obliges members to ensure that enforcement procedures are avail-
able to permit effective action against any act of infringement of IPRs. In the same vein, the 
 
76 Giancarlo Frosio, Reforming the C-DSM Reform: A User-Based Copyright Theory for Commonplace Creativity, 
(7 November 2019), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3482523, p. 17. 
77 Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, available at https://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/le-
gal_e/27-trips_03_e.htm. 
  16 – DRAFT DECEMBER 2019 – 
Forthcoming in Paul Torremans (ed), Intellectual Property Law and Human Rights, 4th edition (Wolters Kluwer, 2020) 
Enforcement Directive78 explains that effective and harmonized enforcement mechanisms are 
necessary to ensure that the substantive law on IP is applied effectively in the community.79  
 
Against this background, it is remarkable that the DSM Directive does not attempt to ensure 
that the user rights, which arise under the limitations and exceptions regarding quotation, 
criticism, review, caricature, parody or pastiche are not backed up with enforcement tools ad 
modum those found in the Enforcement Directive. As seen in the light of the system set up by 
the DSM Directive and the general ‘tilting of the balance’ (as per Elkin-Koren) in favour of 
rights holders, the lack of attention to the enforcement of the rights and interests of users 
undermine not just the effects of the limitations and exceptions. It also serves as a reminder 
that no rights are worth more than the level to which they can be enforced. The DSM Directive 
may have provided users with strong ‘rights’ but without matching duties for platforms or a 
harmonised system for the enforcement of those user rights. 
 
 
78 Corrigendum to Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the 
enforcement of intellectual property rights, (2004) OJ L 195, pp. 16–25. 
79 Ibid., Preamble point 3. 
  17 