 
 
 
 
 
 
Chinese Privacy Law: A Practitioner’s Guide to 
Current Regulations, Future Trends, & Business 
Applications 
 
 
 
 
1
Tiffany Li & Zhou Zhou  
Updated January 13, 2016   
                                                 
1Tiffany Li is Privacy Fellow, Wikimedia Foundation; J.D., Georgetown University Law Center; B.A., University of 
California, Los Angeles. Zhou Zhou is Legal Counsel, Wikimedia Foundation; J.D., Columbia Law School; B.S., 
University of California, Berkeley. The views expressed in this Article do not necessarily reflect the views of our 
employer or any other organization. A version of this Article was published in serial form in “The Privacy Advisor” 
(International Association of Privacy Professionals, 2015).  
 The business case for understanding Chinese privacy law is clear. With China’s growing 
economic power and large consumer base, any international company seeking to profit from 
consumers in the region should expend resources on understanding how best to succeed in the 
Chinese market. This means that privacy officers must pay close attention to how privacy law is 
developing in China, both to keep up with current developments and to stay ahead of the curve 
by proactively implementing strategic policies. 
 
This Article will provide a basic privacy practitioner’s guide to privacy law in China. First, we 
will go over the basic status of privacy laws and regulations in China. Second, we will delve into 
the cultural and historical factors that influence the development and application of Chinese 
privacy law. Finally, we will offer practical lessons and hypothetical case studies for how to 
proactively help your company or organization succeed in China. 
 
I. Current State of Privacy Laws in China 
 
Privacy law in China is still a relatively new field. While China lacks a comprehensive national 
privacy law, there are a number of privacy laws and regulatory guides focused on specific 
concerns.  
 
To understand the current state of Chinese privacy laws, it’s best to first distinguish the concepts 
of privacy from government actors and privacy from corporate actors. China’s current legal 
system does not afford significant privacy protections against government intrusion. However, in 
the past few years, China has been increasingly willing to create and enforce privacy laws aimed 
at regulating corporations and private actors.  
  2  
In the past few years, China has created a number of privacy laws focused on regulating the 
private sector. These laws include telecommunications regulations like the 2011 MIIT “Internet 
Information Services Regulations” (“MIIT 2011 Regulation”)2; the 2013 MIIT 
“Telecommunications and Internet Personal User Data Protection Regulations” (“MIIT 2013 
Regulation”)3; the  2013 MIIT “Information Security Technology - Guidelines for Personal 
Information Within Public and Commercial Services Systems,” (“MIIT 2013 Guide”).4 
Additionally, in 2012, the SC-NPC Decision on Internet Information Protection (“SC-NPC 
2012”)5 created the highest level law in China dealing with data protection. The provisions from 
SC-NPC 2012 were largely included in the 2013 amendments to China’s “Law on the Protection 
of Consumer Rights and Interests” (“Consumer Law”). 6 
 
The amended Consumer Law includes the general principle that all operators must “follow legal, 
legitimate, and necessary principles,” incorporating principles stated in the SC-NPC 2012. The 
Consumer Law (2013), Art. 29 lists these basic principles: 
“Proprietors collecting and using consumers' personal information shall abide by 
principles of legality, propriety and necessity, explicitly stating the purposes, means and 
scope for collecting or using information, and obtaining the consumers' consent. 
                                                 
22011 MIIT “Internet Information Services Regulations” (“MIIT 2011 Regulation”), 
http://www.miit.gov.cn/n11293472/n11293832/n12771663/14417081.html. 
32013 MIIT “Telecommunications and Internet Personal User Data Protection Regulations” (“MIIT 2013 
Regulation”), https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2013/07/16/telecommunications-and-internet-user-
individual-information-protection-regulations/. 
4 2013 MIIT “Information Security Technology - Guidelines for Personal Information Within Public and 
Commercial Services Systems,” (“MIIT 2013 Guide”).4 
http://www.pipa.gov.cn/manage/UploadFile/2015518133720563.pdf.	  
5 SC-NPC Decision on Internet Information Protection (“SC-NPC 2012”), 
https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2012/12/28/national-peoples-congress-standing-committee-
decision-concerning-strengthening-network-information-protection/. 
6 2013 amendments to China’s “Law on the Protection of Consumer Rights and Interests” (“Consumer Law”), 
http://chinalawtranslate.com/consumer-protection-law-including-2013-amendments/?lang=en. 
  3 Proprietors collecting or using consumers' personal information shall disclose their rules 
for their collection or use of this information, and must not collect or use information in 
violation of laws, regulations or agreements between the parties. 
 
Proprietors and their employees must keep consumers' personal information they collect 
strictly confidential and must not disclose, sell, or illegally provide it to others. 
Proprietors shall employ technical measures and other necessary measures to ensure 
information security, and to prevent consumers' personal information from being 
disclosed or lost. In situations where information has been or might be disclosed or lost, 
proprietors shall immediately adopt remedial measures. 
 
Proprietors must not send commercial information to consumers without their consent or 
upon their request of consumers, or where they have clearly refused it.” 
These principles are echoed in the general principles of MIIT 2011, which state that ISPs “shall 
provide services in accordance with the principles of equality, free will, fairness and good faith.” 
 
In 2013, the MIIT released a voluntary guide for industry best practices. The MIIT 2013 Guide 
elucidates eight principles, which are all fairly standard for international privacy norms and 
similar to other nations’ privacy principles:   
1.  Clear Purpose Principle: Data should only be used for a clear purpose and should not be 
used outside of that purpose. 
  4 2.  Minimum and Sufficiency Principle: Companies should only handle the minimum 
amount of information sufficient for their purpose. Personal info should be deleted after 
the purpose has been achieved. 
3.  Public Notification Principle: Companies should give notice to data subjects of the 
purpose, scope, use, security, and other information related to the data collection. 
4.  Personal Consent Principle: Companies should obtain consent before using data. 
5.  Quality Assurance Principle: Companies should take measures to ensure confidentiality, 
integrity, availability of data. 
6.  Safety Guarantee Principle: Companies should take measures to ensure security of data. 
7.  Good Faith Fulfilling Principle: Companies should act in good faith in compliance with 
legal requirements. 
8.  Clear Responsibility Principle: Companies should clearly define responsibilities, taking 
of appropriate measures, and records processing (for use in potential future 
investigations).  
 
These principles should be familiar to any privacy practitioner. Additionally, the MIIT 2013 
Guide includes the following: special safeguards for sensitive information, restrictions for 
overseas data exports, data breach notification obligations, and information on rights of data 
subjects. The MIIT 2013 Guide is the only current state policy that mentions limits on 
transnational data exportation, explicitly prohibiting overseas transfer of data without express 
consent of data subjects or explicit legal or regulatory permission. However, the MIIT 2013 
Guide is voluntary and does not impose legal obligations upon corporations.  
 
  5 Chinese citizens may have a right to privacy under tort law. China’s General Principles of Civil 
Law (“GPCL”) includes protection of the “right of reputation” (GPCL, art. 101), while the Tort 
Liability Law (“TTL”) protects the “right of privacy” (TTL, art. 2). Both the GPCL and TTL tort 
rights of privacy have been used in litigation between individuals and corporations. It is 
important to note that, under the TTL, “network service providers” (likely to be interpreted as 
similar to “Internet Service Providers” in the West) have special obligations to prevent tortious 
actions committed by users of their services. 
 
China also has some privacy-focused sectorial legislation (laws governing specific industries), 
somewhat similar to the U.S. sectorial approach to privacy law. China’s sectorial laws include 
the Basic Norms for Electronic Medical Records (Ministry of Health, 2010), Social Insurance 
Law (2010), and Regulations and Administrative Measures for Credit Reference Agencies 
(2013). In addition, a number of provinces and municipalities have enacted their own privacy 
laws. 
 
In conclusion, while Chinese privacy law is still fairly undeveloped, China has made significant 
strides in recent years to create new laws governing data privacy and confidentiality of personal 
information. Some of the major principles inherent in the highest level Chinese privacy laws are 
similar to international privacy norms (E.U. Directive, APEC Principles, etc.). With the law still 
unclear, the best way forward for privacy practitioners is to ensure compliance with current laws 
and proactively adapt practices that are in touch with Chinese consumer culture. 
 
II. Cultural Factors Influencing the Perception of Privacy 
 
  6 As is the case legal systems in all countries, Chinese culture affects Chinese views and 
application of laws - including privacy laws.  However, we cannot study Chinese privacy law in 
a vacuum. The modern legal conception of privacy, and its applicable laws, arose from Western 
culture. Thus, to understand Chinese privacy law, we must juxtapose Western notions of privacy 
against thousands of years of Confucian teaching and the historical background that still 
influences present-day Chinese society.  In fact, such cultural considerations have such a strong 
influence on Chinese privacy laws precisely because the importation of Western privacy laws 
prevented China from developing its own sui generis privacy culture.  
            
Historically, Chinese laws arose out of Confucian ideas about government and have always been 
underpinned by Confucian ethics and morality.  As such, Chinese laws and their applicability are 
dependent on Chinese cultural assumptions about ethical and moral behavior.  International 
norms for privacy law are also based on ethical and moral considerations. Thus, any tensions 
between Western theories of privacy and the reality in the Chinese legal system can be 
particularly problematic for the implementation of privacy laws since both forces are based on 
strong, and sometimes conflicting, value systems. 
 
In particular, it is possible that the deep importance of community in Chinese culture could 
impede the proper application of privacy laws in China.  Confucian ideas arose thousands of 
years ago out of a time in Chinese history when the country was undergoing an extended and 
tumultuous civil war. During that turbulent time, prominent scholars, like Confucius, sought 
ways to end the turmoil. Thus, under Confucianism, and the Chinese legal systems based on it, 
priority is placed on ensuring order and good governance.  In such a system, the rights of the 
individual are subordinate to the rights of the family unit, the community, and the country.  Even 
  7 today, many Chinese citizens almost implicitly acquiesce to the idea that any privacy rights they 
have are not absolute against the monitoring powers of the centralized state.  Furthermore, in 
many recent privacy-related disputes in China, the legal system have often sided with protecting 
the rights, values, and morals of the community over protecting the privacy rights of the 
individual.7 
 
A second complication for privacy practitioners seeking to understand privacy in China is the 
strong contrast between Chinese and Western ideals involving regulation of individual behavior. 
In the Judeo-Christian Western culture, it’s arguable that punishment is based on the personal 
and inward-facing ideas of individual wrongdoing and individual guilt. However, in Chinese 
culture, punishment often derives from the community-infused concept of Shame.  As one 
commentator notes8, in this Shame-based culture, purported wrongdoers can only be properly 
punished if their faults are exposed to the community and the punished are forced by society to 
correct their behavior based on what society thinks is morally important to do.  Under exposure 
to the criticism of their community, an individual’s privacy rights are disregarded.  This cultural 
artifact has contributed to the privacy-invasive phenomena of ‘human-flesh’ search engines9 that 
commonly engulf online communities in mainland China.10 
                                                 
7 For a further discussion of such cases, please see 隐私权的中国命运—司法判例和法律文化的分析 
by 张礼洪, 隐私权的中国命运—司法判例和法律文化的分析. 
http://www.cnki.com.cn/Article/CJFDTotal-SDFX201401002.htm. 
8田(cid:0)民, “耻感文化与个人(cid:0)私(cid:0)的保(cid:0),”《西部法学(cid:0)(cid:0)》(2010).  
http://shlx.pkulaw.cn/fulltext_form.aspx?Db=qikan&Gid=1510094600&keyword=&EncodingName=gb2312&Sear
ch_Mode=. 
9 戴激涛, 从“人肉搜索”看(cid:0)私(cid:0)和言(cid:0)自由的平衡保(cid:0),” 《法学》(2008). 
http://shlx.pkulaw.cn/fulltext_form.aspx?Db=qikan&Gid=1510068708&keyword=&EncodingName=&Search_Mod
e=. 
10	  Human-flesh’ search engines are campaigns by online users to search and expose the identity and personal details 
of other Chinese citizens of interest and subject them to public humiliation.	  
  8  
On the other hand, the shame-based culture means that in certain ways, Chinese citizens are very 
protective of their public image and any disclosure of private wrong-doing, whether legal or 
moral, that could lead to a loss of ‘face.’ This is likely one impetus behind the privacy and 
confidentiality laws that do exist in China today, and could point to the direction that Chinese 
privacy laws might further develop in the future.  
 
The aforementioned mix of cultural factors has produced a unique Chinese view towards privacy 
- a view that is strict in certain respects but lax in others.  Understanding these cultural and 
historical factors can offer clues to how Chinese privacy law may develop in the future. It is also 
helpful to keep these considerations in mind, when creating privacy practices that deal with 
Chinese consumers or Chinese corporations.  
 
III. Practical Lessons 
 
It is difficult to predict with any certainty how privacy law in China will develop. As we have 
already discussed, Chinese privacy laws are still in their early stages. There is no comprehensive 
national privacy law, and what laws do exist are generally similar to international norms (notice, 
choice, security, and so on).  
 
Here are a few practical lessons to help you proactively protect your company and your clients 
from legal privacy risks in China.  
 
A. Designing the Best China-Centric Privacy Policies 
  9  
1.  Focus on community values 
Given the Chinese emphasis on community values, it is advisable to design your privacy 
policies and practices in context of an understanding of Chinese community values. For 
example, in framing a discussion of your policies, include a discussion of the values of 
your particular online community and explain how your privacy practices protect those 
values. 
 
2. Look to ethics, not just law 
Look to ethics first, not just the law. China does not yet have strong privacy laws, so the 
best basis for any privacy-related policy is probably ethics. Chinese consumers may also 
be particularly swayed by ethical arguments for privacy practices, given historical focus 
on ethical bases for laws. To put this in practice, include an ethical basis when justifying 
your privacy policies, in addition to providing the legal basis for your policies.  
 
3. Use culture for context 
Use culture for context. Different cultural values of privacy affect what your users want 
from corporations. In the U.S., users may view privacy almost as a property right 
(protecting private information a user owns). In China, users may instead view privacy as 
a shield, protecting private lives from community exposure or shame from losing face. 
Recognize this distinction in your policies by emphasizing how your company will 
protect the confidences of your users and prevent information exposure. 
 
B.  Understanding Chinese Consumer Expectations 
  10  
1.  Chinese consumers may have fewer privacy expectations 
Chinese consumers may place less value on privacy, when compared to other competing 
values or obligations. This may be reflected in what your user community and consumers 
value. For example, your users may care more or be affected more by corporate 
transparency efforts than privacy protection efforts. Thus, you may receive a better return 
on investment for putting resources into creating and publishing transparency reports. 
 
2. Chinese consumers do still care about privacy 
At the same time, privacy practitioners should not assume that Chinese consumers do not 
care at all about privacy. Cultural expectations of privacy may be different, but privacy is 
still valued in China, especially privacy concerning confidentiality of personal 
information. Keep in mind the notions of “shame” and “saving face.” It is important to 
remember that, while Chinese consumers may have a different conception of privacy 
rights, this is no excuse for not protecting the privacy of your consumers or failing to 
follow the law.  
 
3. Chinese consumers may be more open to data collection/use 
Chinese consumers may be more pragmatic about companies using or buying their 
private information. If you can make a strong case for why your users should give their 
data (e.g., in exchange for tailored features), it is likely that Chinese consumers will be 
more swayed by these arguments than European consumers, for many of whom privacy is 
an almost inalienable right. Privacy is not a fundamental Chinese value, so Chinese 
  11 consumers may be less tied to strict privacy rights, when compared to Western 
consumers.  
 
Understanding the cultural and historical factors behind China's privacy laws today provides a 
path forward in creating policies and programs that will best engage Chinese consumers and 
likely minimize future legal compliance risks. These practical privacy lessons can be used when 
conducting due diligence on new Chinese business interests, creating new policies for overseas 
corporate expansion, or interacting with Chinese user communities.  
 
As noted, Chinese privacy law is still fairly underdeveloped, and it is difficult to predict how the 
laws will change in the future. However, understanding the current state of Chinese privacy law, 
as well as the cultural and historical factors that might influence its development and application, 
will help privacy practitioners prepare their organizations to succeed in the growing Chinese 
market.  
 
For further discussion on Chinese privacy law, and Asian privacy law in general, we recommend 
the comprehensive treatise, Asian Data Privacy Laws: Trade and Human Rights Perspectives, by 
University of New South Wales Law Professor Graham Greenleaf.  
 
 
  12 