\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 1 7-DEC-16 12:12
ARTICLES
SHOULD THE LAW DO ANYTHING ABOUT
ECONOMIC INEQUALITY?
Matthew Dimick*
What should be done about rising income and wealth inequality?
Should the design and adoption of legal rules take into account their
effects on the distribution of income and wealth? Or should the tax-and-
transfer system be the exclusive means to address concerns about ine-
quality? A widely-held view argues for the latter: only the tax system,
and not the legal system, should be used to redistribute income. While
this proposition comes in a variety of normative arguments and has sup-
port across the political spectrum, there is also a well-known law-and-
economics version. This argument, known as the “double-distortion” ar-
gument, is simply stated. Legal rules that redistribute income only add to
the economic distortions that are already present in the tax system. It
would therefore be better for everyone, and especially the poor, to in-
stead adopt an efficient, nonredistributive legal rule, and increase redis-
tribution through the tax system.
This Article challenges the double-distortion argument from a law-
and-economics perspective. There are two main arguments, in addition
to several other subsidiary points. First, in the abstract, there is no rea-
son to believe that legal rules that have redistributive effects will always
reduce efficiency; indeed, they can sometimes increase efficiency. Exam-
ples from the regulation of product markets, labor markets, and financial
markets underscore this claim. In these cases, legal redistribution is
more efficient than redistribution through the tax system. Second, legal
rules are likely to be more attractive than taxation precisely in cases
where inequality itself or normative concern about inequality is high.
* Associate Professor of Law, SUNY Buffalo Law School, and Visiting Scholar, De-
partment of Political Science, Duke University. Direct Correspondence to: 618 John Lord
O’Brian Hall, Buffalo, NY 14260-1100. E-mail: mdimick@buffalo.edu. For comments, ques-
tions, and general encouragement, I wish to thank Matthew Adler, Christine Pedigo Bartholo-
mew, Mark Bartholomew, Anya Bernstein, Guyora Binder, Michael Boucai, Todd Brown,
Guido Calabresi, Luis Chiesa, Shi-Ling Hsu, David Engel, Vic Fleischer, Laura Ford, Louis
Kaplow, Tara Melish, Tony O’Rourke, Jessica Owley, Brishen Rogers, Matt Steilen, Rick Su,
Tico Taussig-Rubbo, and Jim Wooten. Thanks to Rasmus Rosenberg Larsen for helpful re-
search assistance. Also many thanks to the editors at the Cornell Journal of Law and Public
Policy.
1\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 2  7-DEC-16 12:12
2 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
Under the optimal tax policy, higher inequality or greater concern about
inequality will justify larger tax distortions. Therefore, a particular legal
rule is more likely to be more efficient than the optimal tax policy under
these circumstances. The ultimate conclusion is that a mix of legal rules
and taxation, rather than taxation exclusively, will be the best way to
address economic inequality.
INTRODUCTION................................................. 2 R
I. THE DOUBLE-DISTORTION ARGUMENT ................... 8 R
II. EFFICIENT LEGAL REDISTRIBUTION....................... 12 R
A. Economic Efficiency................................ 13 R
B. Redistribution and Inequality ....................... 16 R
C. Examples .......................................... 20 R
1. Product Markets ............................... 21 R
2. Labor Markets ................................. 23 R
a. Collective Bargaining ...................... 24 R
b. Minimum Wage Legislation ................ 26 R
3. Financial Markets .............................. 30 R
D. Efficient Legal Redistribution ....................... 33 R
III. OPTIMAL LEGAL REDISTRIBUTION........................ 36 R
A. Social Welfare ..................................... 37 R
B. Optimal Tax Policy ................................ 39 R
C. Distributional Judgments ........................... 41 R
D. Level of Inequality ................................. 42 R
IV. COUNTERARGUMENTS ................................... 43 R
A. On the Exclusivity of Efficiency ..................... 44 R
B. On the Pareto Frontier: Transaction Costs and the
Coase Theorem .................................... 50 R
C. Non-Convexities.................................... 53 R
D. Efficient Tax-and-Transfer Policies.................. 54 R
E. Legal Rules and Corrective Taxation................ 56 R
V. DISTRIBUTION POLICY IN A SECOND-BEST WORLD........ 58 R
A. The Fundamental Theorems of Welfare Economics... 58 R
B. The General Theory of the Second Best ............. 60 R
CONCLUSION................................................... 63 R
INTRODUCTION
To the question in this Article’s title, a widely-accepted answer
within law-and-economics scholarship is, “No.”1 Instead of the legal sys-
1 See generally Louis Kaplow & Steven Shavell, Why the Legal System is Less Efficient
than the Income Tax in Redistributing Income, 23 J. LEGAL STUD. 667 (1994). On the influ-
ence of this position, see Ronen Avraham et al., Revisiting the Roles of Legal Rules and Tax
Rules in Income Redistribution: A Response to Kaplow & Shavell, 89 IOWA L. REV. 1125,\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 3  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 3
tem, only the tax system should concern itself with the distribution and
redistribution of economic rewards. The reasoning is called the “double-
distortion” argument: any legal rule that redistributes income only adds
to the economic distortions already present in the tax system. It would
therefore be better for everyone, and especially the poor, to instead adopt
a more efficient, non-redistributive legal rule, and then increase transfers
to the poor or reduce everyone’s taxes. Thus, the law should concern
itself only with efficiency—making the economic pie larger—and not
with distribution—how to divide the pie.2 Since the double-distortion ar-
gument concludes that the poor could be made better off if this policy
advice was followed, it is an argument that everyone concerned about
inequality and poverty should seriously consider. Although coming from
the law-and-economics tradition, the argument reflects a widespread and
deeply held intuition that is shared across both scholarly disciplines and
the political spectrum.3 The double-distortion argument was originally
made in a 1994 article by Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell,4 and has
been a subject of continuous and ongoing debate since then.5 Recent at-
1127 (2004) (“In the mid-1990s, in what has come to be considered a classic article, Louis
Kaplow and Steven Shavell made what seemed to be a decisive argument regarding the use of
redistributive legal rules.”); Tomer Blumkin & Yoram Margalioth, On The Limits of Redistrib-
utive Taxation: Establishing a Case for Equity-Informed Legal Rules, 25 VA. TAX REV. 1, 2
(2005) (stating “[t]hat ‘[r]edistribution is accomplished more efficiently through the income
tax system than through the use of legal rules’ seems to be the prevailing norm in the law and
economics literature . . .”); Zachary Liscow, Reducing Inequality on the Cheap: When Legal
Rule Design Should Incorporate Equity as Well as Efficiency, 123 YALE L.J. 2478, 2480, 2480
n. 2 (2014) (“What many consider the decisive argument in favor of this position is the idea of
‘double distortion’ offered by Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell . . . .”); and Lee Anne Fennell
& Richard H. McAdams, The Distributive Deficit in Law and Economics (Coase-Sandor
Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 713, 2015) (referring to the
“now-conventional assumption that tax-and-transfer will always trump other redistributive
methods . . .”).
2 Kaplow & Shavell, supra note 1, at 667–68 (summarizing this argument in similar R
fashion). For a nice overview of the argument, see David Weisbach, Should Legal Rules Be
Used to Redistribute Income?, 70 U. CHI. L. REV. 439 (2003).
3 The liberal egalitarian political philosopher John Rawls himself wrote, “[O]nce a suit-
able minimum is provided by transfers, it may be perfectly fair that the rest of total income be
settled by the price system. Moreover, this way of dealing with the claims of need would
appear to be more effective than trying to regulate income by minimum wage standards, and
the like. It is better to assign to each branch only such tasks as are compatible with one an-
other. Since the market is not suited to answer the claims of need, these should be met by a
separate arrangement.” JOHN RAWLS, A THEORY OF JUSTICE 245 (1971). Other left-leaning
egalitarians writing outside law and economics have also readily embraced this idea that mar-
kets should be “left alone” and that government, through taxes and transfers, should be solely
responsible for redistribution. See, e.g., Ann Alstott, Work vs. Freedom: A Liberal Challenge
to Employment Subsidies, 108 YALE L.J. 967, 972 (1999) (writing that “unconditional [cash]
grants [for the poor] . . . would help open the way for labor market reforms that can expand
employment opportunities,” such as “eliminat[ing] the minimum wage”).
4 Kaplow & Shavell, supra note 1. R
5 It would be impossible to cite all of the research that engages with this article. Some
of the better-known attempts to criticize the double-distortion argument from within a law-\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 4  7-DEC-16 12:12
4 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
tention to growing income inequality among politicians, the media, and
the public at large has only amplified the scholarly interest in their
argument.6
This Article challenges the double-distortion argument from a law-
and-economics perspective. In particular, the Article contends that legal
rules should be used to redistribute income, in addition to taxes and
transfers. Two main reasons justify this conclusion.7 First, there is no a
priori reason why a legal rule that redistributes income should always be
distortionary—a necessary condition for the double-distortion argument
to be true. Indeed, it is easy to devise examples where a change in legal
rules will both redistribute income and increase efficiency. More gener-
ally, there is nothing inherent in the concept of redistribution that re-
quires such a change to be accompanied by an efficiency loss. Within
economics, redistribution is defined simply as a reduction in inequality.
Consistent with this definition, it is possible for a redistributive legal
change to be either inefficient or efficient—even in the Pareto sense,
where no one is worse off and at least someone is better off.8 Since a
legal change that meets such conditions both reduces inequality and not
only is nondistortionary but increases wealth, it is unambiguously supe-
rior to redistribution through the tax and transfer system, which is always
distortionary.9
Second, the Article demonstrates that even inefficient redistributive
legal rules can be more efficient than the optimal tax-and-transfer policy,
and-economics framework include Avraham et al., supra note 1; Chris Sanchirico, Taxes Ver- R
sus Legal Rules as Instruments for Equity: A More Equitable View, 29 J. LEGAL STUD. 797
(2000) [hereinafter Taxes Versus Legal Rules]; Chris Sanchirico, Deconstructing the New Effi-
ciency Rationale, 86 CORNELL L. REV. 1003 (2001) [hereinafter Deconstructing]; and Liscow,
supra note 1. R
6 See Liscow, supra note 1, at 2482 (“[A]s income inequality increasingly becomes part R
of the political dialogue, finding efficient ways of reducing income inequality may be increas-
ingly important.”).
7 Kaplow & Shavell, supra note 1, at 667. (“For purposes of this article, the term ‘legal R
rules’ refers to rules other than those that define the income tax and welfare system.”). While
certainly the tax system is a species of the legal system, a more substantive distinction might
be that legal rules are explicitly intended to regulate behavior, while the purpose of the tax
system is to raise revenue for public goods or redistribution. Indeed, when public goods provi-
sion or redistribution is the objective, the ideal forms of taxation are those whose effects on
behavior are as small as possible. Note that this distinction does not challenge the notion that
the tax system could also be used for “non-tax” purposes, for example, to regulate behavior, as
with corrective (also called Pigovian) taxation.
8 For instance, any legal rule change that improves the welfare of the poor and leaves
the income of everyone else the same will both redistribute income—in the accepted sense of
reducing inequality—and be Pareto efficient.
9 That tax and transfers are distortionary is also an assumption of Kaplow and Shavell’s
that need not be true. In Part IV.D, I relax this assumption and consider efficient tax redistribu-
tion. An example of this is transfers that are provided as insurance, which can fill in for
missing markets. However, efficient taxation does not disturb the conclusion that both the
legal system and the tax system should be used to redistribute income.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 5  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 5
and that this is more likely to be true when inequality is higher. Simply
put, if both legal and tax regimes are together doubly distortive, Kaplow
and Shavell never furnish a compelling reason for why we should es-
chew the legal distortion and embrace the tax distortion. A sensible eco-
nomic  analysis  would  choose  the  least  inefficient  option.  More
importantly, under the typical optimal tax policy, high levels of inequal-
ity will justify higher levels of tax distortions. Thus, a given legal rule
that accomplishes a certain amount of redistribution and produces a cer-
tain level of inefficiency is more likely to dominate the optimal tax pol-
icy when inequality is higher. The same conclusion obtains when we
hold the level of inequality constant but vary our judgment about it. If the
public or policymakers become less tolerant of inequality, larger tax dis-
tortions can be justified. But then because of these larger distortions, it is
more likely that a particular redistributive legal rule will constitute a
more efficient alternative. Thus, redistributive legal rules, even if ineffi-
cient, are more likely to be superior to taxes and transfers precisely when
inequality is a more serious concern.
A large literature both for and against the double-distortion argu-
ment exists, so it is important to clarify the contribution of this Article.
As well as I am aware, the claim that redistributive legal rules can in-
crease efficiency has not been made in the double-distortion debate
before.10 Previous research concedes that legal rules will be distortion-
10 Liscow’s Note comes closest to my first point by arguing that redistributive legal rules
may entail zero distortion—that is, can be equally efficient to nonredistributive legal rules.
Liscow, supra note 1, at 2483–84, 2486–88 (describing the “distribution of legal entitlements R
that can entail a distortion of neither income nor the activity regulated by the legal rule—a
‘zero distortion’”). Outside of his motivating example, however, Liscow appears to concede
with the rest of the literature that both legal and tax redistribution will entail some distortion
and so the problem is to choose the most efficient—or, perhaps better, the least inefficient—
policy. Id. at 2482–83 (arguing his general point that “using an ‘inefficient’ legal rule instead
of taxation can be an efficient means of redistribution”).
That the debate has overlooked the possibility that legal rules can both increase efficiency
and reduce inequality is somewhat surprising because it is quite well known among econo-
mists and others outside of the double-distortion debate that redistributive policies can also
improve efficiency. This conclusion comes mainly from the literature on the economics of
information. For an overview, see Karla Hoff, Market Failures and the Distribution of Wealth:
A Perspective from the Economics of Information, 24 POL. & SOC’Y 411, 426 (1998). In a
competitive market with perfect information the allocation of resources is generally efficient
for any initial distribution of wealth. Id. at 412. But as several studies have identified, when
information is imperfect, efficiency may well depend on the distribution of wealth. See, e.g.,
Ben Bernanke & Mark Gertler, Financial Fragility and Economic Performance, 105 Q.J.
ECON. 87 (1990) (developing a model of finance where financial instability and agency
costs—both inefficient—increase when borrower’s net worth is lower); Carl Shapiro & Joseph
Stiglitz, Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device, 74 AM. ECON. REV. 433,
439–41 (1984) (demonstrating with an efficiency-wage model of the labor market that a policy
intervention can increase efficiency while also lowering profits and increasing wages). As
these studies demonstrate, a redistributive policy intervention (including, I would argue,
changes in legal rules) can also increase efficiency. This Article agrees with this literature, but\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 6  7-DEC-16 12:12
6 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
ary, but argue that inefficient legal rules may still be more efficient than
tax-and-transfer policies, similar to the premise of my second point.11
Clearly, however, the distinction matters because it strengthens the case
for using legal rules to redistribute income. For instance, because of the
economic cost, justifying an inefficient legal redistribution will require
that there be “significant income differences between plaintiffs and de-
fendants.”12 In contrast, an efficient legal redistribution will always be
justified on distributive grounds, even if it reduces income inequality
only slightly.
Furthermore, I am aware of no other Article that concludes that the
choice of legal rules versus taxes will itself depend on the level of ine-
quality. Previous research has offered a variety of reasons and conditions
for when inefficient legal rules will be more efficient than taxes and
transfers.13 None of these, however, recognize that the choice between
law and taxes depends on the level of inequality itself. Since inequality is
what we care about when redistributing income, this is a significant
point.
Finally, following Kaplow and Shavell, virtually all previous contri-
butions have worked with examples in the area of tort law.14 Kaplow and
Shavell are absolutely correct to say that their analysis goes beyond this
specific case. Nevertheless, this focus has perhaps unnecessarily con-
strained the debate. For example, elsewhere Kaplow and Shavell argue
also argues that efficient legal redistributions are not limited to the case of imperfect
information.
11 To adopt a phrase, one can call my argument the “negative distortion” argument—that
is, distortions that are less than zero, or increase efficiency—in contrast with Kaplow and
Shavell’s double-distortion argument or Liscow’s zero-distortion argument.
12 Liscow, supra note 1, at 2484 (emphasis added). R
13 See, e.g., Deconstructing, supra note 1 (arguing that income may well be an appropri- R
ate signal when designing legal rules to maximize social welfare); Avraham et al., supra note 1 R
(arguing that when one introduces heterogeneity in individuals’ care-taking abilities and addi-
tional information restrictions, it may be appropriate to condition legal rules on individuals’
income); Blumkin & Margalioth, supra note 1, at 11–14 (arguing that when administrative and R
compliance costs are considered, legal rules may be less inefficient than taxes in redistributing
income); Liscow, supra note 1, at 2484 (describing six factors when legal rules will less ineffi- R
cient than taxation: “legal rules are more desirable when: (1) there actually are significant
income differences between plaintiffs and defendants; (2) group membership is inelastic; (3)
responses to a rule change are slow and the income transfers are fast; (4) the economic inci-
dence of a policy is on the desired individuals; (5) parties can bargain at low cost; and (6)
redistributing to the poor is more important than violating notions of horizontal equity.”);
Fennell & McAdams, supra note 1, at 1 (arguing that “[i]n contexts where political impedi- R
ments to tax-based redistribution exceed the impediments to doctrinal redistribution, it may be
possible to increase welfare by redistributing outside of tax”).
14 See, e.g., Deconstructing, supra note 1, at 1008 (considering an income-dependent R
damages rule, as in Kaplow and Shavell’s double-distortion argument); Avraham et al., supra
note 1, at 1127 (focusing on an income-dependent damage rule in torts, as in the double- R
distortion argument); Liscow, supra note 1, at 2486 (comparing negligence and strict liability R
rules).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 7  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 7
that “many legal rules probably have little effect on the distribution of
income,” because litigants will have similar incomes or be on each side
of a transaction equally often.15 While this is more likely to be true in
areas of tort or contract law, for instance, the scope for redistributive law
is much greater beyond these areas. The Article produces several exam-
ples—from the areas of product markets, labor markets, and capital mar-
kets—to establish this claim.
The organization of the Article proceeds as follows. Part I recapitu-
lates the Kaplow and Shavell double-distortion argument. After defining
both efficiency and redistribution, Part II produces several examples
from product markets, labor markets, and capital markets to demonstrate
cases where legal interventions can both reduce inequality and increase
efficiency. From this, I then make the more general argument that redis-
tributive legal rules have no a priori relationship to efficiency. At the
most general level, a reduction in inequality can be associated with a
change in total wealth that makes at least someone worse off and no one
better off (inefficient), makes at least one person better off and another
worse off while reducing total wealth (inefficient), makes one person
better off and another worse off while increasing total wealth (Kaldor-
Hicks efficient), or makes at least someone better off and no one worse
off (Pareto efficient).
In Part III, I consider cases where a legal redistribution reduces effi-
ciency but may still be more desirable than tax-and-transfer redistribu-
tion. While a legal redistribution may introduce some inefficiency, if the
loss is smaller than that caused under the optimal tax-and-transfer policy,
then the legal redistribution will be preferred. Introducing the discussion
of the optimal tax policy requires a discussion of an additional criterion
for normative economic analysis, the idea of social-welfare maximiza-
tion. As the name suggests, the optimal tax policy maximizes welfare,
rather than wealth, as in the efficiency criteria. These two objectives may
well conflict, which justifies the efficiency loss under the optimal tax
policy. But if welfare maximization is the goal, there may be an ineffi-
cient legal redistribution that dominates the optimal tax policy in welfare
terms.  Hence,  I  title  this  Part  optimal,  rather  than  efficient,  legal
redistribution.
Part IV considers a series of objections one could make to my argu-
ment. One could argue that there is no disagreement with Kaplow and
Shavell in the sense that efficiency remains the exclusive criterion of
legal evaluation in the case of efficiency legal redistribution. My re-
sponse is that there is no particularly good reason to privilege the effi-
cient, rather than the redistributive, quality of such rule changes. To the
15 LOUIS KAPLOW & STEVEN SHAVELL, FAIRNESS VERSUS WELFARE 33 (2009).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 8  7-DEC-16 12:12
8 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
contrary, there is compelling justification for giving the redistributive as-
pect equal consideration through a welfare argument. One could also ob-
ject that if the non-redistributive legal rule in question is Pareto efficient
then Kaplow and Shavell’s assumption that legal redistribution will al-
ways be inefficient is sound. But this requires the unjustified assumption
that the rule is uniquely Pareto efficient. Indeed, if there is more than one
Pareto efficient legal rule, the only criterion by which to evaluate legal
rules is by their effect on distribution. This Part also discusses implica-
tions for the argument of “non-convexities” in the economy, efficient
tax-and-transfer policies, and the choice between what is called “correc-
tive taxation” and legal rules.
Part V ties together the analysis with a broader consideration about
distributive economic policy in a world of imperfect markets. One can
read Kaplow and Shavell’s contribution as a way to make relevant for
policy the insight of what is called the second fundamental theorem of
welfare economics. That theorem says that with perfectly competitive
markets any possible Pareto-efficient equilibrium can be achieved with
lump sum taxation. Similar to Kaplow and Shavell’s argument, the impli-
cation is that policy makers need not “disturb” the workings of the mar-
ket in order to get to a Pareto-efficient equilibrium with a more desirable
distribution of income. Unfortunately, implementing this program re-
quires the implausible condition that governments have perfect informa-
tion about consumers’ tastes and firms’ production possibilities. In a
world without perfect information, any government system of taxation
will be distortionary. Kaplow and Shavell’s argument is then that, given
the distortionary nature of taxation, it is best not to add to the distortions
with redistributive and distortionary legal rules. My response is that the
problem of imperfect markets does not apply only to the tax system, and
to the extent that there is market failure in other aspects of the economy,
remedying some of these failures may increase both inequality and inef-
ficiency. As long as this is true, there is always scope for legal interven-
tion for distributive as well as efficiency reasons.
I. THE DOUBLE-DISTORTION ARGUMENT
This Part presents an overview of Kaplow and Shavell’s argument
for why the legal system is less efficient than the income tax system for
redistributing income. The argument is simple and compelling. Their ba-
sic claim is that “using legal rules to redistribute income distorts work
incentives fully as much as the income tax system . . . and also creates
inefficiencies in the activities regulated by the legal rules.”16 Conse-
quently, “redistribution through legal rules offers no advantage over re-
16 Kaplow & Shavell, supra note 1, at 667–68. R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 9  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 9
distribution  through  the  income  tax  system  and  typically  is  less
efficient.”17 From this analysis they also draw the more general conclu-
sion that “it is appropriate for economic analysis of legal rules to focus
on efficiency and to ignore the distribution of income in offering norma-
tive judgments.”18
To understand Kaplow and Shavell’s argument, it will be helpful to
use their own illustrative example. They use an example from tort law,
but it is easy to see that it has more general applicability.19 Individuals
engage in two kinds of activities. They work, or supply labor, which is
costly either because effort is costly or because time spent working takes
time away from leisure. Individuals also take precautions against the
likelihood of causing accidents, which is also costly, in terms of time or
money.20
They consider two different legal rules in tort, beginning with an
efficient one. This is the strict liability rule. Under this rule, a defendant
is liable for the harm she causes. As is well understood, a strict liability
rule leads to the efficient level of care.21 This is because when a person
pays for the damage she causes, she is forced to fully “internalize” the
costs of her behavior. For concreteness, suppose that each person’s ex-
pected net accident costs under strict liability are $1,000.22
Now compare the efficient, strict-liability rule, with an inefficient
legal rule. The proposed inefficient legal rule is one where the damages a
person must pay for harm-causing behavior vary by income.23 For exam-
ple, suppose a poor person, with income of $0, must pay $500 (or half)
of the expected net accident costs, while a rich person, with an income of
$100,000, must pay $2,000 (or double the costs).24 This rule is inefficient
because it induces the poor to take too little care and the rich to take too
much than is efficient.25 However, the rule is also redistributive, since it
reduces the expected costs the poor have to pay for harm-causing behav-
ior, while increasing the expected costs of the rich. If we include these
expected accident costs into each person’s expected income, for exam-
17 Id. at 667.
18 Id. at 677.
19 Id. at 669 (“For concreteness, we will use a specific example in our analysis, but it
will be clear that our argument does not depend on the particulars of the example.”).
20 Id.
21 Id. (“It is a familiar result that the strict liability rule—under which individuals pay for
the harm they cause—leads to efficient behavior.”).
22 Id.
23 Id. (“Redistribution might be accomplished, for example, by setting damages higher
when the injurer is wealthy and lower when the injurer is poor.”).
24 Id.
25 Id. (“Such a redistributive legal rule would be inefficient: it would induce the wealthy
to take more care and the poor to take less care than is efficient.”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 10  7-DEC-16 12:12
10 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
ple, expected inequality is lower under the inefficient, but redistributive,
legal rule.26
Added to the tort system—or more generally the legal system—is
the tax system. Kaplow and Shavell consider a case where people pay a
20% tax rate on income above $10,000, while those below this threshold
receive transfer payments equaling 20% of the difference between their
income and the threshold.27 Thus the rich person would pay $18,000 in
taxes,  while  the  poor  person  would  receive  $2,000  in  transfer
payments.28
Next, add together both the tax system and the expected accident
costs of the inefficient legal rule. It is this combination that determines
individual work incentives and ultimately welfare.29 The rich person’s
total expected costs are $20,000, while the poor person expects to re-
ceive (or “pays” a negative tax in amount) $1,500.30 Essentially, these
sums of tax and liability costs define the total marginal tax rates of both
the legal and tax systems. A critical observation is that because both the
amount of taxes paid and the liability costs vary by income, they both
reduce the incentives to work.31
The next step is to compare this regime, with the inefficient legal
rule, to a regime with the efficient legal rule and a more redistributive tax
system. Kaplow and Shavell do this in two steps. First, they construct a
new, more redistributive income tax schedule.32 In this new tax schedule,
the rich person pays $19,000 (rather than $18,000) in taxes, while the
poor person receives $2,500 (rather than $2,000) in transfer payments.33
Second, they calculate total tax and accident costs under the new tax
schedule and the efficient legal rule. Since the expected costs are $1,000
for everyone, this yields a total tax and accident cost of $20,000 for the
rich and $1,500 for the poor.34
Not surprisingly, since the new tax schedule was chosen precisely to
produce this result, the total tax and liability costs are identical for each
person under both the old and the new regimes. Labor supply incentives
26 Id. (“Expected accident costs must be a function of income if the rule is to redistribute
income relative to a rule under which everyone’s accident costs are the same.”).
27 Id. at 670.
28 That is, the rich pay 0.20 x ($100,000 - $10,000) in taxes, while the poor receive 0.20
x ($10,000 - $0) in transfer payments.
29 Id. at 670 (“It is this combination that determines an individual’s welfare level and
work incentives.”).
30 Id. at 671 fig. 2.
31 Id. at 671 (“[W]e emphasize that when an individual with income y contemplates
earning additional income by working harder, his total marginal expected payments equal the
sum of his marginal tax payment and the expected marginal cost on account of accidents.”).
32 Id. at 671–72.
33 Id. at 673 fig. 4.
34 Id. at 672 fig. 3.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 11  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 11
are therefore identical between the two regimes, because the marginal
costs are the same.35 This is a device to make clear the logical inference
that follows. Since labor incentives are the same, total tax revenue, as
well as total economic output, must be higher under the second regime.36
Tax revenues are higher, because with identical labor incentives, the new
tax schedule, with higher rates on the rich, collects more revenue.37 In-
deed, if our simple example is a society consisting of only these two
individuals, the additional revenue is $500. The rich person pays $1,000
more in taxes, while the poor person receives an additional $500 in trans-
fer payments. Total economic output is higher, because under the effi-
cient legal rule, both the rich and the poor choose the efficient level of
care. In fact, tax revenues increase precisely by the amount of dead-
weight loss caused under the inefficient legal rule.38 This additional reve-
nue can then be used to make society better off—either by lowering
taxes, increasing transfers to the poor, or spending the revenue on public
goods that benefit everyone.39
Thus, using the legal system for redistributive objects leads to a
“double distortion” in economic behavior. The tax system is already re-
distributive and distortionary. Using the legal system for redistributive
purposes  only  adds  to  these  distortions.  It  would  be  preferable,  in
Kaplow and Shavell’s reasoning, to make the economic system and its
governing legal rules as productive as possible and to use the increased
output for further redistribution through the tax system. Even keeping tax
rates constant, the additional output under an efficient legal regime will
increase tax revenue, making it possible to increase transfer payments to
the poor, reduce taxes, or both. This achieves more redistribution and
makes everyone better off. Even those more interested in redistribution
than efficiency and not inclined to find interest in a law-and-economic
analysis should take heed. Increasing efficiency can enhance redistribu-
tive objectives. A larger pie makes it possible to increase the welfare of
the poor.
35 Id. at 673 (“[E]ach individual . . . will choose to earn the same income under each
regime because his incentives will be unchanged: a marginal dollar earned will result in the
same incremental costs (taxes plus accident costs) under both regimes.”).
36 Id. (“Although work effort and an individual’s after-tax welfare are identical under the
two regimes, the state collects more tax revenue in the new regime because it involves a more
efficient legal rule.”).
37 Id.
38 Id. (“[T]he new tax collects all the resources saved by the efficient legal rule.”).
39 Id. at 674 (“With this additional revenue, the government can make each individual
better off—for example, by lowering taxes (for the poor, increasing transfers) by a fixed
amount for each individual or spending the funds on a public good that benefits everyone.”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 12  7-DEC-16 12:12
12 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
II. EFFICIENT LEGAL REDISTRIBUTION
A critical element in Kaplow and Shavell’s argument is that legal
rules that redistribute income are always inefficient. For example, they
write, “[U]sing legal rules to redistribute income distorts work incentives
fully as much as the income tax system—because the distortion is caused
by the redistribution itself—and also creates inefficiencies in the activi-
ties regulated by the legal rules.”40 If legal rules that redistribute income
do not also create inefficiencies, there is no double-distortion.
The first claim of this Article is that their conclusion that legal rules
are distortionary does not in general follow from the premise that they
are redistributive. That is, not all legal rules that redistribute income are
inefficient, and indeed some can be efficient—even possibly Pareto effi-
cient. In fact, there is nothing in the concept of redistribution, properly
understood, that implies either more or less efficiency in economic activ-
ity. It follows from this that if a legal rule both redistributes income and
increases efficiency, it will be strictly superior to redistribution through
the tax-and-transfer system. While taxation is always distortionary (as
understood  by  Kaplow  and  Shavell),41  and  therefore  always  reduces
wealth, some legal redistributions can increase wealth.
To make this argument concrete, I first begin by defining both effi-
ciency and redistribution as those terms are used by economists. With the
definition of redistribution, it is possible to talk about the concept of a
legal redistribution. Since this concept builds on the more general idea of
redistribution within economics, it is no different from the way redistri-
bution through taxes and transfers is understood. The definition is there-
fore fully general and does not depend on any special assumption about
how redistribution through legal rules specifically takes place.
With these definitions in hand, I then make this Part’s first point by
providing a series of examples. Examples from legal rules governing
product markets, labor markets, and capital markets all underscore the
point that market inefficiencies can also increase inequality. In such
cases, legal rules can both increase efficiency and reduce inequality.
Following  these  examples,  I  make  the  argument  more  abstract,
showing how redistribution relates—or, more accurately, does not re-
late—to efficiency in a general setting. A legal rule that has a redistribu-
tive  effect  can  make  everyone  better  off,  and  therefore  be  Pareto
efficient, or it can make everyone worse off, in which case it is ineffi-
cient for violating the Pareto principle. Even more, a redistributive legal
rule can make one person better off and another worse off and there is
still no obvious consequence for efficiency. If the “winner” could com-
40 Id. at 667–68.
41 For a discussion of an exception to this assumption, see infra Part IV.D.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 13  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 13
pensate the “loser,” the legal redistribution will be Kaldor-Hicks effi-
cient. If not, the rule will be inefficient. There is therefore nothing about
redistribution that necessarily increases or—more appositely—decreases
wealth.
A. Economic Efficiency
Are  legal  redistributions  necessarily  inefficient?  To  answer  this
question, we need to be clear about what is meant by the concept of
efficiency. This section therefore quickly reviews the definitions of effi-
ciency found in the economics and law-and-economics literatures.
Most simply, efficiency is the idea of wealth maximization—as dis-
tinct from welfare maximization, an idea that we will encounter later.42
The two best-known definitions of efficiency are Pareto efficiency and
Kaldor-Hicks efficiency.43 Beginning with the concept of Pareto effi-
ciency, this idea is typically divided into two subconcepts.44 They are
closely related, but their distinction is important. The first idea is Pareto
superiority. This idea says that one allocation of income (for example) is
Pareto superior to another if it makes no one worse off and at least one
person better off.45 In other words, there is at least some improvement in
total social welfare. Hence a change in allocation that is Pareto superior
to another is also called a Pareto improvement.46 Similarly, but con-
versely, we can say that one allocation is Pareto inferior if it makes at
least one person worse off even if it makes others better off.47
42 There are several introductions to the idea of economic efficiency. For an excellent
introduction for the law-and-economics reader, see generally Jules L. Coleman, Efficiency,
Utility, and Wealth Maximization, 8 HOFSTRA L. REV. 509 (1980) (introducing the ideas of
Pareto efficiency and Kaldor-Hicks efficiency).
43 Id. at 512–14. Strictly speaking, we should reserve the term “wealth maximization”
for the criterion of Kaldor-Hicks efficiency. See RICHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSISOF
LAW 14 (1998) [hereinafter POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS] (equating wealth maximization
with Kaldor-Hicks efficiency); Richard A. Posner, The Ethical and Political Basis of the Effi-
ciency Norm in Common Law Adjudication, 8 HOFSTRA L. REV. 487, 491 (1980) [hereinafter
Posner,  Ethical  and  Political  Basis]  (equating  wealth  maximization  with  Kaldor-Hicks
efficiency).
44 Coleman, supra note 42, at 512–13 (distinguishing between Pareto superiority and R
Pareto optimality (or, as termed here, Pareto efficiency)).
45 Id. at 513 (“An allocation of resources is Pareto superior to an alternative allocation if
and only if no is made worse off by the distribution and the welfare of at least one person is
improved.”).
46 JOSEPH E. STIGLITZ, ECONOMICSOFTHE PUBLIC SECTOR 93 (2d ed. 1988) (referring to
changes  that  make  some  better  off  without  making  anyone  worse  off  as  “Pareto
improvements”).
47 Although Pareto superiority is stated in terms of utility or welfare (“worse off,” “better
off,” etc.), one can construe it as a principle of wealth maximization. Part of the appeal of the
Pareto principle is that it does not rely on interpersonal comparisons of utility. On the problem
of interpersonal comparisons of utility, see infra notes 202–34 [Part IV.A] and accompanying R
discussion. Thus the only way to demonstrate that a change is Pareto superior is to show that
everyone consented to it. One way to do this is by using the willingness-to-pay principle. As\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 14  7-DEC-16 12:12
14 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
In addition to the concept of Pareto superiority is the idea of Pareto
efficiency. An allocation is Pareto efficient if no one can be made better
off without also making someone else worse off.48 Thus, when an alloca-
tion is Pareto efficient, we have exhausted all the Pareto superior, or
Pareto improving possibilities—it is no longer possible to make all per-
sons or at least one person better off.49 Despite this limit to Pareto im-
provements  there  may  be  many—perhaps  infinite—Pareto  efficient
allocations. Because of these many possibilities it is said that the collec-
tion of all Pareto efficient allocations constitutes the “Pareto frontier.”50
One reason that Pareto superiority has such a strong attraction is
that it is underlined by unanimity: a change can improve efficiency only
so long as no one is made worse off.51 But, since economic and policy
changes frequently do make somebody worse off, the conditions for
Pareto superiority are rarely satisfied.52 For this reason, the concept of
Kaldor-Hicks efficiency is frequently called upon.53 An allocation is said
to be Kaldor-Hicks efficient relative to another if the “winners” could
compensate  the  “losers.”54  Note  that  this  compensation  is  typically
thought of as merely hypothetical. If compensation did actually occur,
Judge Posner explains, “If A sells a tomato to B for $2 and no one else is affected by the
transaction, we can be sure that the utility to A of $2 is greater than the utility of the tomato to
A, and vice versa for B, even though we do not know how much A’s and B’s utility has been
increased by the transaction.” Posner, Ethical and Political Basis, supra note 43, at 489. Thus, R
willingness to pay, a measure of wealth, becomes the main criterion to determine whether a
change is Pareto superior.
48 Coleman, supra, note 42, at 512–13. Coleman refers to this condition as Pareto opti- R
mal or a Pareto optimum. In order to keep distinct the ideas of wealth and welfare maximiza-
tion, I will typically use efficient or efficiency for the former and optimum or optimal for the
latter. Hence, I refer to the Pareto conditions as Pareto efficient or Pareto efficiency.
49 Id. at 513 (noting that Pareto efficiency and Pareto superiority “are analytically related
in that a Pareto-[efficient] distribution has no distributions Pareto superior to it”).
50 JEAN HINDRIKS & GARETH D. MYLES, INTERMEDIATE PUBLIC ECONOMICS 425 (2006).
51 Coleman, supra note 42, at 546 n. 61 (“Nicholas Kaldor (of the Kaldor-Hicks test) R
early on conceived of the Pareto-superior test as rooted in the principle of consent.”); see also
Posner, Ethical and Political Basis, supra note 43, at 488 (“[W]ealth maximization, especially R
in the common law setting, derives support from the principle of consent that can also be
regarded as underlying the otherwise quite different approach of Pareto ethics.”).
52 POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,supra note 43, at 14 (explaining that Pareto superiority R
“has few applications to the real world because most transactions . . . have effects on third
parties, if only by changing the prices of other goods . . .”). To put the shortcoming more
sharply, some alternatives are incomparable under the Pareto-superiority criterion. HINDRIKS
& MYLES, supra note 50, at 439 (“Another failing of the Pareto preference is that it is not R
always able to compare alternative states. In formal terms, it does not provide a complete
ordering of states.”) (emphasis in original). In addition to this shortcoming, Pareto superiority
is indifferent to distributive judgments. Id. at 438. I further explore these shortcomings later in
the article. See infra Part IV.A.
53 POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,supra note 43, at 14. R
54 Coleman, supra note 42, at 513 (“One state of affairs (E’) is Kaldor-Hicks efficient to R
another (E) if and only if those whose welfare increases in the move from E to E’ could fully
compensate those whose welfare diminishes with a net gain in welfare.”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 15  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 15
the change in allocation would be Pareto efficient as well.55 Neverthe-
less, if it is at least feasible for winners to compensate losers, then it must
be true that total wealth in society has increased.56 We can then say that
new allocation is more efficient than the old. Because of this greater
flexibility, Kaldor-Hicks efficiency is typically the criterion of choice
when law-and-economics scholars write about efficiency.57
These ideas can be illustrated in the following Figure 1. Each axis
of Figure 1 measures the utility (U) of two people, person 1 on the hori-
zontal axis and person 2 on the vertical axis. In addition, let y represent a
person’s income. Therefore, each person’s income is labeled y  and y .
1 2
Each person then gets a certain level of utility from the income they
have, and utility is increasing in income. That is, U  = U(y ).
1 1
Income, and therefore utility, increases as one moves further from
the origin on either axis. The curved line represents the utility possibility
frontier.58 The utility possibility frontier represents the maximum amount
of utility that one individual can attain given the utility of another.59 The
utility possibility frontier is also the Pareto frontier.60 Thus, this line rep-
resents the set of Pareto efficient allocations—along the line, for exam-
ple, the utility of person 1 can only be increased at the expense of person
2. Legal regimes A and B are both Pareto efficient, for example, and
moving between them requires making either person 1 or 2 better or
worse off. However, within the Pareto frontier, improvements that make
no one worse off are possible. Legal regime A, for instance, represents a
Pareto improvement from regime C, and makes both 1 and 2 better off.
Also observe that the dashed line along the 45-degree angle repre-
sents allocations that give persons 1 and 2 equal income and utility. Ob-
serve that points A and B are both Pareto efficient. Despite that, point A
exhibits greater inequality than point B. Thus, Pareto efficiency is indif-
ferent between these two allocations. Despite the substantial difference
between them in the level of inequality, Pareto efficiency cannot make
any distributional judgment.61 Notice also that Pareto efficiency cannot
55 Id. (“Under Kaldor-Hicks, compensation to losers is not in fact paid. Were the pay-
ment transaction costless and full compensation given to the losers, Kaldor-Hicks distributions
would be transformed into Pareto-superior ones.”).
56 Because compensation implies the common metric of willingness to pay, it becomes
clear  why  efficiency  is  concerned  with  wealth  maximization,  rather  than  welfare
maximization.
57 POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS, supra note 43, at 15 (“When an economist says that R
free trade or competition or the control of pollution or some other policy or state of the world
is efficient, nine times out of ten he means Kaldor-Hicks efficient.”).
58 For further discussion and theoretical grounding for the utility possibilities frontier,
see id. at 424–25.
59 STIGLITZ, supra note 46, at 63–64. R
60 Id.
61 The indifference limitation of Pareto efficiency was mentioned previously, supra note
52. I discuss this shortcoming further below, infra note 205 and accompanying text. R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 16  7-DEC-16 12:12
16 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
make any judgment about whether point B or point C is better than the
other. Although point B is Pareto efficient, and point C is not, moving
from point C to point B is not a Pareto improvement, since it requires
making person 1 worse off. Points B and C are therefore incomparable
under the Pareto efficiency concept.62 However, since a move from C to
B makes it possible for person 2 to compensate person 1, Kaldor-Hicks
efficiency ranks B as superior to C.63
B. Redistribution and Inequality
To answer the question of whether legal redistributions are necessa-
rily inefficient, we also need to define the concept of redistribution. It is
not clear how the double-distortion debate defines redistribution. To be-
gin, Kaplow and Shavell are correct to insist that the kinds of legal rules
they have in mind are not limited to those that make damages a function
of the parties’ income.64 They do, however, appear to construe redistri-
bution in a way that is at least functionally equivalent to the tax-and-
transfer system: as cash transfers from rich to poor.65 Other contribu-
tions to this debate also appear to adopt this interpretation of redistribu-
tion, which suggests that this may indeed be the way that Kaplow and
Shavell think about it.66
62 Note that incomparability is not the same as indifference. To say that Pareto superior-
ity is indifferent between two different states means that they are ranked equally “good.” In
contrast, incomparability means that the two states cannot be ranked at all. See HINDRIKS &
MYLES, supra note 50, at 439. R
63 Kaldor-Hicks efficiency therefore addresses the incomparability problem of Pareto su-
periority. As I will discuss further below, however, it does not solve the indifference problem.
See infra Part IV.A.
64 Sanchirico claimed that Kaplow and Shavell’s argument holds “only when damages
are made a function of the parties’ incomes.” Sanchirico, supra note 5, at 799. However, R
Kaplow and Shavell quite clearly—and convincingly, in my view—contend that this assertion
is incorrect. See Kaplow & Shavell, supra note 1, at 679 (“It should be apparent that our result R
does not depend on the nature of the activity (for example, one could incorporate victim care),
the form of the legal rule, the income tax system, or the distribution of ability.”).
65 To obtain identical results in Kaplow and Shavell’s argument, one need not only con-
sider damage rules. More generally, however, the effect they describe would need to function
equivalently to a tax on the relevant behavior. See Liscow, supra note 1, at 2489 (“Kaplow and R
Shavell’s important insight is that requiring defendants to pay higher damages if they are rich
is equivalent to an income tax.”); id. at 2490 (referring to the type of legal rules that Kaplow
and Shavell have in mind as a “Kaplow-Shavell-type tax”).
66 Id. at 2487 (explaining with his example that a reduction in inequality that follows a
change in liability rules “is perhaps better defined as distribution rather than redistribution—
indeed, perfect, costless, equity-informed distribution”) (emphasis in original). Note that Lis-
cow’s example still involves redistribution through cash “transfers”—cash payments made to
compensate for all harm caused under a strict liability rule. The examples below demonstrate
that cash transfers need not be required to speak intelligibly about the distributional effects of
legal rules. Furthermore, as the discussion below illustrates, there is no meaningful distinction
between distribution and redistribution in economic theory.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 17  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 17
However, there is nothing special about cash transfers in the idea of
redistribution. Within economics, redistribution is understood simply as a
reduction  in  income  or  wealth  inequality.67  The  definition  seems
straightforward enough, but we now must be clearer about the concept of
inequality more specifically. In this Article, I will use the idea of Lorenz
dominance to compare economic allocations according to corresponding
levels of inequality.68 The concept of Lorenz dominance comes from the
well-known tool of the Lorenz curve to measure inequality.69 To con-
struct a Lorenz curve, one must first order individuals in terms of in-
creasing levels of income (or wealth).70 The Lorenz curve then measures
the proportion of total income owned by a given proportion of the popu-
lation.71 Inequality will be present (and in the real world, it always is)
whenever a certain percentage of the population (less than 100%) holds
less than that same percentage of the income.72
Using the definition of the Lorenz curve we can compare two differ-
ent income distributions.73 Distribution A will Lorenz dominate distribu-
tion B if any given percentage of the population under A always holds a
larger percentage of the income than under B.74 Thus Lorenz dominance
between distributions will occur when the poorer fraction of the popula-
tion holds more of the income in one than in the other.
Figure 3 represents the idea of using Lorenz curves to rank income
distributions. The horizontal axis represents the proportion of the popula-
tion, arranged in order of increasing income, while the vertical axis rep-
resents the proportion of income (or wealth). If a society enjoyed perfect
equality, each person would own an equal fraction of income, and the
proportion of the population would always equal the proportion of in-
67 PETER LAMBERT, THE DISTRIBUTIONAND REDISTRIBUTIONOF INCOME 37–39 (3d ed.
2001) (defining redistribution in terms of a policy—in this case, taxation—that “exerts an
equalizing effect on the distribution of income”).
68 For an introduction to the notion of Lorenz curves and Lorenz dominance, see HIN-
DRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 471–72. For a more in-depth treatment, see LAMBERT,supra R
note 67, at 30–37, 44–49. R
69 HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 471. R
70 Id. (“The Lorenz curve is constructed by arranging the population in order of increas-
ing income and then graphing the proportion of income going to each proportion of the
population.”).
71 Id.
72 Id. (“If there is any degree of inequality, the ordering in which the households are
taken ensures that the Lorenz curve lies below the diagonal since, for example, the poorest half
of the population must have less than half the total income.”).
73 Id. (“The Lorenz curve can be employed to unambiguously rank some income distri-
butions with respect to income inequality.”).
74 Id. at 471–72 (providing an example of how income distributions can be ranked using
Lorenz curves); see alsoLAMBERT, supra note 67, at 26–27 (explaining that a distribution A R
Lorenz dominates a distribution B when the “bottom 100p per cent of income units in distribu-
tion A have a greater share in total income than do the corresponding group in distribution B,
and this is true for every p between 0 and 1”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 18  7-DEC-16 12:12
18 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
come. This condition is represented by the dashed, “line of equality.”
However, in no society is the income distribution ever perfectly equal,
and so the Lorenz curve will always be convex, with a given proportion
of the population possessing less than an equal proportion of the income.
The three different curves, A, B, and C, represent different distributions
of income. In the figure, distribution B Lorenz dominates distribution C
because B lies everywhere above C. Intuitively, income is distributed
more equally, since any (poorer) proportion of the population below the
richest person holds a greater share of the income in B than in C. In
contrast, note that we cannot rank distribution A with either B or C. The
reason is that the curve representing distribution A crosses both B and C.
At some proportion of the population, the poorer fraction of A owns
more but then also less than B or C.75
75 Thus the idea of Lorenz dominance has both strengths and weaknesses. The main
strength is that when Lorenz dominance occurs, it allows a unanimous ranking of income
distributions. See id. at 49 (“Lorenz dominance carries with it welfare approval according to
every strictly increasing and concave utility-of-income function . . . ”) (emphasis added). There
are many different measures of inequality. And depending on the kind of change in the income
distribution, one index might conclude that inequality has fallen, while another might reach the
opposite conclusion. But if one distribution Lorenz dominates another, all indexes will agree
on whether inequality has increased or decreased.
On the other hand, as was show in the comparison of distributions A with B and C in
Figure 3, Lorenz dominance does not supply an answer to this question in all cases. An income
distribution can change without Lorenz dominance occurring. This can happen, for example,
when the poor receive a lower share of the income but the lower middle class gains a larger
share, both relative to the rich. In this case, the Lorenz curve of the second distribution may
not lie everywhere above the curve of the first. In this case, the Lorenz curves cross, and it is
not possible to say whether one distribution dominates the other. LAMBERT, supra note 67, at R
27. Thus, similar to Pareto efficiency, see infra note 62 and accompanying text, Lorenz domi- R
nance does not give us a complete ordering, which makes some distributions incomparable.
This does appear to be a real world problem as well, and can arise when trying to com-
pare inequality across different countries. LAMBERT, supra note 67, at 27 (reporting that one R
study “found Lorenz crossings in more than 30 per cent of 2,556 possible pairwise compari-
sons between 72 countries”). This is a major reason why alternative measures of income distri-
bution, such as the Gini coefficient, have been proposed. The Gini coefficient measures the
area between the Lorenz curve and the line of equality. SeeHINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note
50, at 472–74. Unlike Lorenz dominance, the Gini coefficient supplies a complete ordering of R
distributions. Id. at 474 (“This definition makes clear that the Gini . . . can be used to rank
distributions when the Lorenz curves cross, since the relevant area is always well defined.”).
That is, with the Gini coefficient we will always be able to say whether inequality is larger or
smaller.
The drawback, as already implied, is that these alternative inequality indices do not al-
ways agree. For example, some argue that the Gini coefficient does not give enough weight to
income changes at the top (or bottom), and so that the Gini coefficient gives an understated
picture of the recent rise in inequality in the United States, where income gains have been
concentrated at the very top of the distribution. See, e.g., Anthony B. Atkinson et al., Top
Incomes in the Long Run of History, 49 J. ECON. LIT. 3, 10 (2011) (“The most commonly used
summary measure of overall inequality, the Gini coefficient, is more sensitive to transfers at
the center of the distribution than at the tails.”).
Despite these drawbacks, none of them presents any serious obstacle to the argument
made in this Article. There may well be a debate about whether a change in legal rules will\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 19  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 19
Thus, comparing distributions of income allows us to speak pre-
cisely about redistribution, in the way we have already defined it.76 For
instance, if some policy x changes the income distribution from C to B,
then we can say that policy x is redistributive. Note that this is a general
definition of redistribution. In fact, a special case of this definition corre-
sponds exactly to the way economists measure the redistributive effects
of taxation.77 The redistributive effect of taxation is also defined in terms
of Lorenz curves and Lorenz dominance.78 And a standard result in pub-
lic economics demonstrates that a progressive tax schedule—as con-
trasted with a proportional or regressive one—will be redistributive in
precisely this sense.79 Thus, a tax-and-transfer policy will be redistribu-
tive when the Lorenz curve of disposable income (i.e., after taxes and
transfers) dominates the Lorenz curve of market inequality (i.e., before
taxes and transfers).80
We can understand the distributive effects of legal rules in exactly
the same way. Thus, for instance, we can define a legal redistribution as
one where the distribution of income caused by the legal rule Lorenz
dominates the distribution of income prior to the enactment or applica-
tion of the legal rule.
For an illustration of this, we can use again the example provided in
Kaplow and Shavell’s argument. Kaplow and Shavell’s example of a re-
distributive legal rule—damage awards that depend on income—con-
forms exactly with this general definition of redistribution. Compared to
a legal rule that gives both poor and rich individuals identical accident
costs, the legal rule that allows damages to vary by income is redistribu-
tive precisely because it reduces inequality. Since the poor’s expected
accident costs decrease from $1,000 to $500, the expected income of the
increase or decrease inequality according to one or another inequality index. But this problem
exists independently of the question of whether the legal system should be used to redistribute
income. In order to focus on the debate that matters for this Article, I assume that all distribu-
tional changes can be ranked according to the Lorenz dominance criterion. Since Lorenz domi-
nance implies unanimous agreement, what this means essentially is that we only consider
distributional changes on which all inequality indices would agree.
76 See supra note 67 and accompanying text. R
77 LAMBERT, supra note 67, at 37–39 (defining redistribution in terms of the equalizing R
effect of progressive taxation).
78 See, e.g., Ulf Jakobsson, On the Measurement of the Degree of Progression, 5 J. PUB.
ECON. 161, 162 (1976) (“Suppose that two tax schedules give rise to income distributions after
tax with nonintersecting Lorenz-curves, then the tax schedule related to the dominated Lorenz-
curve can be considered unambiguously more redistributive than the other.”).
79 See generally id. at 162 (“If one tax system is everywhere . . . more progressive than
the other, then it should also be unambiguously more redistributive than the other.”);J. Fell-
man, The Effect of Transformations on Lorenz Curves, 44 ECONOMETRICA 823 (1976); N.C.
Kakwani, Applications of Lorenz Curves in Economic Analysis, 45 ECONOMETRICA 719
(1977).
80 LAMBERT, supra note 67, at 188–90 (summarizing the results of Fellman, supra note R
79; Kakwani, supra note 79; Jakobsson, supra note 78). R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 20  7-DEC-16 12:12
20 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
poor person increases. Likewise, a rich person’s expected income de-
creases as expected damages increase from $1,000 to $2,000. Thus, if we
measured inequality with these two individuals, the Lorenz curve gener-
ated with the legal rule where damages depend on income would strictly
Lorenz dominate the curve generated with the legal rule where expected
damages do not depend on income. Hence, we can describe the income-
dependent-damages rule as redistributive because it reduces inequality.
To conclude this section, redistribution should be understood simply
as a reduction in inequality. More specifically and analogously to tax-
and-transfer redistribution, we can define a legal redistribution as any
change in legal rules that reduces inequality. In addition, there is no par-
ticularly good reason to limit the idea of redistribution to cash transfers
(or their equivalent) from rich to poor. Nor, within this general definition
of redistribution, is there a meaningful distinction between something we
might call distribution and something else called redistribution. In an ec-
onomic analysis at least, redistribution is interesting only insofar as it
changes the income distribution. It should therefore be construed solely
in those terms.81
C. Examples
Now that we have definitions of efficiency and redistribution we
can begin to examine the relationship between them. Before doing this
more abstractly, I consider examples from the following three areas:
product markets, labor markets, and financial markets. For product mar-
kets, I consider the classic case of market power. When firms have mar-
ket power (ability to influence prices) there is typically both a loss of
efficiency and an increase in inequality. Legal rules can improve both
efficiency and equity. For labor markets, I consider the conditions under
which collective bargaining between unions and firms both reduces ine-
quality and increases efficiency. The analysis of labor markets also ana-
lyzes when minimum wage legislation, particularly in conjunction with
an optimal tax policy, can both reduce inequality and increase efficiency.
Finally,  the  last  example  considers  financial  markets.  Information
problems in financial markets can lead to both a loss of efficiency and an
increase inequality. Legal rules can reverse this situation, reducing ine-
quality while increasing efficiency.
81 As mentioned at the start of this section, supra notes 64–66 and accompanying text, it R
is not entirely clear how Kaplow and Shavell define redistribution. To the extent that they
think about redistribution as functionally equivalent to a tax, however, this is clearly too lim-
ited an understanding of redistribution. Legal rules have a far greater range of distributional
effects, as the examples in the following section demonstrate.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 21  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 21
1. Product Markets
Accompanying the renewed attention in rising inequality is a re-
vived concern in the popular press about the monopolistic practices of
firms.82 In a meta-analysis of fifty three different studies of horizontal
mergers, John E. Kwoka found an average post-merger price increase of
6.04% “after controlling for all other influences, a result that implies
generally adverse competitive effects from these transactions.”83 Among
these 53 estimates, 40, or 75.5%, reported price increases averaging
9.4%.  Current  merger  policy  in  the  U.S.  may  therefore  be  anti-
competitive.84
More generally, when firms have market power, production is inef-
ficient because of restricted output.85 Firms with market power have
some ability to set prices. Market power can arise when there is only one
seller (a monopoly)86 or only a few sellers (oligopoly) of some good in a
market.87 In a competitive market, firms are price takers—any attempt to
raise prices will simply send consumers to other producers who are offer-
ing the perfectly-competitive market price.88 In contrast, firms in less-
than-perfectly-competitive  markets  have  at  least  some  ability  to  set
prices.89 In the classic example, a firm with market power can increase
its price by reducing output.90 By restricting supply, the price will go up.
Firms will restrict supply, and raise prices, to maximize their profits.
82 See, e.g., BARRY C. LYNN, CORNERED: THE NEW MONOPOLY CAPITALISM AND THE
ECONOMICS OF DESTRUCTION (2011); David Dayen, Bring Back Antitrust, AM. PROSPECT,
(Nov. 9, 2015), prospect.org/article/bring-back-antitrust-0.
83 John E. Kwoka, Jr., Does Merger Control Work? A Retrospective on U.S. Enforce-
ment Actions and Merger Outcomes, 78 ANTITRUST L.J. 619, 631–32 (2012).
84 Because these studies are not a random sample, the conclusions must be interpreted
with some caution, id. at 634, but the results do lend credence to the more anecdotal concerns
of growing market power by firms, supra note 82. R
85 POSNER, supra note 43, at 301 (explaining that “output under monopoly is smaller than R
under competition”).
86 ANDREU MAS-COLELL ET AL., MICROECONOMIC THEORY 383 (1995) (“The simplest
example of market power arises when there is only a single seller, a monopolist, of some
good.”) (emphasis in original).
87 Id. (defining situations of “oligopoly, in which a number of firms compete in a mar-
ket”) (emphasis in original).
88 Id. (“In the competitive model, all consumers and producers are assumed to act as
price takers, in effect behaving as if the demand or supply functions that they face are infi-
nitely elastic at going market prices.”).
89 Id.
90 In fact, it is functionally equivalent to analyze market power either as the firm choos-
ing the price and producing the level of output that consumers demand at that price, or as
choosing the quantity to produce and allowing the price to be settled by the level of demand.
Id. at 384–85 (“The monopolist’s decision problem consists of choosing its price p so as to
maximize its profits . . . . An equivalent formulation in terms of quantity choices can be
derived by thinking instead of the monopolist as deciding on the level of output that it desires
to sell . . . .”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 22  7-DEC-16 12:12
22 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
Because output is lower than what would obtain in a perfectly competi-
tive market, the level of output is inefficient.91
The existence of market power can increase inequality as well.92
This will happen if the owners of the firms with market power are on
average richer than consumers who purchase goods or services from
them. Consumers are made poorer, because the price of the good is
higher, which makes their real incomes lower. When market power in-
creases profits, it increases the incomes of the owners. Of course, if the
firms with market power are public companies and their shares distrib-
uted equally in society, then the existence of market power would just
make everyone poorer, without increasing inequality. But this is almost
certainly not the case.93 More realistically, the ownership of firms with
market power—as is the ownership of all public corporations—is distrib-
uted unequally. Market power therefore not only reduces efficiency, but
it increases inequality as well.94
It follows from this that a legal rule or rules—e.g., antitrust legisla-
tion—that limits or reduces monopoly can both increase efficiency and
reduce inequality. This is a particularly attractive way to reduce inequal-
ity precisely because it involves no net economic cost. The administra-
tion of antitrust law is certainly costly, but presumably outweighed by
the social benefits of the increase in output. In contrast, taxation, as we
have conceptualized it thus far, always involves a positive economic
91 POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS, supra note 43, at 301 (noting that output is lower “be- R
cause the monopoly price causes some consumers to substitute other products, products that
the higher price makes more attractive. The substitution involves a loss in value. The effect of
monopoly is to make some consumers satisfy their demands by switching to goods that cost
society more to produce than the monopolized good. The added cost is a waste to society.”).
92 Abstractly, whether or not market power increases inequality, it always involves a
transfer of wealth. See POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS, supra note 43, at 302 (describing the R
increase in price from the competitive to the monopoly level as causing a “transfer of wealth
from consumers to producers” in addition to a “deadweight loss,” or inefficiency).
93 In 1995, the top 1% of those in the wealth distribution owned 51% of the total value of
corporate stock (either directly or indirectly through, for example, mutual funds). The top 10%
owned 82% of the value of these stocks. Edward N. Wolff, Recent Trends in the Size Distribu-
tion of Household Wealth, 12 J. ECON. PERSP. 131, 139 and tbl. 6 (1998). Given that the
distribution of stock ownership is highly unequal, the ownership of monopolistic firms is also
highly unequal.
94 Market power can increase other kinds of inequalities as well—e.g., racial inequality.
See Ian Ayres, Market Power and Inequality: A Competitive Conduct Standard for Assessing
When Disparate Impacts Are Unjustified, 95 CALIF. L. REV. 669, 669 (2007) (arguing that a
company should not be able to raise the business necessity defense in disparate impact litiga-
tion if the policy being challenged increases the firm’s profits only by exploiting its market
power to extract supra-competitive profits). This is yet another case where reductions in ine-
quality can also increase efficiency. Id. at 674 (“[D]isparate impact law can complement anti-
trust and consumer protection law to make markets more competitive and more equitable.
Civil rights law can stimulate market competition by raising the cost of anti-competitive con-
duct, such as wage-gouging market niches that are disproportionately minority, and thus in-
crease the relative attractiveness of competitive behavior.”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 23  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 23
cost. If the choice was between the antitrust rule and a tax-and-transfer
schedule that achieved an identical distributional objective, the wealth-
maximizing choice would be the antitrust rule.
2. Labor Markets
As the economists Robert Hall and Alan Krueger write, “[L]abor is
one of the most heterogeneous products traded in a modern economy.
The competitive market for a commodity, where all units are inter-
changeable and all trade for the same price, could hardly be a worse
description of the labor market.”95 In labor markets, departures from the
perfectly competitive benchmark abound. There is adverse selection: will
the employer be a good or bad one, or will the worker be a good or bad
employee?96 There is moral hazard: it is difficult to monitor perfectly the
efforts of employees.97 The employment relationship encompasses enu-
merable subjects, making contracts necessarily incomplete.98 The rela-
tionship is more than a spot contract and may last for a substantial
amount of time, which opens up the possibility for opportunism on either
side.99 The process by which workers search for jobs and firms hire
workers is beset with all kinds of informational problems, generating
“frictional” unemployment.100 Search frictions imply the existence of
rents, which implies some sort of bargaining or division of these rents,
and bargaining power is not likely to be equal between workers and firms
or among workers.101 Indeed, rent-sharing is pervasive: otherwise identi-
cal workers, who should be paid the same in a competitive market, will
be paid differently depending on the profitability of the firm they work
for.102 The existence of rents can lead to wasteful rent-seeking behav-
95 Robert E. Hall & Alan B. Krueger, Evidence on the Incidence of Wage Posting, Wage
Bargaining, and On-the-Job Search, 4 AM. ECON. J.: MACROECON. 56, 56 (2012).
96 For models of inefficiencies that arise from adverse selection in the labor market, see
generally Daron Acemoglu & Jo¨rn-Steffen Pischke, Why Do Firms Train? Theory and Evi-
dence, 113 Q. J. ECON. 79 (1998); and Bruce C. Greenwald, Adverse Selection in the Labour
Market, 53 REV. ECON. STUD. 325 (1986).
97 Bengt Holmstro¨m, Moral Hazard and Observability, 10 BELL J. ECON. 74 (1979);
Shapiro & Stiglitz, supra note 10. R
98 For the classic introduction of incomplete contracting into economics, see generally
OLIVER WILLIAMSON, THE ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONSOF CAPITALISM (1985). For the application
of incomplete contracting to the employment relationship, see generally Paul A. Grout, Invest-
ment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash Bargaining Approach, 52
ECONOMETRICA 449 (1984).
99 Id.
100 CHRISTOPHER PISSARIDES, EQUILIBRIUM UNEMPLOYMENT THEORY (2d ed., 2000)
101 Id.
102 Several empirical studies find extensive evidence of rent-sharing between firms and
workers. See, e.g., David G. Blanchflower et al., Wages, Profits, and Rent-Sharing, 111 Q. J.
ECON. 227 (1996); David Card et al., Rent-sharing, Holdup, and Wages: Evidence from
Matched Panel Data, 81 REV. ECON. STUD. 84 (2014).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 24  7-DEC-16 12:12
24 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
ior.103 In short, labor markets are likely to be inefficient. As we will
shortly see, these inefficiencies can also increase inequality.
a. Collective Bargaining
Let us consider a particular example, which I will then extend in a
few directions.104 Consider a labor union bargaining with a single firm.
Suppose the firm is contemplating a decision to make an investment in
physical capital or in research and development, with the potential to
increase productivity and profits.105 If the firm does this, the union will
have an incentive to bargain for higher wages, in order to capture some
of this increase.106 This adds an implicit cost to the capital investment,
and a firm, anticipating this cost, will either not make the investment or a
make a smaller investment than it would in the absence of a union.107
This is inefficient: output and productivity are lower than they would be
without the union.108
Now consider a legal rule that requires unions to bargain with an
employer’s association, representing an industry or a sector, rather than a
single firm.109 The union and the employer’s association set wages ac-
cording to the average productivity of the firms in the association, rather
than each individual firm.110 This changes each firm’s investment deci-
103 One area where employee rent-seeking has garnered much attention is in the study of
executive compensation. See generally Lucien Bebchuk et al., Managerial Power and Rent
Extraction in the Design of Executive Compensation, 69 U. CHI. L. REV. 751 (2002).
104 The single-firm case follows the analyses in Grout, supra note 98. See also Simon R
Anderson & Michael Devereux, Trade Unions and the Choice of Capital Stock, 90 SCANDINA-
VIAN J. ECON. 27 (1988); Matthew Dimick, Productive Unionism, 4 U.C. IRVINE L. REV. 679,
693-97 (2014) (providing an informal discussion of the formal analyses found in the previous
two-cited papers).
105 Grout, supra note 98, at 451 (describing a scenario where a firm employs both labor R
and capital as inputs).
106 PIERRE CAHUC & ANDRE´ ZYLBERBERG, LABOR ECONOMICS 411 (William McCuaig
trans., 2001) (“This characteristic of equipment means that firms have an incentive to invest
less if bargaining over wages can be begun at any time, for once the investment has been
made, employees are tempted to demand a new round of bargaining in order to benefit from
the improved productivity induced by the increase in capital stock.”).
107 Id. at 449–50.
108 Id. at 449 (noting that if the union can renegotiate contracts or contracts are not bind-
ing, “inputs [such as physical capital] will not be employed efficiently if the union has any
power”).
109 In the United States, current labor legislation and regulation, as expressed in the Na-
tional Labor Relations Act and in the decisions of the National Labor Relations Board
(NLRB), directly and indirectly discourage multiemployer, industrial, or sectoral bargaining.
This policy is reflected in the blanket prohibition on the NLRB’s recognition of multiemployer
bargaining units as well as the prohibition of secondary boycott tactics, which discourages
coordinated union bargaining. At the same time, there are labor law doctrines that favor the
stability of multiemployer bargaining units, after they are voluntarily recognized by both em-
ployers and unions.
110 For an analytical comparison of firm-level (decentralized) with industry- or sector-
level (centralized) collective bargaining, see K.O. Moene et al., Bargaining Structure and Eco-\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 25  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 25
sion compared to firm-based bargaining. Since the investment will now
increase the wages the firm pays by only a fraction of the amount it
would in the previous case, the incentive to invest is much higher in the
multi-firm case than in the single firm case.111 With larger investments
and output, multi-employer bargaining is therefore more efficient than
single-employer bargaining.112
Multi-employer bargaining also reduces inequality compared to sin-
gle-employer bargaining.113 First, since firms care only about marginal
effects when undertaking the investment, aggregate profits can be lower
in multi-employer bargaining even though productivity is higher.114 Un-
ions can increase wages and labor income on average, for example, if
unions are able to coordinate their bargaining strategies, as is likely the
case under multi-employer bargaining.115 This will reduce inequality if
nomic Performance, in TRADE UNION BEHAVIOUR, PAY BARGAINING, AND ECONOMIC PER-
FORMANCE 63, 109–14 (R.J. Flanagan et al. eds., 1993); Karl Ove Moene & Michael
Wallerstein, Pay Inequality, 15 J. LAB. ECON. 403 (1997).
111 Moene et al., supra note 110, at 109–14. R
112 Id.; Moene & Wallerstein, supra note 110, at 406. Evidence supports the observation R
that unionization reduces investment when collective bargaining is decentralized (i.e., occurs
at the firm level), as in Canada, the United Kingdom, or the United States. See generally
Stephen G. Bronars et al., The Effects of Unions on Firm Behavior: An Empirical Analysis
Using Firm-Level Data, 33 INDUS. REL. 426 (1994) (finding that unionization is associated
with less investment in durable assets, such as research and development, in the United States);
Robert A. Connolly et al., Union Rent Seeking, Intangible Capital, and Market Value of the
Firm, 68 REV. ECON. & STAT. 567 (1986) (finding that unionization is associated with lower
investment in research and development in the United States); Kevin Denny & Stephen J.
Nickell, Unions and Investment in British Industry, 102 ECON. J. 874 (1992) (finding that
unionization is associated with lower investment rates in the United Kingdom); Barry T.
Hirsch, Firm Investment Behavior and Collective Bargaining Strategy, 31 INDUS. REL. 95
(1992) (finding that unionization is associated with lower investment in research and develop-
ment and physical capital in the United States); Cameron W. Odgers & Julian R. Betts, Do
Unions Reduce Investment? Evidence from Canada, 51 INDUS. & LAB. REL. REV. 18 (1997)
(finding that unionization is associated with lower net investment rates in Canada). In contrast,
unionization does not have such negative effects when collective bargaining is more central-
ized, as in Europe. See Naercio Menezes-Filho & John Van Reenen, Unions and Innovation, in
INTERNATIONAL HANDBOOKOF TRADE UNIONS 293, 328 (John T. Addison & Claus Schnabel
eds., 2003). A particularly interesting study shows that wage compression associated wit h
centralized wage bargaining in Sweden was consistent with increases in productive efficiency
as long as it focused on reducing wage inequalities between firms and did not compress
within-firm wage differentials too greatly. Douglas A. Hibbs, Jr. & Ha˚kan Locking, Wage
Dispersion and Productive Efficiency: Evidence for Sweden, 18 J. LAB. ECON. 755, 771
(2000).
113 See generally Moene & Wallerstein, supra note 110. For evidence that more central- R
ized bargaining structures reduce wage inequality, see generally Michael Wallerstein, Wage-
Setting Institutions and Pay Inequality in Advanced Industrial Societies, 43 AM. J. POL. SCI.
649 (1999) (finding that wage-bargaining centralization is the most important factor explaining
variation in earnings inequality across developed countries, with other economic and political
factors having little or smaller impact).
114 Moene & Wallerstein, supra note 110, at 406. R
115 Matthew Dimick & Neel Rao, Wage-setting Institutions and Corporate Governance,
44 J. COMP. ECON. (forthcoming 2016).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 26  7-DEC-16 12:12
26 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
those earning capital income are on average richer than those receiving
labor earnings.116 Second, if firms are heterogeneous with respect to
other characteristics that influence productivity, competitive wage-set-
ting or firm-level bargaining will increase inequality among wage earn-
ers.117 By equalizing wages across firms, multi-employer bargaining then
also reduces inequality among those with labor earnings.118
This argument can be extended in various ways. Given the list of
departures from perfect competition, there may well be inequality and
suboptimal investment even without the presence of unions.119 Multi-
employer bargaining can increase efficiency and reduce inequality even
in this case. In addition to physical capital, one could also consider the
case of human capital.120 Greater centralization in wage bargaining can
also have positive effects on job creation,121 employment,122 or as a kind
of insurance against income uncertainty.123
b. Minimum Wage Legislation
A seemingly obvious case where taxes appear to dominate legal
rules as a redistributive tool is the one of minimum wage legislation.
Several scholars, again both within and without law and economics, have
made very strong cases for this conclusion.124 The consensus may be
mistaken, however, and the minimum wage provides an excellent exam-
116 Id.
117 Moene & Wallerstein, supra note 110, at 406 (“We characterized the competitive R
equilibrium in this case and show that it is efficient and unequal in the sense of generating
wage differentials that exceed workers’ quality differentials.”).
118 Id.
119 PISSARIDES, supra note 100, at 57–58; PIERRE CAHUC & ANDRE´ ZYLBERBERG, LABOR R
ECONOMICS 542–45 (William McCuaig trans., 2001). In these models, bargaining arises from
labor market frictions, which generate rents. With contractual incompleteness and bargaining,
the “holdup” problem arises.
120 See generally Daron Acemoglu & Jo¨rn-Steffen Pischke, The Structure of Wages and
Investment in General Training, 107 J. POL. ECON. 539, 564 (1999) (discussing why in the
presence of labor market frictions workers will underinvest in general human capital and pro-
viding unions as one example of how this inefficiency can be overcome).
121 Steven Davis, The Quality Distribution of Jobs and the Structure of Wages in Search
Equilibrium (Nat’l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 8343, 2001).
122 Lars Calmfors & John Driffill, Centralization of Wage Bargaining, 3 ECON. POL’Y 13,
24 (1988).
123 See Jonas Agell & Kjell Erik Lommerud, Union Egalitarianism as Income Insurance,
59 ECONOMICA 295, 303 (1992).
124 For the liberal argument in favor of transfers and against the minimum wage, see
Alstott, supra note 3. For the law-and-economics argument, see generally Daniel Shaviro, The R
Minimum Wage, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Optimal Subsidy Policy, 64 U. CHI. L.
REV. 405, 471 (1997) (arguing that the appropriate tax-and-transfer scheme “could replace
such existing social welfare programs . . . and the minimum wage”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 27  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 27
ple why both taxes and legal rules are necessary to achieve both equity
and efficiency.125
Let us consider a perfectly competitive labor market.126 For the rea-
sons given above, such a market is unlikely to exist. But it will be useful
to assume otherwise for the sake of argument—it will demonstrate that
minimum wage legislation can be both efficient and redistributive even if
labor markets are perfectly competitive.
First suppose such a market without any taxes and transfers. As the
familiar supply and demand argument demonstrates, if one imposes a
minimum wage higher than the market-clearing wage, it will raise wages,
but will reduce the demand for labor. Firms, facing a higher wage, will
employ fewer workers. While the market-clearing wage leads to the effi-
cient amount of labor employed, the minimum wage imposes a dead-
weight  loss  and  is  therefore  inefficient.  Furthermore,  by  reducing
employment for low-wage workers, the classic rebuttal to minimum-
wage proponents is that it harms the very people it was intended to
benefit.127
Because of this, several eloquent cases have been made for tax-and-
transfer alternatives to the minimum wage.128 For example, some argue
that the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is superior to the minimum
wage.129 Under the EITC, the government gives a cash credit, dependent
on household income, to those who work.130 Because the EITC is a low-
wage subsidy, it boosts earnings but also encourages work among those
in the lower tail of the income distribution.131 But because it does not
“tax” low-wage jobs like the minimum wage,132 it does not have the
125 See David Lee & Emmanuel Saez, Optimal Minimum Wage Policy in Competitive
Labor Markets, 96 J. PUB. ECON. 739 (2012); Jesse Rothstein, Is the EITC as Good as an NIT?
Conditional Cash Transfers and Tax Incidence, 2 AM. ECON. J. ECON. POL’Y 177 (2010).
126 There is a large literature demonstrating that minimum wages can both increase effi-
ciency and reduce inequality in imperfectly competitive labor markets. See, e.g., Daron
Acemoglu, Good Jobs Versus Bad Jobs, 19 J. LAB. ECON. 1 (2001); ALAN MANNING, MONOP-
SONY IN MOTION: IMPERFECT COMPETITION IN LABOR MARKETS (2003); Lee & Saez, supra
note 125, at 740. R
127 However, this is not necessarily true. Because the minimum wage does increase
wages, it can be welfare improving for low-wage workers as long as the wage increase for
employed workers offsets the deadweight loss caused by the unemployment effect. See Lee &
Saez, supra note 125, at 741–42 (demonstrating formally that a minimum wage even without R
taxes and transfers can increase social welfare). A necessary assumption for this to be true
under general conditions is “efficient rationing,” i.e., that workers made unemployed by the
minimum wage have the lowest ability and/or taste for work. See id. at 741.
128 See generally Alstott, supra note 3; see also Shaviro, supra note 124. R
129 See Shaviro, supra note 124, at 474. R
130 For programmatic details see Alstott, supra note 3, at 1048 and Shaviro, supra note R
124, at 408. R
131 Shaviro, supra note 124, at 461–62. R
132 See id. at 414–15.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 28  7-DEC-16 12:12
28 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
purported  negative  employment  effects.133  Furthermore,  because  the
EITC is targeted to those with low earnings, it is a more effective tool for
redistribution than the minimum wage.134 Some workers earning the
minimum wage come from households with relatively high income (the
“teenager-from-a-rich-household” problem).135 Arguably, then, the EITC
has all of the benefits—and more—and none of the drawbacks of the
minimum wage.
An alternative proposal to the EITC is the Negative Income Tax
(NIT). Like the EITC, the NIT transfers rather than taxes income (hence,
negative income tax) to those below a certain income threshold.136 But
unlike the EITC, it does not make work (i.e., any positive labor earnings)
a condition of the transfer.137 Some argue that the EITC’s work require-
ment reflects an unjustified and paternalistic intrusion into persons’ deci-
sions to work or not, and that the NIT is superior on these grounds.138
Economically, the criticism of the EITC is that its rate structure is com-
plicated and distortionary.139 In this sense, the NIT is arguably less dis-
tortionary, and therefore more efficient than the EITC.140
As taxes both the EITC and the NIT are distortionary, but some of
these inefficiencies increase the scope for minimum wage policies. First,
133 Id. at 408 (explaining that although the minimum wage is a low-wage “subsidy,” it
“will be affirmatively harmful [to low-wage workers] . . . because it imposes a tax on low-
wage employment. . . . Should one favor a low-wage subsidy, the obvious alternative is to
finance it out of general revenues” as is done with the EITC).
134 Id. (“The EITC’s income-testing and reliance of general revenues make it a far better
tool than the minimum wage both for making market work a more viable long-term option and
for progressive redistribution.”).
135 Id. at 407, 418.
136 Id. at 469–70. My characterization is slightly misleading. According to Shaviro, the
main drawback of the EITC is the high effective marginal tax rates it imposes on income
earners in the “phase-out” range of the credit. Id. at 462. Shaviro would therefore structure the
program so that everyone would receive a lump sum grant (say $6000) which would eventu-
ally be offset by a positive tax rate (say a flat 25%). Id. at 469–70.
137 Alstott, supra note 3, at 977–78 (describing the closely related basic-income and nega- R
tive-income-tax proposals).
138 See generally id.; see also id. at 990 (“[A moral claim for employment subsidies, like
the EITC] discounts the freedom of any low-earner whose vision of the good life does not
revolve around market work.”) and 991 (“The tension between market work and freedom takes
on a special resonance for women, who remain disproportionately responsible for nonmarket
work—caring for children, the frail elderly, and so on.”).
139 Shaviro, supra note 124, at 466 (“All phaseouts risk creating perverse overall marginal R
rate structures, especially when, due to the lack of integrated thinking, they are thoughtlessly
allowed to compound each other.”).
140 Shaviro, supra note 124, at 470–71 (arguing for a NIT over an EITC primarily on the R
grounds of the EITC’s complicated and positive marginal rate structure in the phaseout range
of the benefit). On the other hand, if labor supply on the intensive margin (i.e., the decision to
work or not) is more important than on the extensive margin (i.e., how hard, or how many
hours to work), the EITC can be more optimal than the NIT. See generally Emmanuel Saez,
Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive versus Extensive Labor Supply Responses, 117
Q. J. ECON. 1039 (2002).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 29  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 29
because the EITC is a low-wage subsidy, it encourages more work and
increases the labor supply among low-wage workers.141 But as labor sup-
ply increases, employers can offer a lower wage.142 Employers then cap-
ture a portion of the subsidy intended for low-wage workers.143 Thus, the
EITC’s redistributive effect is muted because of these incidence effects.
But it also induces inefficiency, by encouraging more work than is effi-
cient. At the same time, the NIT on balance discourages work, which
reduces labor supply and therefore increases wages, in a manner that is
similar to the minimum wage (although not dollar for dollar).144 The re-
sult is perhaps a stronger redistributive effect, but “too little,” i.e., ineffi-
cient, labor employed. The economist Jesse Rothstein finds that among
single-mother working households, $1 in EITC spending increases after-
tax incomes by $0.73, while $1 spent on the NIT yields $1.39.145
This is where the minimum wage becomes effective. In the context
of the EITC, which drives down wages and increases labor supply away
from its efficient level, setting the minimum wage at the market-clearing
level can restore efficiency in the labor market.146 Furthermore, by estab-
lishing a wage floor, low-wage workers now capture all of the EITC
subsidy: $1 of EITC spending would increase low-wage workers’ in-
come by $1.147 Thus, combining the EITC and the minimum wage is
both efficient and redistributive.
141 See Rothstein, supra note 125, at 179 (“I find that the EITC produces sizeable reduc- R
tions in equilibrium wages that offset many of its benefits to low-skill workers.”); Lee & Saez,
supra note 125, at 740 (“When the government values redistribution toward low-skilled work- R
ers, the optimal tax system over-encourages the supply of low-skilled labor.”); see also
Shaviro, supra note 124, at 462 (“However, since more than twice as many workers and more R
than seven times as much earned income are in the positive 19 percent than the negative 37
percent marginal rate bracket, it is plausible that on balance the EITC, by reason of its rapid
phaseout, makes the substitution problem [between labor and leisure] worse.”). There is no
disagreement among these authors; Shaviro merely more explicitly acknowledges that the in-
creased labor supply induced by the EITC for low-income workers is offset by a labor supply
reduction of higher-income workers who are in the “phaseout” range of the EITC.
142 Rothstein, supra note 125, at 179 (noting that the positive effect of EITC is “pushed R
downward by falling wages.”); Lee & Saez, supra note 125, at 742–44. R
143 Rothstein, supra note 125, at 179 (“Employers of low-skill labor capture $0.36 via R
reduced wage bills . . . .”).
144 Id. (“The NIT imposes positive tax rates on earnings, leading to net reduction in labor
supply among eligible women and thereby to increased wages.”).
145 Id. at 177.
146 See Lee & Saez, supra note 125, at 742–44. R
147 Id. at 743 (“With a binding minimum wage . . . an EITC expansion would increase
after-tax incomes of low-skilled workers dollar for dollar.”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 30  7-DEC-16 12:12
30 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
3. Financial Markets
A ubiquitous feature of many modern firms is the “separation of
ownership from control” characteristic of the public corporation.148 A
significant source of financing for such corporations is external, either in
equity or debt. Financial markets exist to satisfy this demand. Yet exter-
nal  financing  creates  well-known  incentive  problems.  One  of  these
problems is known as the principal-agent problem.149 The “principal-
agent problem” has been written about extensively and in many ways
serves as the organizing principle for much of the corporate law literature
in the United States.150
The problem is that the owners, the shareholders of the firm, would
like the manager to work as hard as possible, but cannot fully monitor or
contract on the manager’s efforts.151 Because the manager receives a sal-
ary or only owns a fraction of the firm, she is not the residual claimant on
the firm’s output and has little reason to supply her best level of effort.152
Shareholders must therefore monitor the efforts of the manager, but mon-
itoring uses resources that could otherwise have been more productively
148 The public corporation is characterized by relative distant shareholders who own the
corporation, but delegate day-to-day control to professional managers. This type of business
organization arose to prominence and the problem of the separation of ownership and control
was first posed in the early twentieth century. SeeADOLF A. BERLE & GARDINER C. MEANS,
THE MODERN CORPORATION AND PRIVATE PROPERTY (1932). For a widely-cited economic
explanation for this separation, see generally Eugene F. Fama & Michael C. Jensen, Separa-
tion of Ownership and Control, 26 J.L. & ECON. 301 (1983). For an account that brings out the
comparative and political “preconditions” of the separation, see generally Mark J. Roe, Politi-
cal Preconditions to Separating Ownership from Corporate Control, 53 STAN. L. REV. 539
(2000).
149 See generally Holmstro¨m, supra note 97. After the development of the principal-agent R
model in economics, it was quickly applied to the study of the corporation and corporate
finance. See, e.g., Eugene F. Fama, Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm, 88 J. POL.
ECON. 288, 291 (1980); Fama & Jensen, supra note 148, at 306; Michael C. Jensen & William R
H. Meckling, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Struc-
ture, 3 J. FIN. ECON. 305, 309 (1976).
150 Margaret M. Blair & Lynn A. Stout, A Team Production Theory of Corporate Law, 85
VA. L. REV. 247, 248 (1999) (writing that “[c]ontemporary discussions of corporate govern-
ance have come to be dominated by” the principal-agent framework). As they note, it is impos-
sible to reference all of the legal literature, but they cite several applications of the principal-
agent problem in corporate law scholarship. See id. at 247 n. 1.
151 Jensen & Meckling, supra note 149, at 308 (explaining that in a principal-agent rela- R
tionship, “it is generally impossible for the principal or the agent at zero cost to ensure that the
agent will make optimal decisions from the principal’s viewpoint”). Jensen and Meckling also
characterize the shareholder-manager relationship as a special case of the more general agency
problem. Id. at 309 (“Since the relationship between the stockholders and manager of a corpo-
ration fit the definition of a pure agency relationship it should be no surprise to discover that
the issues associated with the ‘separation of ownership and control’ in the modern diffuse
ownership corporation are intimately associated with the general problem of agency.”).
152 SAMUEL BOWLES & HERBERT GINTIS, RECASTING EGALITARIANISM: NEW RULESFOR
COMMUNITIES, STATES, AND MARKETS 7 (Erik Olin Wright ed.,1998).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 31  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 31
employed.153 A contract could be devised which allows the manager to
become the residual claimant on the income generated by the corpora-
tion, but then “rents” the corporation from the shareholders for a fixed
fee.154 But while the manager is the residual claimant on the income
generated by the firm, she is not a residual claimant on the value of the
corporation itself.155 The manager may therefore have little incentive to
maintain the assets owned by the corporation.156 In either case there is a
loss of efficiency. Much of the literature on the principal-agent problem
is about reducing this inefficiency.
One solution to both problems is to sell the corporation to the man-
ager.157 Now the manager is the full residual claimant on the corporation
and has all of the incentives to maximize the value of the firm.158 If the
manager is poorer than the owners, then this move also reduces inequal-
ity by transferring the capital income once received by relatively richer
shareholders to the relatively poorer manager.159
As a class, shareholders may be richer than the manager. Indeed,
this is why external finance exists, because the entrepreneur-manager
does not have the capital herself to run or expand the corporation.160 But
of course, managers, and CEOs in particular, may be quite wealthy indi-
viduals, and rising executive compensation is surely an important source
of income concentration at the top of the distribution.161 Furthermore,
responding to the principal-agent problem by making managers part-
153 Jensen & Meckling, supra note 149, at 308 (defining the sum total of agency costs— R
which constitute efficiency losses—to include the monitoring expenditures of the principal, as
well as any bonding expenditures of the agent and the residual loss in productive output).
154 BOWLES & GINTIS, supra note 152, at 7. R
155 Id.
156 Id.
157 Bowles & Gintis, supra note 152, at 7–8 (“The result of these incentive problems is R
that a highly concentrated distribution of capital is often inefficient: there may exist a more
egalitarian distribution, in which the worker becomes the owner of the firm’s capital goods
which, by more effectively addressing the inventive, monitoring, and maintenance problems
involved, allows general improvements in well-being . . . .”).
158 Id.
159 Id.
160 Another standard—and powerful—justification for the separation of ownership and
control in firms is the greater risk-bearing capacity of the (wealthy) owners. This larger capac-
ity to absorb risk is due largely in part to the greater wealth of the owners, who are sufficiently
wealthy to diversify their risk. See Fama & Jensen, supra note 148, at 333 (mentioning the R
benefits of specialization by separating risk-bearing and management functions).
161 Jon Bakija, Adam Cole, & Bradley T. Heim, Jobs and Income Growth of Top Earners
and the Causes of Changing Income Inequality: Evidence from U.S. Tax Return Data (Work-
ing  Paper,  20122010),  https://web.williams.edu/Economics/wp/BakijaColeHeimJobsIncome
GrowthTopEarners.pdf (analyzing data to “demonstrate that executives, managers, supervi-
sors, and financial professionals account for about 60 percent of the top 0.1 percent of income
earners in recent years, and can account for 70 percent of the increase in the share of national
income going to the top 0.1 percent of the income distribution between 1979 and 2005”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 32  7-DEC-16 12:12
32 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
owners was an intellectually important source for the rise of “pay-for-
performance” among firm managers.162
But the example merely serves to illustrate a much wider phenome-
non. Indeed, the argument can be extended to make all of the corpora-
tion’s employees—rank-and-file workers as well as managers—owners
of the corporation.163 In this case, the redistributive effects of transfer-
ring ownership are far more obvious and stronger.164 Furthermore, this
economics-of-information argument is also applicable to many kinds of
financial market transactions where there is inequality and imperfect in-
formation.165 The more general point is that in capital markets with less
162 For the intellectual lodestone, see Michael C. Jensen & Kevin J. Murphy, Perform-
ance Pay and Top-Management Incentives, 98 J. POL. ECON. 225, 243 (1990). Jensen and
Murphy found a weak relationship between shareholder wealth and executive compensation.
They interpreted these findings to indicate that corporate executives were paid too little, not
that performance pay was a weak tool to motivate managers. Id. at 226–27 (“Public disap-
proval of high rewards seems to have truncated the upper tail of the earnings distribution of
corporate executives. Equilibrium in the managerial labor market then prohibits large penalties
for poor performance, and as a result the dependence of pay on performance is decreased.”).
However, they explicitly acknowledged that this is one interpretation of their evidence. Id. at
227 (“Our results are consistent with several alternative hypotheses . . . .”). And recent re-
search has not been kind to their hypothesis that larger executive compensation would improve
either efficiency or shareholder wealth. See generally Bebchuk et al., supra note 103 (finding R
little evidence that executive compensation packages can be explained in terms of inducing
better performance from managers); see also Marianne Bertrand & Sendhil Mullainathan, Are
CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones Without Principals Are, 116 Q. J. ECON. 901, 902–03
(2001) (finding that executive compensation is responsive to “luck” factors—changes in firm
performance outside of the manager’s control—but also that executive pay is less responsive
to luck in firms with better corporate governance); Thomas Piketty et al., Optimal Taxation of
Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities, 6 AM. ECON. J.: ECON. POL’Y 230, 262
(2014) (finding that top tax rate cuts are associated with top one percent pretax income shares
but not higher economic growth, that United States CEOs “pay for luck” is quantitatively more
prevalent when top tax rates are low, and that international CEO pay levels are negatively
correlated with top tax rates, even controlling for firms’ characteristics and performance,
which indicates a substantial “rent-seeking” component of CEO income).
163 This is in fact the main argument of Bowles & Gintis, supra note 152. R
164 Note that the case for worker ownership is more open to debate than the preceding
examples, partly because there is less empirical support for the efficiency of worker-owned
firms. Further, if worker-owned firms were more efficient than the prevailing public corpora-
tion, one would prima facie expect worker-owned firms to dominate public corporations, via a
kind of “natural selection” argument. As noted previously, supra note 160, a large advantage R
of the separation of ownership and control is the specialization of risk-bearing and manage-
ment functions. Asking workers to own the firms they work for requires them to bear more
risk, which given their lower wealth and the lack of diversification, they are less inclined to do.
This could explain the relative paucity of worker-owned firms in the economy. Bowles and
Gintis’s response is that large enough asset redistributions will make workers more willing to
bear risk, and that policies like insurance for market risks or credit extended to worker-owned
firms on favorable terms can also increase workers’ appetite for risk. See supra note 152, at R
379–83. While I may not be fully convinced by Bowles and Gintis’s argument, the main
purpose of the example is to demonstrate the broader point that there is nothing in economic
theory that dictates that there will always be a tradeoff between efficiency and equity.
165 See, e.g., Bernanke & Gertler, supra note 10, at 90. R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 33  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 33
than perfect information, inequality is also inefficient.166 Thus, legal
rules and policies that encourage greater “asset redistribution” can both
increase efficiency and reduce inequality.
D. Efficient Legal Redistribution
The foregoing examples contradict the double-distortion argument
that legal redistributions will be inefficient. If legal redistribution is not
inefficient, and perhaps even efficient, then it is not true that “the legal
system is less efficient than the tax system in redistributing income.” In
these cases, the law is more efficient than the tax system in redistributing
income.
How far does this result generalize beyond the specific examples
just discussed? This section will explore that question. The simple an-
swer is that there is no necessary relationship between redistribution and
efficiency. A policy change could reduce inequality but also make every-
one worse off. Such a policy change would be both redistributive and
Pareto inferior relative to the status quo policy. But there is no a priori
reason why a policy change could not reduce inequality and make every-
one better off. Such a policy change would be both redistributive and
Pareto efficient. More likely scenarios are cases of redistribution where
some are made better off and others worse off. Yet even here the impli-
cations for efficiency are neither obvious nor straightforward. If the win-
ners could compensate the losers, the redistribution will be Kaldor-Hicks
efficient; if not, redistribution is inefficient under either criterion.
These possibilities are illustrated by Figure 4. This figure is similar
to Figure 1, but we now add the role of legal rules. Let x denote the legal
regime. (For instance, x could be a set of legal rules x = (x , x , . . . , x )
1 2 n
that comprises the legal system.) A different legal regime will produce
income, denoted y, for each person 1 and 2: y  and y . Persons 1 and 2
1 2
then get a certain level of utility from their income, which, again, is a
function of the legal regime. That is, U  = U(y (x)).
1 1
Figure 4 essentially assumes that legal rules can produce allocations
of income anywhere within and including the Pareto frontier. In other
words, legal rules can achieve any allocation of income that is technolog-
ically feasible. There are two main justifications for this. The first is the
166 See, e.g., Hoff, supra note 10, at 412 (making a general argument and summarizing R
the economics-of-information argument about efficiency, inequality, and capital and credit
markets). Consider the case of a poor consumer and rich lender. Tax-and-transfer redistribu-
tion may be the most effective policy prescription in this case, which increases the wealth of
the poor and makes her more credit worthy. Yet this would not be tax-and-transfer in the way
that Kaplow and Shavell think about it, since it would be accompanied by a market-corrective
and efficiency-enhancing function. For this reason, it would be more appropriate to think about
this prescription as a legal rule (to correct behavior) than as a pure tax and transfer. I pursue
this discussion further infra Part III.C.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 34  7-DEC-16 12:12
34 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
conclusion we have just drawn from the previous examples. Those exam-
ples demonstrated that changes in legal rules can increase both efficiency
but also reduce income equality.167 Alternatively, as the double-distor-
tion argument shows, sometimes legal rules can reduce both inequality
and efficiency.168 Thus, in Figure 4, changes in legal rules that move the
allocation of income in a northeast or southwest direction primarily af-
fect the efficiency of the allocation. In contrast, changes in legal rules
that move the allocation in a northwest or southeast direction primarily
affect the level of income equality.
For another justification, we can invoke the Coase theorem.169 The
Coase theorem is well known for saying that achieving the efficient allo-
cation of resources does not depend on the distribution of legal entitle-
ments.170  As  long  as  bargaining  between  agents  is  possible  and
transaction costs are sufficiently low, agents will have an interest in en-
gaging in and paying for the most efficient activities. Less well appreci-
ated is the fact that the Coase theorem says that legal entitlements will
also always affect the distribution of economic rewards without influenc-
ing the allocation of resources.171 Since property rights are divisible in
highly minute ways,172 it is a reasonable approximation to say that prop-
erty rights could be adjusted to achieve a large range of allocations
within and on the Pareto frontier.173 Part IV.B below explores further the
implications  of  the  Coase  theorem,  including  the  role  of  transaction
costs.
167 See supra Part II.C.
168 See supra Part I.
169 The first expression of the “Coase theorem” is found in R.H. Coase, The Problem of
Social Cost, 3 J.L. ECON. 1 (1960), although George Stigler first coined the phrase. See G.
STIGLER, THE THEORYOF PRICE 113 (3d ed. 1966) (stating the “Coase theorem” as predicting
that “under perfect competition private and social costs will be equal”).
170 Stewart Schwab, Coase Defends Coase: Why Lawyers Listen and Economists Do Not,
87 MICH. L. REV. 1171, 1174 (1989) (stating the “weak version” of the Coase theorem as the
proposition that the allocation of resources will be independent of the distribution of legal
entitlements and a “strong version” that bargains are efficient regardless of the initial legal
entitlements).
171 Schwab calls this the “Distributive Corollary of the Coase Theorem,” which he de-
fines, “With zero transaction costs, initial entitlements cannot be justified on efficiency
grounds, and so should be awarded on the basis of need or desert.” See id. at 1195; see also
Guido Calabresi, The Pointlessness of Pareto: Carrying Coase Further, 100 YALE L.J. 1211,
1212 (1991) (arguing that “any given society is always or will immediately arrive at a Pareto
optimal point given transaction costs”).
172 On the ability to parcel out property rights, as in a “bundle of sticks,” see Thomas C.
Grey, The Disintegration of Property, in XXII NOMOS, PROPERTY 69 (J. Roland Pennock &
John W. Chapman eds., 1980).
173 It is surprising that the Distributive Corollary of the Coase Theorem and the choice of
law versus taxes in redistributing income are not discussed together more. I discuss this fur-
ther, infra Part IV.B and accompanying text.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 35  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 35
As an implication of these assumptions, note that the possible allo-
cations of income induced by the legal system are: (1) “continuous”—
there are no gaps, or holes, in the possible income distributions—(2)
“symmetric”—the possible income allocations are distributed similarly
on either side of the line of equality, meaning that there is no reason why
efficiency would require some systematic inequality between persons 1
and 2—and (3) “convex”—meaning that one can draw a line between
any two points on the utility possibility frontier and say within the feasi-
ble set of allocations. Both of these assumptions are strong, but strong
and similar assumptions are not unusual within economic analysis. These
three assumptions mainly exist to help simplify the inquiry. Below, in
Part IV.C, I will relax both of these assumptions and explore the implica-
tions for doing so. Nothing much of substance changes.
We can now investigate Figure 4 in more detail. Figure 4 represents
four different lines. The utility possibility (Pareto) frontier defines the set
of all feasible economic allocations. This captures the Pareto set. All
movements toward the frontier are Pareto improving, points along the
line are Pareto efficient, while moves beyond the frontier are not feasi-
ble. The social indifference curve describes changes in the distribution of
wealth between individuals 1 and 2 that leave total wealth unchanged.
Along this line, reducing inequality is purely a tradeoff between individ-
uals 1 and 2. Despite that, there are legal changes that produce alloca-
tions that both reduce income inequality and increase economic output.
To see this, begin with the status quo allocation, represented by point A.
There are two fine-grained dashed lines that cross through this point.
Everywhere  above  (below)  the  horizontal  dashed  line  increases  (de-
creases) person 2’s utility, while everywhere to the left (right) of the
vertical line decreases (increases) person 1’s utility. In addition, two
coarser-grained dashed rays emanate from the origin, with the lower line
passing through point A. Every point within these two lines reduces in-
come inequality.
These four lines define the universe of possibilities between ine-
quality and redistribution. First, every point below the solid, social-indif-
ference curve and within the two dashed rays is both redistributive and
inefficient.  These  areas  are  labeled  IR  for  inefficient  redistribution.
Within this region, points to the left of the vertical dotted line and below
the horizontal dotted line make both individuals worse off. These are
redistributions for which no one would advocate. However, points with
the IR region that are above the horizontal dotted line and to the left of
the horizontal dotted line are allocations that improve the welfare of per-
son 2. Kaplow and Shavell’s income-dependent damage rule is an exam-
ple of this kind of legal redistribution.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 36  7-DEC-16 12:12
36 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
In contrast, every point above the solid, social-indifference curve
and between the two dashed rays is both redistributive and efficient.
There are both Kaldor-Hicks and Pareto-efficient legal redistributions.
Points that are above the social-indifference curve, but to the left of the
horizontal dotted line are efficient and improve the welfare of person 2,
but leave person 1 worse off. Since person 1 could hypothetically com-
pensate person 2, these allocations are Kaldor-Hicks efficient. However,
allocations within the two dashed rays, above the horizontal dotted line,
and to the right of the vertical dotted line are both redistributive and
Pareto efficient. Points in this area not only reduce inequality, but also
leave both persons better off.
Thus, one cannot say that a redistributive legal rule is distortionary
as a general matter. To answer this question, one must first identify the
effect of the particular legal rule in question. In this sense, redistribution
effectuated through the tax system is a special kind of legal change, one
that, moreover, is always accompanied by distortions in economic behav-
ior.174 This is because of the particular nature of the legal rule being
enacted and enforced. For example, income earners pay a certain per-
centage of their income in cash, which is collected by the government,
and  then  the  cash  is  transferred  to  other  individuals.  A  government
schedule that assigned distinct commodity bundles to individuals based
on their observable output poses a very different set of legal rules for
achieving a desired distribution of economic rewards. Yet it would also
certainly have similar distortionary impacts if it had redistributive objec-
tives (in addition to being much harder to implement). Conversely, as the
examples  in  this  Part  have  demonstrated,  other  kinds  of  legal  rule
changes may both increase efficiency as well as reduce inequality.
III. OPTIMAL LEGAL REDISTRIBUTION
As we have just seen, some legal rules can be redistributive in a
strong sense, yet also be output enhancing. This is the strongest case
against Kaplow and Shavell’s argument that the tax system should be
exclusive mechanisms for redistributing income. In this section, I look
more closely at cases where legal changes are redistributive but also inef-
ficient. It might seem that in this situation we are firmly back in double-
distortion territory and that one should reject legal rules that have such
consequences. However, I argue that even when legal rules are ineffi-
cient, the double-distortion argument is still not always convincing be-
cause even if taxation is distortionary, we still need to compare the legal
174 Kaplow and Shavell, supra note 1, at 667 (claiming generally that “income taxes and R
transfer payments distort incentives to work, limiting the degree to which it is socially desira-
ble to employ the income tax system to redistribute income”). The assumption that the tax-
and-transfer system is always distortionary is relaxed in Part IV.D.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 37  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 37
distribution to the optimal tax policy.175 If the legal redistribution is less
inefficient than this policy, social welfare will be higher with the legal
redistribution than under the optimal tax policy.
While this much has been acknowledged, we can also go further.176
In this Part, I will also argue that legal rules are more likely to be more
efficient than taxation precisely in those cases where inequality is of
greater concern. In particular, more inequality justifies larger tax distor-
tions under the optimal tax policy. Likewise, if the public or policymak-
ers find inequality to be of graver concern (either because attitudes about
inequality change or because the externalities of income inequality have
increased), the optimal tax policy will also justify larger tax distortions.
Yet because of these greater distortions, it is more likely that a more
redistributive legal rule that produces a given amount of inefficiency will
be more efficient than the optimal tax policy.
The introduction of “optimal” and “welfare” requires introducing
another criterion of normative economic analysis.177 I therefore first dis-
cuss the concept of social welfare and its maximization. Following this, I
show that some inefficient legal redistributions can dominate, in welfare
terms, the optimal tax policy. This is more likely the case when we judge
the social welfare cost of inequality to be higher or when inequality itself
is higher.
A. Social Welfare
Thus far, efficiency has been used in this article to be understood as
wealth maximization. But a society might want to instead maximize wel-
175 See, e.g., Blumkin & Margalioth, supra note 1, at 13 (arguing that comparison of costs R
of both tax and legal systems need to be made to judge which is superior); see also infra note
176. R
176 This is, in fact, the crux of many of the critiques of the double-distortion argument.
See, e.g., Sanchirico, supra note 5, at 1027–31 (arguing that the optimal (i.e., welfare-maxi- R
mizing) policy may award higher damages to poorer plaintiffs when the legal rule differen-
tially affects the rich and poor, which implies, relative to Kaplow and Shavell’s argument, an
inefficient allocation of resources); Blumkin & Margalioth, supra note 1, at 3, 11–14 (arguing, R
for example, that once the administrative and compliance costs of tax administration are in-
cluded, redistributive legal rules, which may not incur similar costs, can be less inefficient—or
more efficient—than the tax system); Liscow, supra note 1, at 2482–83 (observing that “redis- R
tribution through legal rules may be inefficient and costly, but so is redistribution through
taxation” and that, accordingly, some redistributive legal rules, although not Pareto superior,
can be “more efficient than raising taxes”).
177 As already indicated in the Introduction, I reserve the term “efficient” to refer to
changes in social wealth and use “optimal” to describe changes in welfare. See supra note 42 R
and accompanying text.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 38  7-DEC-16 12:12
38 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
fare or utility.178 Welfare and wealth are not the same thing179 and, in-
deed,  depending  on  which  objective  we  prefer,  the  policy
recommendation may well be different.180 This will be particularly the
case  when  evaluating  policies  with  different  distributional  conse-
quences.181 I will illustrate these differences and contrasts in this section.
Maximizing social welfare, that is, making social welfare as large as
possible, requires thinking about a social welfare function.182 If we sim-
ply add up everyone’s utility, the allocation we should choose is the one
that makes total utility as large as possible.183 An individual’s utility
function itself needs defining. The assumption, well-supported by evi-
dence,  is  that  people  experience  diminishing  marginal  utility  of
money.184 Simply put, if I have only ten dollars to my name, those ten
dollars will be much more valuable to me than ten dollars I have in addi-
tion to another ten thousand dollars.185 This idea is critical for under-
standing the difference between wealth and welfare maximization. It
means that transferring money from the rich to the poor can increase
social welfare, even at the cost of wealth, because the poor value addi-
tional income more than the rich.186
We can again illustrate these ideas with Figure 2. In addition to the
Pareto, utility possibility (Pareto) frontier, within which represents all of
the feasible allocations, social welfare introduces the social indifference
curve. A social indifference curve represents all of the allocations that
178 Drawing from philosophers of utilitarianism, utility can be roughly understood as hap-
piness. See, e.g., POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,supra note 43, at 13 (distinguishing between R
“expected utility,” from the economics of risk and uncertainty, and “utility in the sense used by
philosophers of utilitarianism, meaning (roughly) happiness”). Sufficient for our purposes will
be a definition of utility used by economists, which is the value or “usefulness” an individual
derives from some good.
179 Wealth would measure the market value of goods, while utility would measure indi-
viduals’ valuation of money or those goods. See supra note 178. R
180 Much of the literature critiquing the double-distortion argument acknowledges that
welfare maximization should be the objective, especially when discussions of inequality are
concerned. See, e.g., Fennell & McAdams, supra note 1, at 1–2 (noting that tax and legal R
policy should be welfare maximizing); Liscow, supra note 1, at 2481 (stating that, in contrast R
to wealth maximization, “traditionally, economists have sought policies that maximize not
wealth but rather ‘social welfare,’ the sum of individuals’ utility . . . .”).
181 Id.
182 MAS-COLELLet al., supra note 86, at 825 (“[A] social welfare function . . . aggregates R
individuals’ utilities into social utilities.”); HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 425 (noting R
that one measures “the welfare of society by aggregating the individual consumers’ welfare
levels”).
183 HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 425–26 (describing the process by which a R
hypothetical social planner maximizes social welfare).
184 For one study, among countless others, see Layard et al., The Marginal Utility of
Money, 92 J. PUB. ECON. 1846 (2008).
185 SeeSTIGLITZ, supra note 96, at 94–97 (discussing the principle of diminishing margi- R
nal utility).
186 See infra notes 187–91 and accompanying text. R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 39  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 39
give the same level of social welfare—in this case, the same total utility
between persons 1 and 2. In Figure 2, there are two social indifference
curves, with the curve that is northeast of the other curve representing a
higher level of social welfare. Intuitively, as curves move outward from
the origin, they give greater utility to both individuals. Notice that while
points A and B are equally Pareto efficient, social welfare would easily
prefer point B to point A or C, since it moves society to a higher indiffer-
ence curve and unambiguously increases social welfare. Notice also that
point B would clearly be preferred to point C, and that B is Kaldor-Hicks
efficient relative to C. However, also observe that the move from C to A
would also be Kaldor-Hicks efficient. But in this case, the gain in wealth
would not justify the increase in inequality, and social welfare would
prefer C to A. Thus, social welfare and Kaldor-Hicks efficiency agree on
the move from C to B, but disagree on the move from C to A.
B. Optimal Tax Policy
The concept of social welfare and its maximization are critical in
what is called the “optimal tax” literature.187 The optimal tax literature
takes as given the problem that taxation will distort behavior and create
disincentives which lower economic output.188 On the one hand, taxation
can increase social welfare by redistributing income and reducing ine-
quality, according to the principle of diminishing marginal utility of
money.189 On the other hand, taxation can reduce social welfare by dis-
torting economic incentives and lowering economic output.190 The objec-
187 The optimal tax literature is enormous, but one can trace its origins to a very influen-
tial paper by James Mirrlees. J.A. Mirrlees, An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income
Taxation, 38 REV. ECON. STUD. 175 (1971). For an informal introduction to the literature, see
generally N. Gregory Mankiw et al., Optimal Taxation in Theory and Practice, 23 J. ECON.
PERSP. 147 (2009). For a formal introduction, see BERNARD SALANIE´, THE ECONOMICS OF
TAXATION 83–122 (2d ed. 2011).
188 Mirrlees, supra note 187, at 175 (“As a result of using men’s economic performance R
as evidence of their economic potentialities, complete equality of social marginal utilities of
income cease to be desirable, for the tax system that would bring about that result would
completely discourage unpleasant work.”). Classical economists, such as Edgeworth, endorsed
“complete equality of fortunes” based on the principal of declining marginal utility of income.
See SALANIE´, supra note 187, at 85. But they did not know how to model “the trade-off be- R
tween efficiency and equity” and how “confiscatory taxation . . . reduces production and thus
the size of the social cake,” although they were aware of that risk. Id. at 87.
189 See supra note 186 and accompanying text. R
190 These efficiency losses may arise from a variety of sources, including the administra-
tive and compliance costs of tax collection. See, e.g., Blumkin & Margalioth, supra note 1, at R
11–14. In the optimal tax literature, as well as in Kaplow & Shavell’s double-distortion argu-
ment, the sole cost of taxation typically derives from the disincentive to work. See, e.g., Mir-
rlees, supra note 187, at 175–76 (assuming the incentive to work depends on taxes, but that the R
“costs of administering the optimum tax schedule are assumed to be negligible”); Kaplow &
Shavell, supra note 1, at 667–68 (modeling their hypothetical case where taxation distorts R
labor incentives, but a redistributive legal rule distorts both labor and care-taking incentives).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 40  7-DEC-16 12:12
40 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
tive is to then find that tax function that optimally balances this trade-off
between equity and efficiency—to achieve the highest social welfare
consistent with the smallest efficiency cost.191
One can draw two conclusions from the optimal tax literature that
will be useful for the following discussion.192 The first is that higher
inequality can justify greater taxation—and hence a larger economic dis-
tortion.193 When inequality is high, redistribution is particularly desira-
ble.  More  redistribution  requires  more  taxes,  and  hence  a  larger
distortion, but this is justified by the greater welfare benefit of redistribu-
tion in the context of high inequality. Conversely, if incomes were per-
fectly equal, there will be no welfare benefit to redistribution and only an
economic cost. In this case, no taxation is justified. The second conclu-
sion is that the optimal tax depends not just on the level of inequality, but
also on how much we (or the policy maker) care about any particular
level of inequality.194 For example, a utilitarian cares only about aggre-
gate wealth and effectively puts zero weight on the level of inequality.195
Since taxation can only reduce wealth, no taxation is justified under the
utilitarian’s preferences.196 On the other hand, a Rawlsian cares only
about the welfare of the least well off.197 This objective places a great
191 See Mirrlees, supra note 187, at 207 (referencing the trade-off between “labour-dis- R
couraging effects” of taxation and the “redistributive benefits”); see alsoSALANIE´, supra note
187, at 83 (“The study of optimal direct taxation must take into account disincentive effects on R
labor supply. . . . [O]nly since Mirrlees . . . do we have a model that allows us to discuss the
trade-off between equity (the search for a redistribution that implements social views) and
efficiency (minimizing distortions induced by the tax system).”).
192 Much of the optimal tax literature tries to determine the optimal “shape” of the tax
schedule, meaning how progressive the schedule should be. See Peter Diamond & Emmanuel
Saez, The Case for a Progressive Tax: From Basic Research to Policy Recommendations, 25
J. ECON. PERSP. 165 (2011) (“A large academic literature has developed models of optimal tax
theory to cast light on the problem of optimal tax progressivity.”).
193 This is in fact one of Mirrlees’s initial suggestions. See Mankiw et al., supra note 187, R
at 160 (Mirrlees “suggested that tax rates would generally be higher in less equal societies.”).
194 For a discussion of the redistributive implications of different social welfare functions,
which can be interpreted to reflect different policy objectives, see MAS-COLELL, supra note 86, R
at 825–29.
195 HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 425–26 (describing a utilitarian social welfare R
function as one where the “utility of one consumer can be substituted perfectly for that of
another with the utilitarian social welfare function . . .”). Because of perfect substitution of
utility between individuals, a transfer from rich to poor will not increase social welfare. This
implies that taxation has no benefits and only costs, and thus authorities should not undertake
it.
196 Id.
197 HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 425–26 (describing a Rawlsian social welfare R
function as one that maximizes the welfare of the least well-off person and where “no substitu-
tion is possible . . . .”). It is well known that Rawls’s Difference Principle is nonwelfarist. The
Difference Principle states that society should maximize the amount of primary goods—not
the level of utility—going to its poorest members. John E. Roemer, Equality of Resources
Implies Equality of Welfare, 101 Q.J. ECON. 751, 753 (1986) (“[Rawls] wishes to maximize
the bundle of primary goods going to the least well off, not to maximize the utility of that\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 41  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 41
deal of weight on inequality and chooses the tax level that maximizes the
welfare of the poorest citizen, giving no weight to the welfare of any
richer member of society.198 Any other level of consideration we give to
equity lies between these two extremes.199
C. Distributional Judgments
As just demonstrated, the optimal tax literature seeks to identify the
ideal tax function that balances the economic cost against the reduction
in inequality in order to maximize social welfare. This optimal tax,
which identifies the amount of economic loss, depends on how much
inequality a policy maker is willing to condemn. As also just demon-
strated, in a utilitarian’s calculus, any level of inequality is acceptable,
while those committed to a Rawlsian objective are prepared to tolerate
quite a lot of economic loss in order to reduce inequality.
Thus, how much distortion maximizes social welfare depends on
how much we are willing to condemn inequality. This also strongly af-
fects whether the legal system or the tax system should be used to redis-
tribute income. Depending on how much society or a policy-maker is
willing to reduce inequality, an inefficient legal redistribution may or
may not be a preferable alternative. For example, if the tolerance for
inequality is relatively high, social welfare may be highest under the op-
timal tax policy, which redistributes little at relatively low economic
cost. An inefficient legal redistribution may reduce inequality more, but
may deliver lower social welfare because of greater economic distor-
tions. In contrast, this same legal redistribution may well be superior to
the optimal tax policy under a Rawlsian social welfare function, which
creates larger economic distortions. Thus, whether legal rules are more
efficient than taxes in redistributing income depends on the social wel-
fare objective that society or policy makers choose.
This idea can also be illustrated with the aid of Figure 5. Figure 5
depicts three different social indifference curves derived from different
social welfare functions, a utilitarian, a Rawlsian, and an intermediate
one. The status quo point is point A. The dashed line represents the re-
source constraint caused by increasing the level of taxation required to
implement a desired distribution of resources. As we move toward the
line of equality, the economic cost of doing so increases. Perfect equality
group.”). Economists nevertheless call a social-welfare function that maximizes the welfare of
the poorest Rawlsian because of the obvious similarity.
198 MAS-COLELL, supra note 86, at 828 (noting that a Rawlsian social welfare function R
“will have strong egalitarian implications. In fact, the preference for equality is quite extreme”
and while the costs of taxation may prevent complete equality in this case, “the purely utilita-
rian social optimum is significantly more unequal than the [Rawlsian] optimum”).
199 As in HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 86, at 425–26, an observer could call these R
intermediate social welfare functions.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 42  7-DEC-16 12:12
42 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
can be achieved if there is a complete confiscation of income and wealth,
which is then equally distributed. However, there is no economic incen-
tive to work in such a society, so there is no income to redistribute. As
each indifference curve shows, the amount of redistribution we should
tolerate depends on our normative judgment. The utilitarian cannot jus-
tify any change from the status quo point A. The Rawlsian wants to max-
imize the utility of the least well off person, person 2, and so chooses the
highest vertical position on the tax loss curve, represented by point C.
Intuitively, the intermediate judgment chooses a point between these two
on the tax cost curve, point B, which reduces inequality more than in A,
but less than in C.
The critical insight comes by examining regions X and Y. Region Y
is the area created by the “lens” of the two intersections of the utilitarian
and intermediate indifference curves. All allocations within this region
give higher social welfare than at point B, but at less economic cost.
Hence, if one were a utilitarian, no point within region Y would be justi-
fied, but if one were willing to condemn inequality at least as much as
the intermediate judgment, any legal redistribution within region Y would
be preferred to point B. Similarly, the same thing can be illustrated by
region X, which is the area under the intermediate indifference curve, but
above the Rawlsian indifference curve. An intermediate judgment would
not endorse any allocation within region X, but a Rawlsian would prefer
any point within region X to point C, the Rawlsian’s most preferred tax-
and-transfer allocation.
Thus, the choice of whether to use the legal system or the tax sys-
tem depends on how much inequality society is willing to tolerate.200
Generally,  legal  alternatives  become  more  attractive  when  society’s
“taste” for equality increases. Put another way, the possibility of finding
a less inefficient legal redistribution increases as we become less tolerant
of inequality.
D. Level of Inequality
For very closely related reasons, the choice between law or tax as
redistributive tools also depends on the level of inequality itself. Keeping
fixed our judgment about the distribution of income, the social-welfare
maximizing level of taxes will be higher when inequality is higher.201 If
there is no inequality, for example, there is no social welfare gain from
200 An observer could ask which social welfare function should be endorsed. Economists
have refrained from answering this question, considering it a value judgment that economic
social science cannot answer. This difficulty stems from the problem of interpersonal compari-
sons of utility, which will be discussed infra notes 224–31 and accompanying text. R
201 Because there is greater scope for increasing social welfare when inequality is higher
for reasons of diminishing marginal utility of money. See supra notes 184–86 and accompany- R
ing text.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 43  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 43
reducing inequality. Likewise, when there is only a modest level of ine-
quality, there is only a modest gain from reducing it and hence only a
small loss in economic output is justified. In contrast, when inequality is
high, the social welfare gain from reducing inequality is also high. This
larger social gain justifies a larger economic cost. As a result, the eco-
nomic distortion caused by taxation will also be higher. It follows from
this  that  which  redistributive  tool  we  use  depends  on  the  level  of
inequality.
The reasoning is similar to the example given in the previous sub-
section. If inequality is low, the optimal tax policy will have relatively
low tax rates and little economic distortion. If a legal redistribution low-
ers inequality further, but is associated with larger economic costs, the
tax policy may be the social-welfare maximizing policy. However, if ine-
quality is high, the optimal tax policy will entail a greater economic dis-
tortion. In this case, the legal redistribution may instead be the social-
welfare maximizing policy.
In addition, Figure 6 depicts this argument graphically. Figure 6
represents two status quo allocations, given by points A and C. The
straight line running through points A and C indicates that society enjoys
the same wealth at each allocation, but that A is more unequal than C.
Holding our judgment of inequality fixed at an intermediate level, the
optimal tax policy would be to choose point B in case A, and point D in
case C. However, notice that although social welfare is higher at point B
than at point A, point D is higher than both. Since the status quo point C
has lower inequality than A, one does not need to move very far to point
D, and incurs lower economic cost to do so. Hence, social welfare is
higher at D than at A, B, or C.
This graphical analysis also implies that if there are legal allocations
between the two social indifference curves when beginning at A, they
would be preferred to the optimal tax solution, under which society only
gets to B. On the other hand, if we begin at a lower level of inequality,
status quo point C, then none of the legal redistributions between the two
social indifference curves would be preferable to the optimal tax solution
at point D. Once again, the conclusion is that whether an inefficient legal
redistribution is desirable or not depends on the level of inequality. In
this case the conclusion has an appealing generality: if the level of ine-
quality is higher, the set of legal redistributions that yield higher social
welfare becomes larger.
IV. COUNTERARGUMENTS
This Part considers potential objections to my argument. I first ad-
dress the claim that even if legal rules might be more efficient than taxa-
tion in redistributing income, this does not defeat Kaplow and Shavell’s\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 44  7-DEC-16 12:12
44 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
broader argument that efficiency should be the sole criterion for evaluat-
ing legal rules. Next, I consider more directly the implications for trans-
action costs in my argument. This leads to a further discussion that
examines more critically the assumptions of “continuity” and “symme-
try” I made in the main analysis. Finally, I consider the implications for
my argument of, first, the possibility of efficient tax-and-transfer policies
and, second, what is called “corrective” taxation, as distinct from income
taxation.
A. On the Exclusivity of Efficiency
One potential objection to my argument is that a legal redistribution
that also increases social wealth—that is, is efficient—is not inconsistent
with Kaplow and Shavell’s argument. One reading of their argument is
that efficiency should be the sole criteria for evaluating legal rules. In-
deed, their conclusion states that their “argument . . . suggests that it is
appropriate for economic analysis of legal rules to focus on efficiency
and to ignore the distribution of income in offering normative judg-
ments.”202 For instance, return to the monopoly example. In that case, the
argument might be that we should endorse the antitrust rule for its effects
on efficiency, regardless of its distributional consequences. Considering
the antitrust rule’s consequence on inequality is therefore not necessary.
Although they do not say this, perhaps Kaplow and Shavell assume only
inefficient legal redistributions because efficient legal redistributions do
not challenge this conclusion.
This response is not convincing, for several reasons. First, the argu-
ment that efficiency should be the sole criterion for normative analysis is
not the argument they make, and is at best only an implication of it. Their
main claim is that the tax system is “more efficient” than the legal sys-
tem in redistributing income. Yet, as the argument above has demon-
strated, this claim is false: not only may legal redistributions be more
efficient than the tax system, but they may also increase efficiency.
Therefore, the legal system should be used to redistribute income, and
can even be superior to the tax system. This debate does not question the
role and importance of efficiency. Within this law-and-economics dis-
cussion, everyone agrees that efficiency is important. The only question
is whether legal rules or the tax system is the most efficient—least
costly—means of redistribution.
Still, there may be something to this objection. Favoring the legal
system over the tax system for distributional objectives in these cases
still depends on these legal redistributions being efficient. If everyone
agrees that efficiency is important, does not efficiency therefore still
202 Kaplow and Shavell, supra note 1, at 677. R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 45  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 45
“trump” equity in the economic analysis of law? In response, the most
that one can say about efficient legal redistributions is that they are both
efficient and redistributive. Why should the efficiency effect take priority
over the distributive effect? In fact, I will argue that the distributional
effect deserves at least equal normative priority with efficiency.
Distribution deserves normative priority over efficiency because so-
cial welfare maximization dominates wealth maximization as criteria of
economic and legal analysis. Several shortcomings of Pareto efficiency
that were only alluded to previously make this point clear. One crucial
fact about Pareto efficiency is that it cannot make any judgment about
the distribution of the allocation.203 It is possible that an allocation that
makes everyone equally well off could be Pareto efficient. Likewise, an
extremely unequal allocation could also be Pareto efficient.204 Related to
this shortcoming is the problem that Pareto efficiency does not possess
any criteria for choosing among the set of Pareto optimal allocations. As
long as there is no “waste,” Pareto efficiency is indifferent between any
possible number of economic allocations.205 A third drawback of the
Pareto criterion is that it is unable to rank certain allocations.206 If a
different allocation made one person much better off and a second person
only slightly worse off, we might be willing to accept such a change,
particularly if the “winner” in this change was willing and able to com-
pensate the “loser.” But in fact, Pareto efficiency can say nothing about
this change, because someone is made worse off.207 For this reason,
some allocations are incomparable under Pareto efficiency.208
203 An example of this is given in Figure 1. In that figure, points A and B are both Pareto
efficient, both the B allocation is more equal than the A distribution. Despite the difference in
equity, Pareto inefficiency is indifferent between the two. HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, R
at 438 (“[E]ven though an allocation is Pareto efficient, there is no implication that it need be
good in terms of equity.”).
204 Id.
205 I read this shortcoming as slightly different than the first. The first shortcoming is that
Pareto efficiency cannot make any distributional judgments. The second shortcoming is more
general and says that Pareto efficiency is indifferent about allocations that are Pareto efficient.
HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 439 (“Pareto-efficiency does not embody any concept of R
justice, and highly inequitable allocations can be efficient under the criterion. [Second,] [i]n, in
many situations there are very many Pareto-efficient allocations, in which case the criterion
provides little guidance for policy choice.”).
206 Id. (“Another failing of the Pareto preference ordering is that it is not always able to
compare alternative states. In formal terms, it does not provide a complete ordering of states.”)
(emphasis in original).
207 An example of this is illustrated in Figure 1. In that figure, Pareto efficiency cannot
rank points B and C. Facing a choice between these two, Pareto efficiency cannot tell us
whether one is preferred to the other. For instance, a change in allocation from C to B would
make person 1 worse off, even though person 2 could compensate person 1.
208 Note that indifference is not the same thing as incomparability. See HINDRIKS &
MYLES, supra note 50, at 439 (“If the preference order were indifferent between two states, R
then they are judged as equally good. Incomparability means the pair of states simply cannot
be ranked.”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 46  7-DEC-16 12:12
46 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
It is in these cases of incomparability that the concept of Kaldor-
Hicks efficiency comes in handy. As previously defined, an allocation is
said to be Kaldor-Hicks’s efficient relative to another if the “winners”
can compensate the “losers.”209 Note that this compensation is typically
thought of as merely hypothetical.210 If compensation did actually occur,
the change in allocation would be Pareto efficient as well.211 Neverthe-
less, Kaldor-Hicks efficiency is useful precisely in those situations where
allocations are incomparable under the more austere Pareto criterion. If it
is at least feasible for winners to compensate the losers, then it must be
true that total wealth in society has increased.212 We can then say that the
new allocation is more efficient than the old. Kaldor-Hicks efficiency is
also said to be more useful than Pareto efficiency since most changes in
economic allocations involve both winners and losers.213
Although the idea of Kaldor-Hicks efficiency can solve the compa-
rability  problem,  it  cannot  address  the  indifference  or  distributional
problems. Like Pareto efficiency, Kaldor-Hicks efficiency is indifferent
to a change in the allocation of resources, so long as the winners can
compensate the losers.214 Whether the change also involves an increase
or  decrease  in  income  inequality  is  irrelevant  to  Kaldor-Hicks
efficiency.215
Social welfare analysis avoids these problems of the efficiency cri-
terion. In fact, choosing among income distributions the one that maxi-
mizes to social utility—the social welfare function—solves all of the
shortcomings of the efficiency concepts listed previously.216 Although
there may be more than one allocation that achieves the same, and the
highest, level of social welfare, under certain assumptions the social wel-
fare criterion does not face the problem of an infinite indifference be-
209 See Coleman, supra note 42, and accompanying text. R
210 SeePOSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,supra note 43, at 14. R
211 Coleman, supra note 42, at 98 (“Were the payment transaction costless and full com- R
pensation given to the losers, Kaldor-Hicks distributions would be transformed into Pareto-
superior ones.”). For this reason, Kaldor-Hicks efficiency is sometimes called potential Pareto
efficiency. SeePOSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,supra note 43, at 14. R
212 Returning to Figure 1, we can now judge allocation B more efficient than allocation C,
since in a move from C to B, person 2 could compensate person 1.
213 POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,supra note 43, at 14. R
214 See id. at 14 (discussing the concept of Kaldor-Hicks efficiency and the requirement
that winners be able to compensate losers, regardless of the distributive consequences).
215 Id. at 15 (explaining that efficiency, including the Kadlor-Hicks criterion, “does not
answer the question whether the existing distribution of income and wealth is good or bad, just
or unjust”).
216 For a general discussion of welfare maximization and its advantages vis-a`-vis effi-
ciency, seeHINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 424–27, 436–41. R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 47  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 47
tween allocations.217 It also solves the problems of distribution.218 For
example, if we take a dollar away from a wealthy person and give it to a
poor person, we will increase social welfare.219 This follows naturally
from the principle of diminishing marginal utility of money.220 Social
welfare increases since the poor person values that dollar more than the
wealthy person. Hence, unlike Pareto or Kaldor-Hicks efficiency, social-
welfare maximization is not indifferent to the level of economic inequal-
ity. Finally, social welfare maximization can also address the incompara-
bility  problem.221  Suppose  the  difference  between  two  different
allocations is that the welfare of the poor is much higher in the first than
in the second, while the welfare of the rich is only slightly lower in the
second than in the first. As we previously saw, Pareto efficiency cannot
compare these two allocations.222 Kaldor-Hicks would endorse the first
as long as the poor could compensate the rich. In addition, the social-
welfare criterion would also endorse the first as long as total social wel-
fare is higher in the first than in the second—which is the conclusion
given diminishing marginal utility of money.
Although both social welfare maximization and Kaldor-Hicks effi-
ciency can address the Pareto problem of comparability, they may well
disagree about which allocation is more desirable. For example, Kaldor-
Hicks efficiency clearly endorses an allocation change that increases ine-
quality, but in which the rich can compensate the poor. Yet the new allo-
cation  may  or  may  not  be  social  welfare  maximizing.  Suppose,  for
example, that a large wealth gain of the rich is only slightly larger the
wealth loss to the poor. Although the change is Kaldor-Hicks efficient—
the rich could compensate the poor, and still be better off—the allocation
may reduce social welfare because, by the principle of the diminishing
marginal utility of money, the uncompensated welfare loss of the poor
217 Referring again to Figure 1, note that any point along the utility possibility, or Pareto,
frontier is Pareto efficient. Since the curve is continuous, the number of Pareto efficient alloca-
tions is infinite. However, when the social indifference curve is introduced, there is a unique
allocation that maximizes social welfare. Nevertheless, since the utility possibility frontier may
be nonconvex (e.g., “wavy” rather than curved), the welfare-maximizing allocation may also
not be unique. Notwithstanding this concession, welfare maximization reduces the number of
“desirable” allocations in this way.
218 HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 425 (explaining that the “equity considerations” R
of society, or the social planner, are “[e]mbodied” within a social welfare function).
219 SeeSTIGLITZ, supra note 46, at 108 (“[I]f the extra utility that a poor person gets from R
an extra dollar of income (his marginal utility) exceeds the loss in utility to the rich person of
losing a dollar (his marginal utility), then total social welfare (the sum of the utilities) will
increase by transferring the dollar.”).
220 See supra note 184 and accompanying text. R
221 SeeSTIGLITZ, supra note 43, at 104 (“The social welfare function provides a basis for R
ranking any allocation of resources, unlike the Pareto principle, in which we can only say that
one situation is better than another if everyone is at least as well off, and someone is better
off.”).
222 Supra notes 206–08 and accompanying text. R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 48  7-DEC-16 12:12
48 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
may exceed the welfare gain of the rich. For the same reason, for an
increase in inequality to increase social welfare, the gain of the rich must
be substantially larger than the loss to the poor. Consider the limiting
case for a useful example. An allocation change that increases the wealth
of the rich, but leaves that of the poor unaltered, would unambiguously
increase total social welfare. In general then, the social welfare criterion
and Kaldor-Hicks efficiency will give different answers about whether
an economic allocation should or should not be endorsed relative to an-
other. Yet that they might agree also indicates that social welfare incor-
porates both equity and efficiency into its evaluation of an economic
allocation.223
Despite these advantages, there are some well-known critiques of
social welfare. The best-known critique challenges the assumption that
one can make interpersonal comparisons of wellbeing.224 While we can
accept that individually I would feel different about ten dollars depend-
ing on whether I was rich or poor, we cannot be so certain about the
change in total utility when changing the incomes between individu-
als.225 This is simply because utilities are not directly observable.226 In
addition, perhaps a rich person values ten more dollars even more than a
poor person, even if both have diminishing marginal utility of money.227
Perhaps this is why the rich are rich and the poor are poor!228
223 STIGLITZ, supra note 46, at 104–06 (explaining how a social welfare function allows R
one to balance the trade-offs between efficiency and equity). As Stiglitz notes, efficiency is
just as much a part of welfare maximization as is equity: “Obviously, society is better off [in
welfare terms] if everyone is better off—this corresponds to the Pareto principle.” Id. at 103.
224 See generally Lionel Robbins, Interpersonal Comparisons of Utility: A Comment, 48
ECON. J. 635 (1938); see also Hindriks & Myles, supra note 50, at 443–46. R
225 Yew-Kwang Ng, A Case for Happiness, Cardinalism, and Interpersonal Comparabil-
ity, 107 ECON. J. 1848, 1848 (1997) (“After the indifference-curve or ordinalism revolution in
the 1930’s, modern economists are very adverse to the more subjective concepts and very
hostile to cardinal utility and interpersonal comparisons of utility.”). The basic economic the-
ory of consumption requires only that individuals be able to rank their preferences for bundles
of commodities (ordinal), not that they be able to quantify the utility they get from each com-
modity bundle (cardinal).
226 Robbins, supra note 224, at 637 (writing that other economic theories “were assump- R
tions which had been verified by observation or introspection, or, at least, were capable of such
verification. The assumptions involving interpersonal comparison were certainly not of this
order. . . . Jevons had said, ‘Every mind is inscrutable to every other mind and no common
denominator of feeling is possible.’”).
227 POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,supra note 43, at 502 (“Since the shape and height of R
people’s marginal utility curves are unknown, and probably unknowable, the possibility that
wealthier people’s marginal utility curves are higher on average than poorer people’s cannot
be dismissed, at least when wealth differences are not extreme.”).
228 Since utilities are not directly observable, one might argue that the assumption of
identical utility curves is as good as the assumption of different utility curves. In answer to
this, see POSNER, supra note 43, at 502 (“Yet mightn’t income and the marginal utility thereof R
be, within limits anyway, positively correlated—on the theory that the people who work hard
to make money and succeed in making it are, on average, those who value money the most,
having given up other things such as leisure to get it?”) (emphasis in original).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 49  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 49
There are several possible responses to the criticism of interpersonal
utility comparisons. One is that if it is possible to determine a cardinal
and bounded index of preferences for individuals, then interpersonal
comparisons of utility are indeed possible.229 In addition, there is some
empirical justification for the belief that individuals indeed have roughly
similar utility functions.230 Another answer to the interpersonal compara-
bility objection is that a social welfare function captures less a verifiable
claim about interpersonal comparisons—especially those claims about
the relative positions of winners and losers (e.g., the poor and the rich,
respectively, in cases of redistribution)—and more an inescapable value
judgment made by citizens or a policy maker.231
Whatever one thinks about the criticisms of social welfare and their
responses, it need not detain us in the debate about whether taxes or legal
rules should be used to reduce economic inequality. The reason is that
both arguments require making interpersonal comparisons.232 Social wel-
fare maximization is as critical for the case of redistributive taxation as it
229 Daniel M. Hausman, The Impossibility of Interpersonal Utility Comparisons, 104
MIND 473, 480 (1995) (“If it is possible to determine a ‘correct’ cardinal and bounded index of
preferences for individuals that is unique up to a positive linear transformation, then . . . there
is, I contend, one right way to make interpersonal utility comparisons.”). This simply means
that interpersonal comparisons are possible in principle. It does not dispose of the challenge of
measuring utilities or preferences, or other objections to utilitarianism as a desirable normative
principle, such as that its implications are unfair in certain situations. Id. at 483–85 (summariz-
ing different criticisms of a solution to the incomparability problem on the grounds that it is
unfair).
230 All consumers have very similar underlying preference orderings. All consumers pre-
fer more income to less, and households with similar incomes make very similar divisions of
expenditures between alternative groups of commodity bundles. For instance, the amount of
income spent on food is quite similar, even though the types of foods purchased differs be-
tween households. As Hindriks and Myles write, “In modeling such consumers, it is possible
to assert that they all have the same utility function guiding their choices. This makes their
utilities directly comparable.” HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 444. R
231 As Kaplow and Shavell themselves point out in separate work, many cite the econo-
mist Lionel Robbins for the claim that interpersonal comparisons of utility are impossible.
KAPLOW & SHAVELL, supra note 1, at 27 n. 20. Yet Robbins himself viewed this attribution as R
incorrect, and explained that “the common stipulation that different individuals have equal
capacities for satisfaction involves a value judgment rather than a scientifically verifiable hy-
pothesis, and that the need for making value judgments when formulating policy recommenda-
tions should be understood not as a deficiency but rather as an inevitability.” Id. They also cite
the economist Ian Little, who argued that statements about the relative welfare of individuals
could be more or less scientific, but drew a clear line between those statements and the inher-
ently normative character of policy recommendations derived from them. In sum, even if dif-
ferent individuals’ utility functions were comparable, we would still be making a value
judgment about the desirability of redistribution. Id. And if a value judgment is inescapable,
we can interpret a social welfare function as reflecting a normative claim about inequality. As
we have seen, a variety of normative judgments are possible, ranging from the utilitarian case
(wealth maximization) to the Rawlsian case (maximize the utility of the poorest person or
household). See supra notes 42, 50 and accompanying text. R
232 See the discussion of optimal tax policy supra Part III.B.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 50  7-DEC-16 12:12
50 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
is for reducing inequality through legal rules.233 Indeed, this is no less
true for Kaplow and Shavell as for other economists and law-and-eco-
nomics scholars. In their book, Fairness versus Welfare, Kaplow and
Shavell fully commit themselves to a social welfare position, arguing
that “social decisions should be based exclusively on their effects on the
welfare of individuals . . . .”234 Thus, as long as one takes a welfarist
position to the question of distributive justice, the interpersonal compara-
bility problem is inescapable. Consequently, it has little bearing on the
specific debate this Article addresses.
The conclusion is that welfare maximization takes priority over
wealth maximization. Accordingly, social policy should balance both ef-
ficiency and equity—efficiency should not be the exclusive criterion for
evaluating legal rules. In the case of antitrust regulation, there is no rea-
son to give priority to its positive efficiency effects. Antitrust regulation
should be endorsed because it increases social welfare, both by increas-
ing efficiency and reducing inequality. Note that in the antitrust scenario
we fortunately do not face a tradeoff between efficiency and equity. In
other cases, such a tradeoff will be inescapable. Nevertheless, in these
situations, welfare maximization requires that we give weight to both
efficiency and equity. Thus, efficiency is not the only criterion by which
legal rules (or other social policies) should be evaluated.
B. On the Pareto Frontier: Transaction Costs and the Coase
Theorem
Another interpretation of Kaplow and Shavell’s argument is that
when legal rules should be chosen exclusively because they are efficient,
they mean Pareto efficient rules. If policymakers adopt Pareto efficient
legal rules, the implication is that any other rule would be inefficient.
This logic would then rule out cases of efficient legal redistribution. Ar-
guably, the rule that Kaplow and Shavell choose in their example is just
such a Pareto efficient legal rule: strict liability. Strict liability perfectly
leads actors to internalize their externalities, equating both private and
social marginal benefits and costs. As the argument might go, because
strict  liability  is  Pareto  efficient,  any  other  legal  rule  would  be
inefficient.
233 Id.
234 KAPLOW & SHAVELL, supra note 15, at xvii. Note that this statement is a significant R
departure from their statement in their double-distortion argument, which emphasizes effi-
ciency rather than welfare: “[Our argument] suggests that it is appropriate for economic analy-
sis of legal rules to focus on efficiency and to ignore the distribution of income in offering
normative judgments.” Kaplow & Shavell, supra note 1, at 677. Despite that change, it is clear R
they  remain  committed  to  their  double-distortion  argument.  See  generally KAPLOW  &
SHAVELL, supra note 1. R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 51  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 51
This section demonstrates that this conclusion does not follow from
the identification of a Pareto efficient legal rule. This discussion will also
provide an occasion to bring into the analysis the role of transaction costs
and the Coase theorem.
The rebuttal to this counterargument is that nothing about the con-
cept of Pareto efficiency implies that a Pareto efficient point will be
unique.235 There can be many, and possibility infinite Pareto efficient
allocations. The same goes for legal rules as well. Thus, there can be two
or more legal rules that are both Pareto efficient—or at least yield the
same level of efficiency. At the same time, their distributional conse-
quences will typically be quite different. Thus, while an alternative legal
rule may not improve efficiency, it may still reduce inequality without
any loss in efficiency. This outcome would still be superior to redistribu-
tion through taxation.
We can use Kaplow and Shavell’s own example of tort law to
demonstrate this.236 Consider first a negligence rule. It is well known that
the  negligence  rule  leads  individuals  to  adopt  the  efficient  level  of
care.237 Under this rule, a person must only pay for harm to others if the
level of precaution taken by that person is unreasonably low. Facing such
a rule, this person will choose the reasonable level of care. As in Learned
Hand’s famous formula, the reasonable level of precaution is precisely
the one that equalizes marginal benefits and costs.238 Hence a person will
choose the efficient level of care. However, because this level of care is
reasonable, she will also not be liable for harm caused to another. These
individuals will therefore receive no “transfers” from the harm causer.
In contrast with the negligence rule, suppose that a court adopts a
strict liability rule in cases of products liability. Now the harm-causer—
typically the company that produced the defective product—must pay for
all harm caused. This rule still leads to the efficient level of care, since it
forces the producer to fully internalize all of its costs, including the harm
caused to others by its defective products. With respect to efficiency,
235 This should be obvious from standard economic presentations of the idea of Pareto
efficiency. See, e.g., STIGLITZ, supra note 46. R
236 This example will compare the negligence rule in general tort law and the strict liabil-
ity rule in products liability. Liscow, supra note 1, at 2486–88, also compares both rules in a R
nuisance/pollution example. But the products liability case seems even more apt than the pol-
lution case considered by Liscow.
237 See, e.g., Marcel Kahan, Causation and Incentives to Take Care under the Negligence
Rule, 18 J.L. STUD. 427, 429 (1989) (“Under perfect conditions, a negligence rule will provide
incentives for injurers to take the optimal level of care.”).
238 One can casually identify the Learned Hand Test with the negligence rule and interpret
both as leading to efficient behavior. See, e.g., Liscow, supra note 1, at 2486–87, 2486 n. 18. R
However, it is also possible to perceive some ambiguity in the Learned Hand Test, some
interpretations of which would lead to inefficient behavior. See John Prather Brown, Toward
an Economic Theory of Liability, 2 J.L. STUD. 323, 331–35 (1973).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 52  7-DEC-16 12:12
52 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
therefore, the outcomes are identical under either the negligence or strict-
liability rules.239 However, the distributional effects are quite differ-
ent.240 Under the negligence rule, the plaintiffs receive no compensation
from the harm causer. In the abstract tort setting, plaintiffs are unlikely to
be any more or less wealthy than defendants. Therefore, the lack of trans-
fers is of little concern, because the redistributive impact would be small.
Plaintiffs, however, do receive some compensation under the strict liabil-
ity rule. Moreover, producers will be, on average, wealthier than con-
sumers. In this case, the redistributive rationale makes sense, and strict
liability can foster a reduction in inequality without a loss of efficiency.
The first implication for this example is to underscore the point that
the existence of a Pareto efficient legal rule does not imply that any alter-
native legal rule will be inefficient. Pareto efficiency is not unique, and
therefore there may be more than one legal rule that is Pareto efficient.
The second implication is stronger. If the choice of legal rules we face is
between rules that are all Pareto efficient, on what grounds are we to
evaluate them? Efficiency is not a helpful criterion, because they all sat-
isfy that condition. Within a legal-economic analysis, the only basis on
which to choose among this set of rules is distributive. Thus, to put this
another way, if legal rules put society on the Pareto frontier, the only
criterion available for evaluating legal rules is equity.
Of course, society is unlikely to be on the Pareto frontier, and if we
were there, we wouldn’t need to worry about tax distortions. Further-
more, this means there is scope for legal rules to increase efficiency. But
this does not cut in Kaplow and Shavell’s favor, because if there is scope
for increasing efficiency there are likely legal rule changes that simulta-
neously reduce inequality as well.
It is worth dwelling on this argument for a little longer. Guido Cala-
bresi has made the interesting contention that society is in fact always on
the Pareto frontier.241 If the Pareto principle were a unanimity require-
ment, “why wouldn’t any change that belonged in the [Pareto] set have
already been made? Since, by definition, no one would in any way be
hurt by the change, why would anyone object?”242 Thus, “what is effi-
cient . . . .”243 The obvious answer to this claim is transaction costs: are
there not allocation changes that would make everyone better off, but
which cannot be made unanimously because transaction costs preclude
239 Liscow, supra note 1, at 2486–87 (observing that both negligence and strict liability R
rules lead to the same level of care).
240 Id. at 2487 (“Although there is no difference in the behavior of the [harm causer],
there is a difference in the distribution of money.”).
241 Guido Calabresi, The Pointlessness of Pareto: Carrying Coase Further, 100 YALE L.J.
1211, 1212 (1991).
242 Id. at 1216.
243 Id.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 53  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 53
us from doing so? Calabresi has “no doubt that failures of knowledge,
organization, and compensation often keep us from what, if it could be
done, would make us all better off.”244 But his response is that “transac-
tion costs are no different from any other costs,” and thus transaction
costs “help define the Pareto possibility frontier.”245 Accordingly, “a
move to the frontier and a shift of the frontier are, plain and simply, the
same thing.”246
The implication of this reasoning is that distributive concerns are
inescapable in legal analysis and evaluation. Because society is always
on the Pareto frontier, any change in allocation will involve winners and
losers. These are distributional changes that make welfare comparisons
essential. We can carry this further. Since we are on the Pareto frontier,
from an efficiency point of view, any point on that frontier is equally
desirable. Pareto efficiency gives us no basis for choosing among the
Pareto set. If this is the case, equity is the only basis on which we can
evaluate the choice of allocations. As we will see in the next section,
welfare maximization can provide a justification for reintroducing effi-
ciency into the analysis, but of course equity must be considered as well.
C. Non-Convexities
Earlier, I justified my argument for efficient and optimal legal redis-
tributions by using figures that assumed continuous, symmetric, and con-
vex utility possibilities curves. This assumes that there is some set of
legal rules that can achieve any allocation within the set created by that
curve, as in Figure 4. For example, in response to the continuity assump-
tion,  one  could  argue  that  there  are  significant  “gaps”  within  these
figures, and that not every allocation is feasible, including some of those
within the region of efficient legal redistributions.
In response to this objection, the continuity assumption is really just
a  simplification.  It  is  almost  certainly  true  that  not  every  allocation
within the set created by the utility possibility frontier is feasible. Yet all
of our examples so far have given us reasons to believe that there are
many, and perhaps many more, allocations that are feasible. Further-
more, supporters of the double-distortion argument would no doubt be-
lieve that there are legal rules than can be Pareto-improving, as well as
inefficient legal rules that can lower income inequality. If this were so, it
would be strange if there were not legal rules that were not only efficient,
but also redistributive. To assume otherwise would be to assume that any
gaps  coincide  precisely  in  the  area  of  efficient  or  optimal  legal
redistributions.
244 Id. at 1218.
245 Id.
246 Id. at 1219.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 54  7-DEC-16 12:12
54 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
The objections to the assumptions of symmetry and convexity are
somewhat more serious, but still do not pose any real obstacle to the
argument. For example, one could read Figure 2 as assuming that the
optimal social welfare corresponds to a set of legal rules that gives both
individuals exactly equal income. But quite apart from the distortionary
effects of legal rules or taxes, this point may be an impossibility simply
because, technologically, an economy may require different tasks of va-
rying complexities that demand that certain workers be paid more or less
than others. Thus, rather than a convex curve, the utility possibilities
frontier may bow inwards exactly in the region of perfect equality. In
addition, different individuals may simply have different abilities, which
would again mean that optimal point may entail some inequality and,
especially, that the utility possibilities curve may be asymmetric.
Nevertheless, it should be apparent that none of these assumptions
remove the more fundamental possibility that there can exist some legal
rules that both reduce inequality and increase efficiency. Lack of con-
tinuity implies that the set of legal rules is not infinite. But this set may
still be quite large. Either lack of convexity or symmetry may mean that
perfect equality is impossible with welfare maximization. But they do
not rule out the possibility that reductions, even significant ones, are
possible.
D. Efficient Tax-and-Transfer Policies
So far this Article has assumed, along with Kaplow and Shavell,
that the tax system is distortionary. In fact this may not exclusively be
the case. That is, tax-and-transfer policies can also have positive effi-
ciency consequences. Although Kaplow and Shavell do not make this
argument, it is a potential objection to the claim that legal redistributions
can be efficient. The counterargument to this Article’s claim is that redis-
tribution through taxation can be efficient as well. The possibility of effi-
cient, redistributive taxation requires us to reevaluate the choice of law
versus tax in making distributive economic policy. Yet, as this subsection
argues, even where the tax-and-transfer system may produce efficiencies,
we cannot also rule out the use of law. Once again, the best distributive
economic policy will most likely be a mix of legal rules and taxation.
To see how taxation can increase total wealth, consider the follow-
ing example.247 While individuals’ incomes depend on the amount of
labor they supply, they also depend on how much they invest in their
education.248 For moderate or low-income individuals, however, access
247 The following example is from Karla Hoff & Andrew B. Lyon, Non-Leaky Buckets:
Optimal Redistributive Taxation and Agency Costs, 58 J. PUB. ECON. 365 (1995).
248 Id. at 367 (building a model in which individuals not only choose their labor supply,
but also how much education to obtain).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 55  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 55
to education in turn depends on access to credit, for example, student
loans.249 And credit markets will be inefficient when information about
individuals’ abilities is private.250 Because lenders cannot perfectly ob-
serve the abilities of borrowers or their future earning potential, the costs
of lending, reflected in higher interest rates, increase.251 High interest
rates put education out of reach of low-wealth individuals.252 Redistribu-
tion, by increasing individuals’ collateralizable wealth, can lower interest
rates and increase investment in education.253 Depending on circum-
stances, the increase in education can offset the distortions to labor sup-
ply caused by taxes, leading to Pareto improvements in the economy.254
The implication is that, just as with efficient legal redistributions,
there can be efficient tax-and-transfer policies. When tax redistribution
reduces wealth, the choice is easy. Because the efficient legal redistribu-
tion increases wealth, it unambiguously dominates redistribution through
taxation. But when redistribution through both legal rules and taxation is
efficient, why choose legal rules over the income tax system in these
cases?
Even if tax redistribution can be efficient, this is no argument for
choosing taxes at the exclusion of legal rules. If the choice is between
efficient tax redistribution and efficient legal redistribution, then there is
no choice: both can be implemented. If redistribution through taxation is
efficient but the legal redistribution inefficient, then a comparative analy-
sis of the social welfare consequences of each policy option must be
undertaken. And so forth. In short, the choice between taxes or legal
rules depends on the specifics in each case. There is still no general rule
that instructs us that legal rules should never be used to redistribute in-
come. Thus, the existence of efficient tax-and-transfer policies does not
rule out the use of legal rules to also redistribute income.
249 Id. at 367–68.
250 Id. at 366 (“When there is private information in an economy, some transactions that
would be mutually beneficial if all agents had the same information are not compatible with
the incentives of the transactors . . . .”).
251 Id. at 367 (“Some of those who borrow will rationally undertake investments in higher
education with negative expected present value because part of the cost of failure is shifted,
through default, to others. . . . In general equilibrium, it raises the costs of borrowing.”).
252 Id. at 367–68 (“[Borrowing costs], reflected in high interest rates, may be so high that
no one in that wealth class has an incentive to borrow, and so zero investment in human capital
occurs.”).
253 Id. at 367 (“We show that a grant that increases individuals’ collateralizable wealth
and that is paid out of labor taxes can yield Pareto improvements.”).
254 Id. at 368 (“We do not eliminate the adverse impact of taxation on compensated labor
supply, but we show that the beneficial net impact on investment in human capital may be
more important than the impact on labor hours.”).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 56  7-DEC-16 12:12
56 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
E. Legal Rules and Corrective Taxation
As the efficient tax-and-transfer example demonstrates, taxation in
general need not be distortionary. But it is nevertheless still a tax. And as
the economics of information literature has shown, taxes and subsidies
can frequently play a role in correcting for various kinds of market fail-
ures.255 Indeed, as is well known, any type of legal rule or regulation can
be instantiated as a tax or subsidy.256 To reproduce a strict liability legal
rule, for example, the government could levy a tax on all harm caused by
an individual or legal entity. The implication of this is that taxation could
be used to achieve all of the efficiency and distributive objectives that we
could have in mind for the use of legal rules. Taxation would be superior
to legal rules in redistributing income.
This argument against legal rules fails because it does not consider
the very important differences between corrective taxation and income
taxation. The difference between corrective taxes and legal rules and reg-
ulations is merely formal. Both corrective taxes and legal rules explicitly
and intentionally seek to change behavior—for any possible purpose, to
correct  for  market  failures,  increase  efficiency,  reduce  inequality,  or
whatever. There is, however, an important difference between, on the
one hand, legal rules and corrective taxation and, on the other, income
taxation, especially as understood by Kaplow and Shavell. The objective
of income taxation is not to change behavior, but to raise revenue—ei-
ther to produce public goods or redistribute income.257
Indeed, the reason that Kaplow and Shavell and the optimal tax the-
orists believe income taxes are the best instruments for redistribution is
that they track the very thing that is redistributed: income. The best in-
come tax would be the one that has the least effect on behavior. Even
better than an income tax would an endowment tax—a kind of lump-sum
tax assessed on individuals’ income-earning potential, which would have
no effect on behavior, and therefore no efficiency loss.258 But in the ab-
255 A well-known paper in economics establishes that the competitive equilibrium of an
economy with incomplete markets and imperfect information is generically not even con-
strained Pareto efficient. See generally Bruce Greenwald & Joseph Stiglitz, Externalities in
Economies with Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets, 101 Q.J. ECON. 229 (1986).
For this reason, there is nearly always a role for government to improve economic efficiency
through corrective taxation.
256 Shaviro, supra note 124, at 411–14 (discussing the “interchangeability” of taxes, gov- R
ernment spending, and regulation).
257 One could also say more directly that the purpose of an income tax is to redistribute
income. See LIAM MURPHY & THOMAS NAGEL, THE MYTH OF OWNERSHIP: TAXES AND JUS-
TICE 76 (2002) (discussing the purpose of income taxation, which is to raise revenue either for
redistribution, spending on public goods, or both).
258 “In order for a tax to be lump sum, the consumer on whom the tax is levied must not
be able to affect the size of the tax by changing their behavior.” HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra
note 50, at 428. The idea of lump-sum taxation is further discussed, infra notes 266–72 and R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 57  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 57
sence  of  information  on  individuals’  abilities,  income  is  the  closest
proxy.259
The institutional choice under debate then is not the choice between
legal rules and taxes in general, but between behavior-altering legal rules
and corrective taxation, on the one hand, and distortion-minimizing in-
come  taxation  on  the  other.  To  extend  their  argument,  Kaplow  and
Shavell  would  contend  that  both  corrective  taxation  and  legal  rules
should be chosen solely based on their efficiency effects. Neither should
have distributive concerns, while the income tax should be the sole in-
strument for redistributing income. To extend my argument, there is no
reason why corrective taxes could not simultaneously increase efficiency
and reduce inequality.260 Provided that that is the case, both corrective
taxes and income taxes should be used to redistribute income.
One could have a debate between the choice of legal rules and cor-
rective taxation.261 But, at least in the context of this Article’s debate, it
would not be a very productive one. Because they have the same objec-
tives, the choice between law and corrective taxation would be made
based on issues of administrative efficiency and agency expertise and
competency. Is the levying of taxes on inefficient behavior less costly
than judicial oversight? Do the taxing authorities have the professional
competence and expertise necessary, not just to raise taxes, but to regu-
late the conduct in question? Addressing these issues is beyond the scope
of this Article. Moreover, it seems doubtful that a general rule, rather
than case-by-case consideration, would be the answer to this question.
In summary then, the existence of corrective taxation (especially as
a substitute for legal rules) is no objection to the argument that legal
rules, in addition to income taxes, should be used to redistribute income.
accompanying text. Briefly, without perfect information on individuals’ income-earning poten-
tial, a redistributive lump-sum tax is considered unrealistic. Nevertheless, several tax law
scholars have made the argument for the plausibility of endowment taxation. For a critique of
this position and an overview of the relevant literature, see Ilan Benshalom & Kendra Stead,
Values and (Market) Valuations: A Critique of the Endowment Tax Consensus, 104 NW. U. L.
REV. 1511 (2010).
259 Mirrlees, supra note 187, at 175 (“[T]he natural, and one would suppose most reliable, R
indicator of [a person’s] income earning potential is his income.”).
260 Indeed, to link this back to previous discussions, credit markets are a good example of
where corrective taxes can increase efficiency and reduce inequality. See supra Parts II.C.3
and IV.D; see also Bowles & Ginitis, supra note 152, at 3–71; Hoff, supra note 10. R
261 See, e.g., Louis Kaplow & Steven Shavell, On the Superiority of Corrective Taxes to
Quantity Regulation, 4 AM. L. ECON. REV. 1 (2002) (arguing that if the government can im-
pose a nonlinear tax equal to the schedule of harm or can adjust the tax rate upon learning that
it diverges from marginal harm, then corrective taxes are superior to quantity regulation);
Edward L. Glaeser & Andrei Shleifer, A Reason for Quantity Regulation, 91 AM. ECON. REV.
431 (2001) (arguing that quantity regulation is frequently superior to corrective taxes because
of lower enforcement costs).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 58  7-DEC-16 12:12
58 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
V. DISTRIBUTION POLICY IN A SECOND-BEST WORLD
The  purpose  of  this  concluding  Part  is  to  situate  my  argument
within a broader economics literature. It is well recognized that in a
world of perfect markets, taxation is the best way to achieve any distribu-
tive objectives society or policymakers might have. The double-distor-
tion argument can be read as a way to justify a similar conclusion in a
world of imperfect markets. But once we have admitted to a world of
market imperfections, this also justifies the use of legal rules both to
enhance efficiency and reduce inequality. Market failures will create effi-
ciency losses, and there is no reason why these losses may not also in-
crease inequality, as all of the previous examples have demonstrated.
Once this is conceded, then there is always a role for legal rules to en-
hance both efficiency and equity.
A. The Fundamental Theorems of Welfare Economics
One can read Kaplow and Shavell’s argument as a way of endorsing
what is called the “second fundamental theory of welfare economics” for
a world of imperfect competition. To understand the second fundamental
theorem, we briefly introduce the first.
The first fundamental theorem of welfare economics states that a
perfectly competitive economy achieves a Pareto efficient allocation of
resources.262 In other words, in a perfectly competitive economy we have
reached  the  Pareto  frontier,  all  Pareto  improvements  have  been  ex-
hausted, and it is not possible to make anyone better off without also
making someone worse off.263
In contrast to the first fundamental theorem of welfare economics,
the second theorem states that any Pareto efficient allocation of resources
within a perfectly competitive economy can be achieved with lump sum
taxes.264 Since it is possible for some Pareto efficient allocations to be
highly, even perfectly, equal, the idea is that one can obtain any desired
distribution of income solely through the tax system without sacrificing
economic efficiency.265 The main attraction is that there is no need to
reorganize the economy to achieve distributive objectives.266 The econ-
omy achieves an optimal level of output in a decentralized fashion, while
262 Stiglitz, supra note 255, at 259. R
263 Id.
264 Id.
265 HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 424. R
266 Id. (noting that after consumers are assigned lump-sum transfers, they will “then trade,
and the chosen equilibrium will emerge as the competitive equilibrium. This is the process of
decentralization”) (emphasis in original).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 59  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 59
the tax system is the sole instrument necessary for influencing the distri-
bution of economic rewards.267
Critical to the second fundamental theorem is the idea of lump sum
taxes. Intuitively, a lump sum tax is one that has no distortionary impact
on economic behavior.268 This is certainly a necessary feature of the tax
system if one wants to achieve a desired distribution of resources without
causing any loss to economic output. A more formal, but slightly less
intuitive definition says that lump sum taxes are those where the con-
sumer cannot vary the amount of tax paid by changing her behavior.269
Under this definition, every tax instrument fails to be lump sum. For
instance, one can change the amount of income tax paid by working less.
A person can also change the amount of commodity taxes paid by chang-
ing saving and consumption patterns. Estate taxes can be avoided by
making inter vivos transfers.270 In the late 1980s, the United Kingdom
implemented a poll tax, which came close to a lump sum tax because it
levied the same amount on every individual. Yet even in this case, indi-
viduals could vary the amount of tax they paid by moving, not making
any official declaration about the new address, and therefore failing to
appear on local tax registers.271 Even if poll taxes did not influence be-
havior, they would not be optimal lump sum taxes. Since the appeal of
the second fundamental theorem is that any desired distribution of in-
come can be achieved, optimal lump sum taxes will in general redistrib-
ute  and  therefore  necessarily  vary  across  persons  of  different
consumption tastes and production abilities.272 In principle, one could
achieve optimal lump sum taxation if one had knowledge about individu-
als’ consumer preferences and economic endowments (e.g., their ability
or productivity).273 But because this is private information for each indi-
267 Id. (“In achieving the decentralization of the allocation, only two policy tools are em-
ployed: the encouragement of competition and a set of lump-sum taxes to ensure that each
consumer has the required income.”).
268 HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra note 50, at 428. R
269 “In order for a tax to be lump sum, the consumer on whom the tax is levied must not
be able to affect the size of the tax by changing their behavior.” HINDRIKS & MYLES, supra
note 50, at 428. R
270 Id. (discussing how each of these examples—income tax, commodity tax, and estate
tax—fail to act like lump-sum taxes).
271 Id. (discussing how the UK Poll Tax came close to working, but still failed to work, as
a lump-sum tax).
272 Id. (“[B]ecause the role of lump-sum taxes [in the Second Theorem] is fundamentally
redistributive, . . . the taxes will be highly differentiated across consumers. Since even uniform
lump-sum taxes are implemented with difficulty, the use of differentiated taxes presents even
greater problems.”).
273 Id. at 428–29 (describing how the calculation of the optimal lump-sum transfers re-
quires knowledge of both preferences and endowments).\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 60  7-DEC-16 12:12
60 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
vidual, and cannot be known with certainty by a policy maker, lump sum
taxation is thought to be impossible in practice.274
The impossibility of lump sum taxes then leads to the conclusion
that taxes will always distort economic behavior. In any case, the policy
implications of the second fundamental theorem and its relationship to
the double-distortion argument should now be clear. Under both concep-
tions, the legal system need not be used to address distributional issues.
Rather, the legal system should merely serve to support the efficient pro-
duction of goods and services. Distributional objectives should be left
entirely to the tax system.
One can then interpret the double-distortion argument as a version
of the second fundamental theorem of welfare economics for a world of
imperfect competition. In making their argument, Kaplow and Shavell
implicitly acknowledge the second fundamental theorem of welfare eco-
nomics. As they explain, criticism of the position that legal rules should
be evaluated solely with regard to their efficiency effects “would be
moot if the income tax system—understood here to include possible
transfer payments to the poor—could be used freely to achieve any de-
sired distribution of income.”275 And as we saw, the second fundamental
theorem states that any desired Pareto efficient allocation of resources,
including more equal distributions, can be achieved with lump sum taxa-
tion. Yet, lump sum taxation is infeasible and therefore “income taxes
and transfer payments distort incentives to work, limiting the degree to
which it is socially desirable to employ the income tax system to redis-
tribute income.”276
The Kaplow-Shavell argument is therefore distinct from the second
fundamental theorem. They acknowledge that in general lump sum taxa-
tion cannot be achieved and taxation is distortionary. At the same time,
the second theorem clearly animates their argument. Like the second the-
orem, they share the conviction that the functioning of the economy, in-
cluding the legal system that supports and makes it possible, should have
efficiency as its sole objective. The tax system, and not the legal system,
should address distributive concerns.
B. The General Theory of the Second Best
If one can interpret the double-distortion argument as a version of
the second fundamental theorem of welfare economics for a world of
imperfect competition, then one can also situate my argument within a
different general conclusion found in welfare economics. This idea is
274 Id. at 429 (“The fundamental difficulty is that these economic characteristics, prefer-
ences and endowments, are private information.”).
275 Kaplow & Shavell, supra note 261, at 667. R
276 Id.\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 61  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 61
called the general theory of the second best. The term “second best” is in
contrast to the term “first best,” a situation where all of the conditions for
a competitive economic equilibrium are satisfied, and thus a Pareto effi-
cient allocation of resources exists.277 The theory of the second best says
that if one of the conditions for Pareto efficiency fails to be satisfied,
then even if the other Pareto efficient conditions are attainable, they are
no longer desirable.278 To put it more sharply, if one of the conditions for
Pareto efficiency fails, then a second-best welfare maximizing allocation
can  be  achieved  only  by  departing  from  the  other  Pareto  efficiency
conditions.279
The theory of the second best grew out of the literature on trade and
tariffs. For one example, among others, it was shown that “the adoption
of a free trade policy by one country, in a multi-country tariff ridden
world, may actually lower the real income of that country and of the
world.”280 Thus, the existence of tariffs violates one of the Pareto effi-
ciency conditions. But the lowering of trade barriers by one country, in-
stead of leading to an incremental improvement in welfare, actually
lowers it.281 Another example comes from the analysis of a production
277 R. G. Lipsey & Kelvin Lancaster, The General Theory of Second Best, 24 REV. ECON.
STUD. 11 (1956) (“It is well known that the attainment of a Paretian optimum requires the
simultaneous fulfillment of all the optimum conditions.”).
278 Id. (“The general theorem for the second best optimum states that if there is intro-
duced into a general equilibrium system a constraint which prevents the attainment of one of
the Paretian conditions, the other Paretian conditions, although still attainable, are, in general,
no longer desirable.”).
279 Id. (“In other words, given that one of the Paretian optimum conditions cannot be
fulfilled, then an optimum situation can be achieved only by departing from all the other
Paretian conditions.”).
280 Id. at 16.
281 In the trade example, one might argue that it would better if all countries eliminated
trade barriers, thus removing all of the barriers to Pareto efficiency. Yet, some violations of the
Pareto-optimality conditions may not be possible to surmount even in principle. These obsta-
cles to Pareto efficiency can be summarized in three broad categories: externalities, market
power, and asymmetry of information. See generally MAS-COLELL ET AL., supra note 86, at R
308–09. The first is externalities. Id. at 308, 350–82. If a firm does not bear all of the costs of
its activities and uses a production process that imposes negative externalities on others—e.g.,
pollution—there will be too much of the good produced, lowering welfare. This situation is
not Pareto efficient, since some could be made better off without making others worse off—if
the citizens pay the firm to stop polluting. Alternatively, if there is a positive externality,
producers do not enjoy all of the benefits from making the good, and too little of the good will
be produced. The second category is market power. Id. at 308–09, 383–435. A competitive
economy requires that all consumers and producers act as price takers, and that their behavior
cannot affect prices. Essentially, demand or supply functions are infinitely elastic at going
market prices. Yet if, for example, there are only few agents on one side of the market (either a
few producers or a few buyers), then this condition will not be satisfied. These agents will
possess market power, defined as the ability to profitably set prices away from their competi-
tive levels. The third category is information imperfections, both hidden information (adverse
selection) or hidden action (moral hazard). Id. at 309, 436–513. For instance, a firm that hires a
worker will often know less about the ability of the worker than the worker herself. Classi-
cally, in a used-car market, the seller will have better information about the quality of the car\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 62  7-DEC-16 12:12
62 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
problem. Typically, profit maximization requires, from the familiar text-
book condition, that marginal productivity equal marginal cost. But sup-
pose one of the inputs of a multi-input production process used by a firm
is fixed at some minimum amount, above that which the firm would pre-
fer to employ to maximize profits. Then the second-best maximization of
profits requires not only that marginal productivity not equal marginal
cost for this particular input, but that marginal productivity not equal
marginal cost for all of the other inputs as well.282
The lessons of the theory of the second best can be easily applied to
the debate between the choice of taxes and legal rules to redistribute
income.283 Most generally, because the optimal tax policy will be distor-
tionary, and lead individuals away from first-best behavior, it will not be
desirable to choose otherwise Pareto efficient legal rules. Although the
general theory of the second-best says little about what these legal rules
will look like in each circumstance, we can be sure of this conclusion in
general.
More specifically, the minimum wage case described in Part II.C.2
offers a good example of the theory of the second best in action. As we
saw there, in a perfectly competitive labor market, the Pareto efficient
allocation of labor requires equating marginal benefits and costs: the
marginal productivity of labor should be equal to the wage. However,
once a (distortionary) tax scheme is in place, setting wages equal to the
marginal product of labor becomes inefficient. A work subsidy encour-
ages too much labor. The social-welfare maximizing solution then is to
implement a minimum wage higher than the marginal productivity of
than the prospective buyer. Finally, even if an employer knows the ability of an agent, she may
not always be able to perfectly monitor the effort she exerts in her duties. In all of these cases,
market equilibria frequently fail to be Pareto efficient. The main conclusion here is that if
departures from Pareto efficiency are pervasive and obstin ate, then the lessons of the theory of
the second best need to be constantly kept at the forefront.
282 One interpretation of the theory of the second best offered by economists and others is
that if there are departures from perfect competition, economic theory has nothing to say. But
this conclusion is incorrect. “Economic theory can tell us under what circumstances two small
distortions are preferable to one large one; when it is better to have inefficiencies in both
consumption and production; and when it is better not to have inefficiencies in production.”
JOSEPH E. STIGLITZ, ECONOMICSOFTHE PUBLIC SECTOR 551 (3rd ed. 2000). The real lesson of
the second best is not that economic theory is useless. Rather, it tells us that we cannot
“blindly apply” first-best policy advice as if we are in a second-best world. Id. Finding the
second-best solution may be difficult, because when one Pareto condition fails, nothing in
general can be said about the direction or magnitude of the departure from the secondary
optimum conditions that will implement the second best. Lipsey & Lancaster, supra note 277, R
at 12 (“It is important to note that in general, nothing can be said about the direction or the
magnitude of the secondary departures from optimum conditions made necessary by the origi-
nal non-fulfillment of one condition.”). This means that figuring out the best policy to take
requires work—which is unfortunately often the case for any policy or legal analyst.
283 For an even more extensive discussion applying the general theory of the second best
to the double-distortion argument, see generally Deconstructing, supra note 5 . R\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 63  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 63
labor. In the absence of a distortionary tax (and assuming perfectly com-
petitive labor markets), the optimal solution is no regulation of the labor
market. Once a distortionary tax is introduced, however, this is no longer
the case.
In summary, Kaplow and Shavell’s argument can be seen as a reit-
eration of the second fundamental theorem of welfare economics. But,
once imperfect competition is introduced, endorsing legal rules that im-
plement the putatively efficient allocation may not be welfare maximiz-
ing. In particular, the same information problems that make taxation
distortionary may also create inefficiencies that increase inequality. In
this context, legal rules have a clear scope to both address the ineffi-
ciency and reduce inequality.
CONCLUSION
An influential policy position found throughout various academic
disciplines and across the political spectrum is that only the tax system,
and not the legal system, should be used to redistribute income. Within
law and economics, Kaplow and Shavell’s double-distortion argument
supports this view. The double-distortion argument states that redistribu-
tive legal rules only add to the distortions already created by the tax
system. Everyone—the poor included—could therefore be made better
off by adopting an efficient, non-redistributive legal rule and increasing
transfers to the poor and reducing taxes.
This Article has challenged the double-distortion argument, with
two main contentions. First, there is no compelling reason why redistrib-
utive legal rules will also be distortionary. Several examples demonstrate
that rules that reduce inequality also increase efficiency. In these cases,
legal rules can redistribute income more efficiently than taxes. Second,
even if redistributive legal rules reduce efficiency, this does not automat-
ically make taxation a superior option. Indeed, the set of more efficient
redistributive legal rules typically will be larger when either inequality or
our normative distaste for it becomes larger.
The main conclusion is that taxation should not be the exclusive
tool used to redistribute income. Rather, the optimal—welfare maximiz-
ing—set of policies will use a mix of both legal rules and taxes to redis-
tribute income. How much and in what proportion each should be used is
not a question that can be answered in the abstract. One attraction of the
double-distortion argument is its generality. Essentially the argument re-
solves this choice for us a priori by claiming that taxation will always be
more efficient than legal rules. Unfortunately, as this Article has demon-
strated, we do not have that luxury. Because legal rules can sometimes be
both more efficient and redistributive, we must consider each situation,
case-by-case, to determine whether legal rules should or should not be\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 64  7-DEC-16 12:12
64 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
used to redistribute income. The double-distortion argument does not
save us from the hard work of comparative and institutional analysis.
FIGURE 1: ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY
U
2
Utility possibility (Pareto) frontier
Line of equality
B
A
C
U
1\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 65  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 65
FIGURE 2: SOCIAL WELFARE
U
2
Utility possibility (Pareto) frontier
Line of equality B
Social indifference curves
C
A
U
1\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 66  7-DEC-16 12:12
66 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
FIGURE 3: LORENZ DOMINANCE
Line of equality
me A
o
c
n
I
f 
o
n 
o
rti
o
p
o C
r
P
B
Proportion of Population\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 67  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 67
FIGURE 4: EFFICIENT LEGAL REDISTRIBUTION
U
2
Line of equality
Utility possibility frontier
ER
R
POR
IR
IR
A
Social indifference curve
U
1\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 68  7-DEC-16 12:12
68 CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY [Vol.26:1
FIGURE 5: INEFFICIENT LEGAL REDISTRIBUTION AND DISTRIBUTIONAL
JUDGMENTS
U
2
Intermediate
Rawlsian
Utilitarian
Y
X
C
B
Tax loss curve
A
U
1\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 69  7-DEC-16 12:12
2016] ECONOMIC INEQUALITY? 69
FIGURE 6: INEFFICIENT LEGAL REDISTRIBUTION AND INEQUALITY
U
2
D
C
B
Tax loss curve
A
U
1\\jciprod01\productn\C\CJP\26-1\CJP101.txt unknown Seq: 70  7-DEC-16 12:12