446 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 107:3  [2015-21]
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Davis, Richard, ed. Covering the United States Supreme Court in the Digital Age. 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014. 269p. $99.
Reviewed by Susan David deMaine *
¶18 The U.S. Supreme Court is simultaneously transparent and secretive. All of 
its decisions—the work that truly counts—are widely and publicly available. Alter-
nate views and disagreements are recorded in concurrences and dissents. Oral 
arguments are open to the public and covered by the press. Transcripts of these 
arguments are available the same day, and audio is available at the end of the week. 
At the same time, all deliberations are done behind closed doors. Neither the Jus-
tices nor any representative of the Court comment on decisions. The Justices’ clerks 
stay off social media and never discuss their work. And no cameras or other elec-
tronic devices are ever allowed in the courtroom.
¶19 The question of cameras in the courtroom during oral arguments comes 
up frequently, and the Justices always say no. They insist that cameras would 
change the dynamic of the Court, threaten their relative anonymity, and do little 
other than provide fodder for misleading sound bites on the evening news. At the 
same time, however, Justices have appeared on Sunday morning talk shows and 
even on Jon Stewart’s The Daily Show.
¶20 This apparent contradiction is somewhat characteristic of the relationship 
between the Court and the media. The Court keeps the media at a very long arm’s 
length, yet the Justices get frustrated when the press spends more time on the poli-
tics of a decision than the legal developments. The challenges posed by the rela-
tionship between the Court and the media form the overarching theme of Covering 
  *  © Susan David deMaine, 2015. Research and Instructional Services Librarian, Ruth Lilly Law 
Library, Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law, Indianapolis, Indiana.Vol. 107:3  [2015-21] KEEPING UP WITH NEW LEGAL TITLES 447
the United States Supreme Court in the Digital Age. This collection of thirteen origi-
nal chapters covers all aspects of the relationship between the press and the 
Supreme Court, from changes in news content over time to “war stories” from 
reporters on the Court beat. All in all, the book provides an in-depth and largely 
readable look at how the American people learn about the work of the Court.
¶21 The book opens with two chapters that provide a sense of the interplay 
between the Court and the press. The Court’s aloofness is evident, as is its content-
ment to do things much as they have always been done. Over time, the Court has 
made several accommodations to requests for greater access: same-day transcripts, 
end-of-week audio, and spacing decision announcements with more awareness of 
the demands on journalists (until 1965, the Court handed down decisions only on 
Mondays; now Mondays and Thursdays are big days, but decisions come on other 
days as well, and the Court tries to limit blockbuster decisions to one a day). Also 
evident is the deference shown the Court by the press. Generally speaking, mem-
bers of the Supreme Court press corps do not attempt to go beyond the bounds set 
by the Court, accepting that they will have access to extensive amounts of paper but 
no comments, leaks, or interviews.
¶22 The Court’s accommodations have not yet embraced the fact that coverage 
of the Court is shifting from traditional media outlets to online news sources, par-
ticularly blogs. Several chapters in Covering the United States Supreme Court in the 
Digital Age discuss the changes in media coverage of the Court over time. The gen-
eral consensus is that coverage in traditional sources is both relatively sparse and 
declining. Elite newspapers such as the New York Times and Wall Street Journal have 
the best coverage unless a decision has a big effect locally, in which case the local 
paper may provide good coverage. Television news coverage has never been exten-
sive and has diminished in both breadth and depth over time. The blogosphere, and 
SCOTUSblog in particular, is now the go-to source for thorough coverage of the 
Court and its decisions. This phenomenon comes up again and again in the book, 
as does the Court’s refusal to change the rules governing press passes to allow  
bloggers—regardless of their qualifications or reputation—into the press corps. 
SCOTUSblog relies on Lyle Denniston, who holds press credentials from WBUR in 
Boston, for its access.
¶23 One remarkable aspect of SCOTUSblog is the detailed attention it gives to 
so many decisions. As chapter 5, “Explaining Intermedia Coverage of Supreme 
Court Decisions,” makes clear, in traditional media it is the decisions that cause the 
most deviance from the status quo or from accepted norms which get virtually all 
the coverage. This is borne out in chapter 6, “Constructing Harry Blackmun,” which 
discusses how the Roe v. Wade opinion became Justice Blackmun’s legacy despite 
the fact that it was one decision out of many written during his twenty-four years 
on the Court. Along similar lines, chapter 8, “The Placement of Conflict: The 
Supreme Court and Issue Attention in the National Media,” uses Brown v. Board of 
Education to examine how Supreme Court decisions that disrupt the status quo and 
garner lots of media attention affect the national issue agenda.
¶24 Unlike the majority of the chapters, four of the five final chapters are writ-
ten by journalists. Not surprisingly, these chapters offer great stories and a high 
level of readability. David G. Savage of the Los Angeles Times writes about the inner 448 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 107:3  [2015-21]
workings of a typical day covering the Supreme Court. Slate correspondent Dahlia 
Lithwick’s chapter stands out as a must-read, and the closing chapters on Justice 
Brennan and Justice Stevens provide interesting close-ups of two Justices and their 
relationships with the press. Although there is some repetition in content—several 
chapters decry the state of media coverage of the Court, and several chapters dis-
cuss the impact of SCOTUSblog—this book provides intriguing details and many 
thought-provoking insights about the reserved yet symbiotic relationship between 
the Supreme Court and the press covering its work. It is a worthwhile read for 
journalists, political scientists, law librarians, and lawyers alike.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   