Behavioral  Exploitation  Antitrust in  Consumer
Subprime Mortgage  Lending
Max Huffman* & Daniel B. Heidtke* *
We  analyze  whether antitrust provides a favorable alternative and perhaps superior
approach to regulating consumer subprime mortgage lending. Behavioral exploitation antitrust
targets commercial conduct of the sort that was  observed in consumer subprime mortgage
lending in the years leading up to 2007.  The negative effects to welfare of exploitation of the
subprime mortgage market are easily observed. Antitrust-based regulation can mitigate those
welfare  effects.  Regulation that does  exist,  which  operates at the  level  of the  individual
transaction,m  ay be easily avoided, may be short-sighted,m  ay suffer from enforcement problems
explained by public choice theory, and/or may overreach in its capacity to remove  consumer
choice.  We  show  that antitrust enforcement under a rule of reason approach avoids those
pitfalls. However, none of the three primary approaches to antitruste nforcement -prohibitions
of anticompetitive conduct by  a dominantf irm, prohibitions of anticompetitive agreements, and
prohibitions of mergers with incipient anticompetitive effects - in their current forms permit
resort to  antitrust remedies in  the  consumer subprime  mortgage market.  We  argue that
liberalized standardsf or antitrust enforcement under both Clayton Act section 7 (regulating
mergers) and Sherman Act section ] (regulatingc oncerted conduct), perhaps restrictedn arrowly
to this and closely analogous markets, would be appropriatet o gain the benefits of regulation
through behaviorale xploitation antitrust.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.INTRODUCTION....................................................77
II. WELFARE EFFECTS IN MORTGAGE MARKETS AND FAILURES  OF EXISTING
REGULATION.......................................................80
A. BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION IN SUBPRIME MORTGAGE LENDING...............  ........ 80
B. THE PROBLEMS WITH THE REGULATORY STATUS Quo ANTE..........................86
III. A ROLE FOR ANTITRUST  LAW........................................93
A.  BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION As BAD ANTITRUST CONDUCT...............  ........... 93
B.  ANTITRUST AVOIDS THE PROBLEMS WITH THE LEADING
C.  APPROACHES TO CONSUMER MORTGAGE REGULATION..............................97
D.  THE LIMITS OF BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST....................  ........ 101
IV. MOVING TO BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST.  ................. 1 06
V. CONCLUSION:  ...............................................  ..... 108
I. INTRODUCTION
The  grass  roots  of the  2007  financial  crisis  were  the  market  for  consumer  home
mortgages.  This market  was rife  with  failures,  many  of which  occurred  because  consumers
suffered well-understood  limitations on their abilities to maximize their own economic welfare,
and lenders knew how to exploit those failures.  The market failures created substantial resource2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 78
misallocation:  more consumers borrowed more money on different terms than they would have
in a market lacking  such behavioral  exploitation.  That resource misallocation took the form of
an "asset bubble": more homes were built and sold than would have been in a market in which
consumers acted with fuller information and greater ability to act on it.
Regulators proved unable or disinclined to prevent the asset bubble.  Some combination
of factors - a dereliction  of duty,  a  lack  of foresight,  a lack of economic  rationality,  and/or
perverse incentives created by the political and regulatory structure - was at play.  We accept the
proposition that regulator foresight was impossible.  On that basis, we seek a means to prevent
future  crises  other  than  simply  more  regulation.  We  propose  that  behavioral  exploitation
antitrust may prevent future such asset bubbles in consumer markets.  We go further and argue
that US-style  antitrust law and policy is institutionally  superior to the modes of regulation that
have been relied on to date.
The  root  cause  of  the  asset  bubble  was  behavioral  exploitation,  whereby  lenders
intentionally  exploited  consumers'  known  decision-making  biases,  creating  a  market  effect.
That  conduct may give rise to antitrust liability.  Antitrust's remedial  scheme is more likely to
forestall  future crises with roots in consumer markets  than are other  regulatory  schemes.  As
Darren Bush observed in the wake of the financial crisis, "[a]ntitrust law is one of the ingredients
which flavors our national economy and ought to be seriously reconsidered in light of its role in
helping shape the current state of that economy."'  We extend the existing literature on consumer
harm from behavioral  exploitation by showing that an antitrust remedy may be available, and is
superior to other regulatory approaches to this conduct.
Antitrust  law exists to protect  against the ravages  of private enterprise  that the  market
cannot be relied on to avoid - market failures.2  There are two primary tools in the antitrust kit
that  might  be  employed  to  prevent  financial  crises  caused  by  the  failure  of  systemically
important firms or groups of firms.  First, antitrust has been used to prevent undue concentration
by one firm or groups of firms in an industry.  At its most extreme and controversial, this market-
structure-oriented approach to enforcement might encourage the forced dismantling of firms in a
market  that  is  considered  unduly  concentrated.  Such  an  approach  harkens  to  the  Structure-
Conduct-Performance  paradigm, a now disfavored - though in some circles resurgent - school of
Associate Professor and Dean's Fellow, Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law.  A draft of this
* 
paper accompanied a talk given at the Loyola Consumer Law Review Symposium, "The Continuing Effect of the
Mortgage Crisis on Consumers," Loyola University Chicago, School of Law.  Thanks to participants at that
symposium, participants in a workshop at the Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law, Letha Flint,
Matthew Olsen, and Michael Pitts for helpful comments.  Thanks also to the editorial staff at the William & Mary
Policy Review and to our blind peer reviewer.
Fellow, Institute for Consumer Antitrust Studies, Loyola University Chicago, School of Law.
Darren Bush, Too Big to Bail: The Role ofAntitrust in DistressedI ndustries, 77 ANTITRUST L.J. 277, 312 (2010).
2 Market failures might arise when one firm or a group of firms are able to prevent, or at least to delay, the market's
correcting  functions.  "Market failure"  is a technical misnomer for a market response that  is simply too slow to
protect against substantial short- and medium-term harm.  Thus, broad industry collapse might not represent market
failure  at all, but a necessary adjunct to the establishing of a stronger industry, which will emerge after a period of
shake-out.  Like Keynes, who famously observed that long-run solutions are of limited value  in the real world, we
nonetheless consider such a delayed market response to be intolerable.  See JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, A TRACT ON
MONETARY REFORM  80 (reprinted, Prometheus Books 2000) ("The long run is a misleading guide to current affairs.
In the long run we are all dead.").  (Keynes wrote of monetary policy, with specific reference to price inflation in the
absence  of government regulation, and not of the microeconomic  conduct that we consider here.)  Antitrust has a
place in such a non-failure circumstance as well.  It can hasten discipline that the market might provide after time,
but that threatens to arrive too late to protect against substantial short- to medium-term harm.79 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
antitrust thought  from the  middle of the  last  century.3  Middle-ground  approaches,  including
blocking mergers that would lead to unwieldy size and considering merging firms'  demonstrated
propensity to engage in harmful conduct, remain vibrant and may serve  a remedial purpose  in
consumer subprime markets.
Antitrust's second tool is targeting bad conduct by firms that enables competitive  success
on bases other than superior efficiency.  That bad conduct may lead to,  or help to preserve, the
same unwieldy market structure that merger review exists to prevent.4  It is well understood that
bad  conduct  that  leads  to  or  preserves  monopoly  power  may  also  bring  about  resource
misallocation.  That resource misallocation occurs  in the case of behavioral  exploitation, when
demand is stimulated to a level inconsistent with what consumers'  actual preferences would be in
the absence of the conduct.
We apply behavioral exploitation antitrust to conduct in the consumer subprime mortgage
markets that underlay the 2007 financial crisis.  We adopt the commonly held understanding of
the  root  cause  of  the  crisis:  the  sale  of millions  of  mortgage  products  to  consumers  in
transactions that were either fraudulent or exploited those consumers'  inabilities to act in pursuit
of their  own  economic  best  interest.6   The  conduct  produced  short-term  success  for  firms
engaged  in it.  That  success  spurred  competition through  similar conduct,  leading to  an asset
bubble.7  We will demonstrate here that an antitrust-based approach could prevent the grass-roots
conduct  that  led  to  market  failure.  There  is  reason  to  hope  that  our  arguments  might  be
3 See generally Darren Bush, Too Big to Bail:  The Role of Antitrust in DistressedI ndustries, 77 ANTITRUST L.J.
277,  281-88  (2010) (describing  the  Structure-Conduct-Performance  paradigm  of antitrust enforcement).  Serious
thought has  been given in very recent years to imposing structural limits in financial markets.  One author notes:
"both  the Dodd-Frank Act and the [EU  Vickers Commission]  Report make some 'structural  reform'  proposals for
solving the problem of too-big-to-fail."  Abel Mateus,  "Too Big to Fail": Banking Regulatory Reform and What
Still Needs to be Done, 7 COMP. POL'Y INT'L 22, 23 (2011).  Under modern approaches, however, U.S.  antitrust law
is limited to preventing mergers leading to unwieldy size, and has no tools for limiting or reducing firm size when
growth is organic.  Others have proposed a role for antitrust in limiting firm size, with an eye toward the systematic
problems of dominant firms' stumbling and failing; but those approaches require changes in enforcement philosophy
by  both enforcement  agencies  and  courts.  See Jesse  W. Markham,  Jr.,  Lessons for Competition Law from the
Economic Crisis:  The Prospectf or Antitrust Responses to the  "Too Big to Fail" Phenomenon, 16 FORDHAM J.
CORP. & FIN.  L. 261,  262 (2011)  ("Antitrust law could make a greater contribution  in resolving this public-policy
problem  if Congress  enacted  or the  judiciary  forged  more robust  rules preventing  and  dismantling  unwieldy
corporate size in excess of any plausible scale efficiency justification.").
4 See United  States v. Aluminum Co. of Am., 148  F.2d 416, 430-31 (1945)  (discussing  a firm's ability to acquire
monopoly power through conduct).
5 See Oren Bar-Gill, The Law, Economics and Psychology qf Subprime Mortgage Contracts, 94 CORNELL L. REV.
1073, 1079-80 (2009)  (noting the "demand-side market failure" that occurs when borrowers are myopic, optimistic,
and otherwise economically irrational, leading them to "'demand'  complex deferred-cost loans"); cf Roger D. Blair
& Jeffrey  Harrison, Rethinking Antitrust Injury, 42  VAND.  L.  REV.  1539,  1561-65  (1989)  (predatory  pricing -
another  species  of bad  antitrust  conduct  - causes  resource  misallocation  as  prices  are  dropped  below  their
competitive levels).
6 Oren Bar-Gill noted in 2009 the growth of the subprime mortgage market over the five years prior to 2007, with 3
million subprime loans "originated" - sold - in 2006, and the total market value of all subprime loans exceeding one
trillion dollars.  The Law, Economics, and Psychology of Subprime Mortgage Contracts, 94 CORNELL L. REv.  1073,
1074 (2009).  See generally Andrew Ross Sorkin, Too Big to Fail (2010); National Commission on the Causes of
the Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States, Final Report (2011).
Cf Mark Zandi, "Fannie and Freddie don't deserve the blame for bubble," Jan. 24, 2011,  WASH. POST, available at
http://www.washingtonpost.com/realestate/fannie-and-freddie-dont-deserve-blame-for-bubble/
2012/01/23/gIQAn3LZMQprint.html  (visited  Jan.  24,  2011).  Zandi  noted  the  phenomenon  of "rapaciously
expanding private lenders" offering "low rates and increasingly aggressive terms to borrowers.  In 2006, almost half
the loans made by private lenders required no down payment and no documentation."  Id2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 80
extended,  and that antitrust enforcement  promises to be a  successful preventative  strategy for
future asset bubbles that rely on consumer spending.8
In Part II we first define behavioral  exploitation  and show how it occurred and caused
harm in the consumer subprime mortgage  markets.  We then discuss the regulatory  protections
that exist  and proved to  be ineffective  in preventing  the 2007  crisis.  We explain why  those
leading approaches to consumer mortgage regulation proved insufficient to prevent the subprime
mortgage lending that led to the crisis.  Part III discusses a behavioral exploitation antitrust claim
for conduct in these markets.  Although the behavioral exploitation antitrust claim is a natural fit
for  the  conduct  in  consumer  subprime  mortgage  markets,  we  conclude  the  claim  is  not
achievable  under  the current  state of antitrust  law.  We thus devote  Part  IV to proposals  for
changing the law, either through legislation, common-law interpretation, or regulation.
II. WELFARE EFFECTS IN MORTGAGE MARKETS  AND FAILURES OF
EXISTING REGULATION
Behavioral  exploitation was common in consumer subprime  mortgage transactions prior
to 2007.9  It caused harms to consumers,  which aggregated  to create market effects.  Resources
were  misallocated  as  more  consumers  borrowed  more  money  to buy  more  houses than they
would have  had they  followed utility  maximizing  strategies  in a  situation  lacking  behavioral
exploitation.  And  the  regulatory  schemes  in  place  suffered  from  flaws,  including
shortsightedness,  regulatory  capture,  easy  circumvention,  and  removal  of consumer  choice.
Further, the body of statutory provisions regulating mortgage transactions has been the subject of
seemingly steady  reform and amendment, requiring almost constant study to remain abreast of
the current state of the law.'0  The primary response to the financial crisis, the Dodd-Frank Act,
does not solve those problems.
A. BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION IN SUBPRIME MORTGAGE LENDING
Behavioral  exploitation  is  intentionally  exploiting  known  biases  in consumer decision-
making."  The theory rests on an understanding of those consumer marketplaces, like those for
subprime mortgages, as being characterized  by sophisticated repeat-player  merchant sellers and
relatively naYve end-user purchasers.12  Consumer credit markets are understood to possess these
Our argument relies on asymmetries  in either information or sophistication between two parties to an ostensibly
consensual  transaction.  It is readily applicable  to consumer transactions that "are  characterized  by an asymmetry
between the two parties: the seller of a good or the provider of a service  on the one hand and the consumer on the
other.  One party  is usually a highly  sophisticated corporation,  the other - an  individual, prone to the behavioral
flaws that make us human."  Oren Bar-Gill, Seduction by Plastic, 98 Nw. U.L. REv.  1373, 1373 (2004).  We do not
in this paper extend the argument beyond consumer marketplaces.
9 We do not study the market after the financial crisis.
10 See generally, T. Thomas Cottingham,  III, Mortgage  and Asset Backed Securities Litigation  Handbook  § 5:1,
detailing the amendments to TILA, including: HOEPA, and then a period of several months in which TILA and the
HOEPA  amendments  were  amended  by  the Mortgage  Disclosure  Improvement  Act  of 2008 (MDIA),  and  the
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA), which further amended the MDIA's amendments to TILA.
11 Max Huffman, Marrying Neo-Chicago with BehavioralA  ntitrust, 78 ANTITRUST L.J. 105,  128 (2012).  See also
Matthew  A.  Edwards,  The Rebate Rip-off  New  York's Legislative Responses to  Common Consumer Rebate
Complaints, 29 PACE L. REv. 471, 476 (2009) (referring to rebate programs as "behavioral exploitation," which take
advantage  of consumers'  inertia, leading  to their failures to redeem);  Matthew  A.  Edwards,  The FTC and New
Paternalism, 60 ADMIN.  L. REv. 323,  353 (2008) (giving examples of payday lending, inducement of supermarket
impulse purchases, and mail-in rebates).
12 Huffman, supra note 11,  draft at 38-40.81 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
characteristics.13   In particular,  consumer  subprime  mortgage  transactions  frequently  involve
borrowers  with the dual characteristics of below-average  education and limited experience  with
transactions in the market.14
Those  exploitable biases,  sometimes called decision-making  heuristics, are mental short
cuts that facilitate rapid decision-making,  but frequently  cause consumers to deviate from their
utility  maximizing  decision  paths.'5   A  marriage  of  economics,  social  psychology,  and
management  theory,  termed  behavioral  economics,  has  demonstrated  that  individuals
systematically  deviate  from utility maximizing  conduct - sometimes  by  being more  altruistic
than their  utility  functions  would predict,  sometimes  by  exhibiting  less  willpower  than their
utility functions would predict, and sometimes by  exhibiting cognitive short-comings.16  Those
three  deviations  from  utility-maximizing-conduct  have  been  called  bounds  on  consumer
rationality.'7   They give  rise to a host of demonstrated  cognitive biases.1  Some  empirically
observed  phenomena  are  highly relevant  to  consumer lending  markets,  including  "hyperbolic
discounting"  or "myopia" - the tendency to ignore long-term costs and benefits so that decisions
are made  on the basis of short-term  cost-benefit  analyses19  - and the "optimism  bias,"  which
causes  a  consumer  to  discount  statistically  likely  future  harm  and  over-rely  on  statistically
unlikely future benefits.20
1. THE REALITY OF BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION
Behavioral  economics  arrived  late  to  the party.  The  real-world  practice  of behavioral
exploitation  stems from knowledge  gained over many decades of study that is well documented
in the market literature.  Too few in the  fields of law and economics, and in particularly in the
antitrust,  realms,  have  seen fit  to  study the  business  and  management  theory  literature  when
developing legal rules.21
13 See Oren Bar-Gill & Elizabeth  Warren, Making Credit Safer, 157 U. PA. L. REV.  101,  169 (1998);  see  also
Edward  J. Janger & Susan Block-Lieb,  Consumer Credit and Competition:  The Puzzle qf Competitive Credit
Markets, 6 EUR. COMP. J. 68, 70-71 (2010).
14  See Laurie A. Burlingame,  A  Pro-Consumer Approach to Predatory Lending:  Enhanced Protection Through
FederalL egislation and New Approaches to Education, 60 CONSUMER FIN. L.Q. 460, 462 (2006).
15 See DANIEL KAHNEMAN,  THINKING FAST AND  SLOW 25 (2011)  (subconscious  "System 1" decisions are "usually
accurate"  and are "swift and generally appropriate," but subject to "systematic errors").
16S ee Christine Jolls et al., A BehavioralA  pproach to Law & Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV.  1471,  1476-79 (1998).
" See id
Empirical study has demonstrated myriad cognitive biases, many of which are closely related to long-established
biases.  Wikipedia contains an impressive  list.  See List of Biases in Judgment and Decision Making, WIKIPEDIA,
(February  9,  2012)  en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List  of cognitive  biases.  More  in-depth  discussion  can be  found  in
sources including Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow (2011), and Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational (2008).
19 See Oren Bar-Gill, Seduction by Plastic,9 8 Nw. U. L. REv. 1373,  1396 (2004).
20 See id
21 Spencer  Waller has recognized this problem.  In 2001, Professor Waller noted the oddity that we relied so much
on economic teaching rather than lessons from business and management theory.  Spencer W. Waller, The Language
ofLaw and the Language ofBusiness, 52 CASE WESTERN RES. L. REv. 283, 283-85 (2001).  He was right to do so.
As he  pointed out in 2001,  while economists  found themselves  hung up with theoretical  concerns over whether
certain practices  could possibly cause harm, by, for example,  creating market power that enabled a firm to raise
prices or decrease output or quality, business persons recognized that, in the real world, just that was going on.  See
Spencer Weber Waller, The Language ofLaw and the Language of Business, 52 CASE W. RES. L. REv. 283, 316-28
(2001).  It is an interesting aside that the expert regulators tend to come either from legal or economic backgrounds,
but much less from business  backgrounds.  The  FTC has a bureau of economics,  populated with, according to a
recent statistic, some 70 PhD economists, but no comparable bureau populated with MBAs.  See www.ftc.gov (last
visited April 2, 2012).2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 82
Merchants have studied means to exploit hyperbolic discounting, the optimism bias, and
other  cognitive  biases  when  contracting  with  consumers.  Another  demonstrated  bias  causes
consumers  to  make  decisions  on  the  basis  of  salient,  noticeable  characteristics  over
characteristics  that are  less  pronounced.  Consumers  may  borrow  money on the  basis  of the
interest rate or down payment rather than penalties for non-repayment.  The endowment effect or
ownership bias increases the value to us of what we have relative to what we do not have.  Taken
together, a merchant might induce a soft (psychological) commitment to a transaction by quoting
a low price before interposing other expenses.  This is drip pricing or shrouding,  a well-studied
technique of exploiting cognitive bias to induce consumers to pay more for the product or service
than they would if presented with all the costs up front.22  Hyperbolic discounting and optimism
biases  come into play here as well.  If future costs are uncertain, consumers can be expected to
envision best-case scenarios or ignore future costs altogether in their decision-making.
Financial  transactions  demonstrate  the  behavioral  exploitation  problem  in  particularly
stark fashion.  Financial transactions are much less likely (than, for example, the development,
advertising  and marketing  of products  or services) to be characterized  by idiosyncratic goals on
the parts of consumers.  Consumers are unlikely  to gain any utility from higher-than-necessary
interest rates or fees.  A 2009 study of pricing practices concluded that drip pricing is one of two
practices with the "greatest potential to cause harm" by inducing consumers to enter transactions
they would not have  entered had the prices  been fully disclosed up front.23  Drip pricing  and
price shrouding  succeed by  increasing willingness to pay, exploiting the endowment effect, and
by obfuscating the actual price.  A consumer may learn about the actual price after the consumer
is committed to the transaction, or may never learn the actual price.
It  requires  little  extension  of these  studies  to  see their  impact  on consumer  subprime
mortgage  transactions.  Scholars  have  identified  three  dominant  characteristics  of consumer
subprime  mortgage  transactions.  According  to  Oren  Bar-Gill,  consumer  subprime  mortgage
transactions  are characterized  by  supra-normal  cost deferral  and an "exceedingly  high level of
complexity."  Neither can be explained at the level that they occur in subprime lending under an
assumption that both parties act rationally to maximize their utility.24  Others have observed that
subprime  borrowers  are,  on  average,  less  sophisticated,  in  terms  both  of  education  and
experience in the market, than borrowers generally.25
Supra-normal cost deferral is analogous to drip pricing techniques.  A lender can charge
more  on a transaction  if the  up-front price  is low in the  form of a  low - even zero - down
22  See Amanda Reeves  & Maurice  Stucke, Behavioral Antitrust, 86  IND.  L.J.  1527,  1541  (2011)  (defining  drip
pricing).  Cf  ROBERT  B. CIALDINI,  INFLUENCE:  SCIENCE & PRACTICE 61-67  (4th  ed.  2001)  (describing  larger
impacts  of inducing commitment  with regard to  small initial  decisions).  The United Kingdom's  Office  of Fair
Trading has concluded that drip pricing is one of the two most pernicious pricing practices by causing purchasers to
spend more than they wished (in the absence of the full pricing practice) to spend.  See UK Office of Fair Trading,
"Advertising of Prices," available at oft.gov.uk/OFTwork/markets-work/current/advertising-prices/.
23  U.K.  Office of Fair Trading, "Findings  and Outcomes,"  in Advertising of Prices (Oct.  15,  2009),  available at
http://www.oft.gov.uk/OFTwork/markets-work/advertising-prices/.  Consumers  encounter  drip  pricing  on  a daily
basis, in sales pitches as mundane as "would you like to add a cookie for only $0.99 more today?" and as frustrating
as "that will be $60 for your two checked bags - how would you like to pay for that today?"  See, e.g., "Optional
service  fees  &  government  taxes,"  U.S.  Airways.com,  available  at  usairways.com/en-
US/traveltools/specialneeds/ticketingpolicies/taxesfees.html?c-hp  txt  01120 (last visited Feb. 9, 2012).
24 Oren Bar-Gill, The Law, Economics and Psychology of Subprime Mortgage Contracts,9 4 CORNELL L. REV.  1073,
1079 (2009).
25  See,  e.g.,  Laurie  A.  Burlingame,  A Pro-Consumer Approach to Predatory Lending:  Enhancing Protection
Through FederalL egislation and New Approaches to Education, 60 CONSUMER FIN. L.Q. REP. 460, 462 (2006).83 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
payment.  The supra-normal cost-deferral, whereby "in 2005, 2006, and the first half of 2007, the
median subprime borrower put no money down, borrowing  100 percent of the purchase price of
the house,"26 might produce both of the effects of drip pricing.  Before becoming  aware  of the
reality  of their  obligations,  consumer  borrowers  can  become  psychologically  committed  to  a
transaction  and thereby  willing  to incur greater expense  than they otherwise might have been
willing to incur.  Cost deferral, like drip pricing, has obfuscating effects as well.  Because the
real cost of a credit transaction depends  on time value  of money considerations,  the more costs
are  deferred,  the  more  difficult  it  is  for  a  consumer  accurately  to  calculate  the  real  cost  of
borrowing.
The obfuscating effect is compounded by complex credit terms that prevail in consumer
subprime mortgage transactions.  Those may include "multiple, indirectly defined interest rates...
"further  complicated  by  maximum  adjustment caps."27  Steffen Huck  and Zidong Zhou have
concluded  that this complexity  serves to hide from the  consumer the actual price of the credit.
Markets  operate  more  efficiently  in the  presence  of information  and transparency.  A profit-
maximizing  lender  that is able  to hide  real prices  in complex terms  will  charge higher prices
because of the reduced risk that the borrower will shop around.28
Finally,  the  consumer  subprime  borrower  is  characterized  by  limited  education  and
experience,  rendering him or her susceptible  to exploitation.  Education and experience  render
consumers  more  able to  protect themselves  against  the harms  from behavioral  exploitation.29
The  lack  of those  advantages  leaves  the  consumer  relatively  more  susceptible.  Experience
usually  will be limited because  home mortgage  transactions  are consummated  infrequently  in
any  one  borrower's economic  lifetime,  so consumer borrowers  do not have the  opportunity to
realize  their  errors  and act  differently  in future  transactions.30  As  lower  income  borrowers,
subprime borrowers  may not have the experience  of frequent recourse to credit markets  in any
form.  A related characteristic  of many  subprime borrowers is old age, 31  which some evidence
indicates correlates with reduced cognitive abilities as regards financial transactions.32
2. WELFARE EFFECTS. HARMS To CONSUMERS AND SUBOPTIMAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION
Behavioral  exploitation  is  well  understood  to  cause  harm  by  undermining  efficient
resource  allocation.  Consumers are induced to enter transactions they would eschew but for the
exploitative  conduct,  or  to  enter  transaction  on  terms  that  they  would  otherwise  consider
intolerable.  Resources  flow to  consumers'  ostensible,  rather  than actual, preferences.33  That
creates  a market in which high dollar  subprime  mortgages  may crowd  out small  dollar prime
26 Oren Bar-Gill, The Law, Economics and Psychology of Subprime Mortgage Contracts,9 4 CORNELL L. REV.  1073,
1076 (2009).
27 Id at 1078.
28 Huck & Zhou argue: "The adverse effects of poor decisions with regards to search and quality can be made worse
through  firms'  deliberate  attempts  to  make  price  comparisons  and  search  harder  - through  complex  pricing,
shrouding, obfuscation and other means."  Huck & Zhou, Consumer Behavioral Biases in Competition:  A Survey,
UK Office of Fair Trading, at 7 (2011).
29  See Huck & Zhou, supra note 28, at  57-58  (learning and  cognitive ability lessen welfare  effects of cognitive
biases).
30 Huck and Zhou suggest that ex post detection and realization of errors offers "the biggest scope for alleviating
market failures".  Huck & Zhou, supra note 28 at 8.
31 See Burlingame, supra note 25 at 462.
32 See Huck & Zhou, supra note 28 at 58.
33 See Huck & Zhou, supra note 28 at 7 (warning of "overproduction of goods that in the end will be thrown away or
suboptimal design of products that may have too much of one attribute and too little of another").2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 84
mortgages if consumers are induced to enter inappropriate  transactions.34  Aggregate welfare is
thereby diminished.35
This  effect  differs  from  demand-curve  shifting  that  underlies  dynamic  competition,
whereby,  for example,  the  introduction  of the  iPad created  demand  for tablet  computers  that
previously did not exist.36  Behavioral exploitation is not a question of introducing and marketing
new products, changing  consumers'  utility  functions permanently  (or until the  next innovation
comes along).37  Behavioral  exploitation is a question of a short-term shift in the demand curve,
altering consumers'  understandings  of their own utility  functions long enough to bring about a
transaction that cannot be reversed.
Bar-Gill has recognized the welfare effects of the type of behavioral exploitation that we
outline here.38  He explains how those welfare effects occur in subprime mortgage contracts that
"share  two  suspect  features"  of cost  deferral  and  complexity  we  discuss  above.39   Bar-Gill
identified  a "demand-side  market  failure"  that occurred  when imperfectly  rational  borrowers
"'demanded'  complex deferred-cost  loans and lenders met this demand."40  That market failure
produced  welfare  effects  in  four  ways:  complexity  hindered  competition  by  undermining
comparison-shopping;  cost-deferral  led to  increased  rates  of default with consequent  harm  to
borrowers  and third parties  (including  "the  economy  at  large");  subprime  contracts  suffered
distributive consequences because poor borrowers were uniquely affected; and demand for home
mortgage products was artificially inflated.41
It is possible to theorize the size of the welfare effect in any individual transaction.  Any
amount paid on an expected-value basis above the consumer's reservation price in the mortgage
transaction  should be considered pure wealth transfer to the  lender.42  (Although it is possible
that consumers  are willing to pay more in a transaction for the added value  of a trusted lender,
34  For another concrete  example, behavioral  exploitation  may produce too much demand  for consumer subprime
mortgage lending.  The supply response will reduce the supply of (for example) student loans and increase their cost
relative to subprime mortgage loans.
35 See Oren Bar-Gill, The Law, Economics, and Psychology of Subprime Mortgage Contracts, 94 CORNELL L. REV.
1073,  1130 (2009) (noting "welfare cost in the form of allocation inefficiency:  borrowers are not matched with the
most efficient lender."); Oren Bar-Gill, Competition and Consumer Protection: A Behavioral Economics Account,
in Swedish Competition Authority,  The Pros and Cons of Consumer Protection (forthcoming),  manuscript at 1, 4
(Dec. 2011), (noting that "perceived benefits" of a transaction may deviate from "actual benefits").
36 See generally J. Gregory Sidak & David J. Teece, Dynamic Competition in Antitrust Law, 5 J. COMP. L. & ECON.
581  (2009) (describing the role of dynamic competition in antitrust analysis and the importance  of Schumpeterian
"product and process innovation").
See Timothy J. Tardiff, Efficiency Metrics for Competition Policy in Network Industries, 6 J. COMP. L. & ECON.
957, 962 (2010) (product improvements give rise to outward shift in the demand curve).
38 Bar-Gill, Competition and Consumer Protection, supra note 35, at 13-16.  Scholars have for years observed the
market  failures  associated  with  information  asymmetries,  which  are  closely  related  to  the  disparities  in
sophistication  that underlie  merchants'  abilities to exploit naYve  consumers.  See, e.g.,  Richard  Craswell,  Tying
Requirements in Competitive Markets: The Consumer ProtectionI ssues, 62 B.U. L. REv. 661, 671 (1982).  Craswell
also noted the efficiency loss resulting from this exercise of power. Id. at 672.
39 Oren Bar-Gill, The Law, Economics and Psychology of Subprime Mortgage Contracts,9 4 CORNELL L. REV.  1073,
1076 (2009).
40 Id. at 1080.
41 Id. at 1083.
42  This definition  of the transaction-level welfare  loss  accommodates  the possibility  that, but for the behavioral
exploitation, the transaction  would not have occurred at all.  If a consumer borrower  is willing to pay  X but the
lender is able to convince him or her to pay X+1 (not changing his or her mind, but undermining his or her ability to
appreciate the actual cost), the consumer will have paid X+1  for a product he or she values at X and would gladly
exchange for something valued at X+1.85 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
whether in exchange for avoided search costs or due to a perceived quality difference, that effect
will be very  small.  It may also be possible to compare  amount paid to reservation  price  on a
lender-by-lender basis, eliminating any effect from brand loyalty.)
Determining  exactly  what  that  differential  is  in  a  particular  transaction  is  more
challenging.  One could engage in exit polling-type surveys of consumer borrowers,  asking after
the transaction was consummated  how much the consumer was willing to pay and comparing it
to the actual transaction terms.  The advantage  of this approach is that any  such survey would
account  for  factors  that  may  have  been  unforeseeable  prior  to  the  consumer's  actually
consummating  the transaction, such as falling in love with a home that is more expensive than
originally  anticipated.43   It  suffers  from  drawbacks  of administrative  difficulty  and  possible
unreliability.
A second approach would be to compare the loan terms of the consummated transaction
against those of transactions that the consumer eschewed.  A consumer borrower who chooses an
adjustable-rate  mortgage over a fixed-rate  mortgage that is less expensive on an expected value
basis may have been behaviorally  exploited. This approach suffers two drawbacks.  First, many
subprime borrowers fail to qualify for an array of lending options, eliminating alternatives before
the  consumer  is able  to  choose.  Second,  there  are  a  variety  of factors  that might  explain a
borrower's  choice  of loan terms, even under an assumption of rational choice.  For example,  a
borrower with no money available for a down payment but who reasonably expects to come into
money in the medium-term might purchase immediately  (to take advantage  of low prices, or so
as  not to lose  a particularly  attractive  property)  on terms  that would be  unattractive  for most
borrowers, but avoid the problems of the onerous loan terms by paying the loan off early.
Welfare  effects  are  more  readily  determined  by  looking  across  the  market  than  by
looking  at  any  one  transaction.  Determining  the  costs  of  particularly  pernicious  loan
characteristics  gives  a  basis  for  approximating  market-wide  welfare  effects.  Eric  Stein
conducted  an  early  study  that preceded  the  most  substantial  excesses  in  subprime  mortgage
lending  over  the  past  decade.  His  report  estimated  "that  U.S.  borrowers  lose  $9.1  billion
annually  to  predatory  lending  practices,"  employing  a  definition  of predatory  lending  that
included conduct within the ambit of behavioral exploitation.44  Of the lending practices studied,
"equity  stripping"  - the  charging  of  fees,  credit  insurance,  and  prepayment  penalties  -
represented  2/3 of the annual  loss.  Stein's description  of these practices as  including fees that
are  "painless  at  closing"  but  lasting  "forever"  invokes  the  salience  and  optimism biases  and
hyperbolic  discounting,  as  well as the  drip pricing,  shrouding,  and obfuscation techniques  for
exploiting them.
3. DECEPTIONC  OMPARED
Behavioral  exploitation  is  a  close  cousin  of  deception,  the  practice  of  inducing  a
transaction  on  the  basis  of  material  misrepresentations  (or  omissions  that  operate  as
misrepresentations)  that has long been regulated at common law and by both federal  and state
statute.45  A  simple  example  illustrates  the  difference  between  the  two.  A  materially  false
statement  of,  or  a  material  omission  to  state  (in  a  context  where  the  omission  creates  a
43 This effect may itself be the result of behavioral exploitation by the seller of the home or a real estate agent.
44  See Eric Stein, Quantifying the Economic Cost qf Predatory Lending, COALITION FOR RESPONSIBLE  LENDING
REPORT 2 (Rev'd ed. Oct. 2001).
45 See generally MICHAEL M. GREENFIELD, CONSUMER  TRANSACTIONS 6-183  (2009) (discussing federal and state
regulation of deception)2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 86
misimpression),  a transaction term  is  deceptive.46  Thus, a deceptive  lender  might say "that's
everything,"  but later include a fee that was not disclosed.  By contrast, an accurate statement of
the  same  transaction  terms,  in  a  context  that renders  the  consumer  unable  to  appreciate  its
importance,  is behavioral exploitation.  A behaviorally  exploitative lender might disclose the fee
only at the very last minute, when the consumer is psychologically  and practically (having, for
example, agreed to the underlying purchase transaction) committed to proceed.
Deception  certainly took  place in the  market  for consumer subprime  home mortgages
leading  up to the 2007  financial crisis.  The U.S.  Financial  Crisis Inquiry Commission report,
among other examples, describes  occurrences of consumers who thought they agreed to one set
of loan terms and signed papers reflecting other loan terms.47  This conduct creates harm in the
same  way  as  behavioral  exploitation:  the  deceived  consumer  enters  a  transaction  he  or  she
otherwise would not consummate, creating an economy-wide welfare loss.48
B. THE PROBLEMS WITH THE REGULATORY STATUS Quo ANTE
A hodge-podge of targeted, consumer-protection  based, regulation developed in the years
leading  up  to  the  financial  crisis.  The  existing  consumer  protection  and remedial  structure
remains  insufficient,  inefficient,  and  bewildering.  One  court  expressed  regret  evidencing
insufficiency  of the current state of regulation of the mortgage lending industry:  "The power to
curb predatory practices lies either in consumer education or with Congress; as a court of limited
jurisdiction, I may only enforce the laws as written, not as I would wish they were written."49
1.  EXISTING FEDERAL AND STATE MORTGAGE LENDING REGULATION
In  broad  terms,  existing  mortgage  lending  regulation  may  be  placed  in  one  of the
following  categories:  (1) federal  disclosure  statutes,  (2)  statutes regulating  unfair  or deceptive
acts or practices, and (3) state law remedies.  First, federal regulation of grass-roots transactions
primarily  revolves  around  two  statutes:  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act  (TILA),o  and  the  Home
Ownership  and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA).51  The Federal Trade Commission Act, which
regulates  "unfair  or deceptive  acts or practices,"  provides  another basis for protection against
harmful lending practices.  Lastly, state law often provides a means through which to challenge
unfair conduct, yet in a way that is frequently redundant to federal regulation.
Although  the  failure  of  existing  mortgage  lending  regulation  alone  cannot  entirely
account for the subprime mortgage meltdown, the existing regulations could not stem the tide of
loosened lending practices, outright fraud, and behavioral  exploitation in the years preceding the
financial  crisis. 52 For instance, TILA requires and regulates  lender disclosures at the time of a
46 See supra Part 11.
47 See Financial Crisis Inquiry Report at 7-8, 12; Bernstein Senate Testimony 3.
48 Maurice E. Stucke, When a Monopolist Deceives, 76 ANTITRUST L.J. 823 (2010).
49 Parker v. Long Beach Mort.,  534  F. Supp. 2d 528, 530 n.2  (E.D. Pa. 2008). See generally Bryce, Foreclosure
Developments, Mortgage Fraud,C  ounterclaimsa nd Defenses, 64 CONSUMER FINANCE L.Q. RPT. 1 (Spring 2010).
50 Truth in Lending Act ("TILA"), 15 U.S.C.A.  § 1601 et seq.
51  Home Ownership  and Equity Protection Act of 1994 ("HOEPA"),  15  U.S.C.A.  §§  1602(aa),  1610,  1639,  and
1640.
52 Christopher E. Ware, Laura Gramling Perez, Main Street Meets Wall Street: The Mortgage Meltdown, 80-DEC
Wis. Law. 8 (Dec. 2007)("Alone, increased demand for homes, low interest rates, risk-shifting investment vehicles,
aggressive or fraudulent lending, creative financing, or lax oversight would not have caused the collapse.  Together,
however, these factors shifted priorities in the mortgage market, and then cause the mortgage problems that are at
the forefront of the news.").87 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
consumer loan application, including those for home mortgage loans.53  Indeed, the purpose of
TILA  is to  "protect consumers  from  inaccurate  and unfair  credit  practices  and  . . . assure  a
meaningful disclosure  of credit terms  ... [to]  avoid the uninformed use of credit."54  As noted
above,  a behaviorally  exploitative  lender, unlike a deceptive  lender, would likely  comply with
TILA by  disclosing certain fees or terms.  However, that lender will make required disclosures
after  the  consumer  is  psychologically  and  practically  committed  to  proceed.  Thus,  TILA-
required  disclosures would do little. TILA's purpose  would be defeated,  where a lender offers
such terms in a context in which the consumer is unable to appreciate their importance.
Another federal disclosure  statute, HOEPA, amended  TILA to respond more directly to
so-called  predatory  lending  in  the  mortgage  market.5   Whether  a  mortgage  is  subject  to
HOEPA's increased regulation  "is determined by triggers related to a loan's annual percentage
rate  or its points and fees,  rather than any  definition of 'predatory  lending'."56  Those  triggers
proved  easy  to  avoid,  permitting  creditors  to  escape  HOEPA's  increased  disclosure
requirements.  "[L]enders  make loans very close to the triggering thresholds, but low enough to
avoid the trigger,"  "offer open lines of credit as opposed to closed-end loans," and charge "junk
fees"  for "services  that are  related to,  but technically  independent  of, the  mortgage."5   This
ability  to  end-run  the  statutory  requirements  limits  HOEPA's  effectiveness  from a  consumer
protection standpoint.
The Federal Trade Commission Act is a third basis for protection against harmful lending
practices.  The  FTC has authority  to challenge  "unfair  or deceptive  acts  or practices."5'  The
FTC's unfairness authority generally has been applied in rulemaking, defining specific instances
of conduct  that may be  enjoined  as  unfair.  Deception is defined  according  to precedent  and
administrative guidance to include conduct that is likely to mislead a consumer acting reasonably
under  the  circumstances.59   The  FTC  has  been  successful  in  reaching  settlements  including
restitution in cases  of deception.  The FTC Act remedy promises only limited effectiveness for
two reasons.  First, only the FTC has standing to enforce the FTC Act, precluding consumer and
competitor  plaintiffs from suing.  Second, the  reasonableness element  of a deception claim is
unlikely  to  be  made  in  a  case  of behavioral  exploitation,  which  by  definition  relies  on
economically irrational - hence, "unreasonable" - conduct.60
State law, another possible source  of consumer protection, is  frequently redundant  and
often relies on duties imposed by federal statute.61  For example,  statutorily unfair or deceptive
53  15  U.S.C.A.  § 1601  et seq.; see also Reg. Z § 226.19 (requiring lenders is to give early estimated disclosures at
the time of the loan application).
54  15  U.S.C.A.  § 1601(a).  See  Dee  Pridgen, Putting Some  Teeth  in  TILA:  From Disclosure to Substantive
Regulation in the Mortgage Reform andAnti-PredatoryL ending Act of2010, 24 Loy. Cons. L. Rev. 615, 617 (2012)
(TILA "took a pure disclosure approach").
5 Home Ownership  and Equity Protection Act of 1994 ("HOEPA"),  15  U.S.C.A.  §§  1602(aa),  1610,  1639,  and
1640.
56  Letter  from  Edward M.  Gramlich,  Member  of the  Board, Federal  Reserve  to  The  Honorable  Phil  Gramm,
Chairman  of Committee  on Banking,  Housing  and  Urban  Affairs,  United  States Senate,  dated  April 28,  2000;
available at: http://banking.senate.gov/docs/reports/predlend/fed.htm.
Burlingame, supra note 14 at 467; Nicholas Bagley, 79 N.Y.U. L. REv. 2274, 2282 (2004).
15 U.S.C.  § 45(a)(1).
59 In re InternationalH  arvester, 104 F.T.C. 949 (1984).
6o It is not logically necessary that "economically irrational"  be equated to "unreasonable."  Proof that a consumer
"acted in a way consistent with the broad range of ordinary or average people" would suffice to render that conduct
reasonable under InternationalH  arvester. Id.
61In re InternationalH  arvester, 104 F.T.C. 949 (1984).2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 88
acts  and practices  claims may  simply adopt the standards  established  by interpretations  of the
Federal  Trade  Commission Act.62  Similarly,  some  states  provide that compliance  with TILA
disclosures  is  an  affirmative  defense  to  liability  under  state  law.63   Yet,  commentators  do
recognize some states'  proactive role in regulatin-g consumer-lending practi-ces.64
State laws can provide broader protections than federal law in two primary ways.  First,
state and local laws may increase restrictions on mortgage lenders and apply to a wider spectrum
of  loans.65  Second,  state  claims  may  expand  the  nature  of the  right  of action  available.
Consumers and state attorneys general  lack standing to sue for a violation of the Federal Trade
Commission  (FTC)  Act,  but  will  frequently  be  granted  standing  for the  same  claim  brought
under  state  law.  Finally,  state  claims  may  also  arise  under  the  common  law  of fraud  and
misrepresentation.  Such claims  require proof of a misrepresentation  of fact by the  mortgagee
and reasonable reliance by the consumer borrower.66
In 2003,  however,  the  Office  of the  Comptroller of the  Currency,  a banking regulator,
preempted  state  efforts  to  regulate  the  lending  practices  of national  banks.67   States  were
prevented from outlawing loan terms such as balloon payments, negative amortization, late fees,
and  prepayment  penalties,  all  of which  represent  the  dual  characteristics  of complexity  and
deferred cost and capitalize  on consumer decision-making  biases.68  Thus, state laws suffer the
same  shortcomings  as those federal  regulations to which they  are redundant,  and have largely
been prevented from going much further.
2.  PREDICTABLE LIMITATIONS
Much  of  this  regulation  was  well-intentioned,  designed  to  accomplish  narrow  and
legitimate  purposes,  and had been in place long before  the financial  crisis.  In fact, TILA was
initially enacted in 1968.69  Nevertheless, the existing regulations were insufficient and unable to
account  for  changing  market  conditions,  deregulation,  and ill-preparedness  on behalf of key
policy makers.70
62 See, e.g., Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. Ch. 93A, § 2 (outlawing unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive
acts or practices and adopting FTC interpretations of FTC Act § 5 to assist in the interpretation of this section).
63 See, e.g., Consumer Credit Protection Act, §102 et seq.,  15  U.S.C.A.  § 1601 et seq.; S.H.A.  815 ILCS 505/1  et
seq.; see also MorEquity, Inc. v. Naeem, 118 F. Supp. 2d 885, 893 (N.D. Ill., Oct. 25, 2000) (citing Jackson v. South
Holland Dodge, Inc., 312 111. App. 3d 158, 167, 244 Ill. Dec. 835,  726 N.E. 2d 1146 (1st Dist. 2000) (holding when
a creditor is exempt from TILA liability, the creditor is also exempt from Consumer Fraud Act liability.).
64 See Burlingame, supra note 14, at 468-69 (discussing the North Carolina's anti predatory-lending statute).
65  Cottingham,  Mortgage  and  Asset Backed  Securities  Litigation  Handbook,  §5:8  (Nov.  2011).  Detailing,  for
example, the Georgia Fair Lending Act (Ga. Code Ann. §§  7-6A-1,  et seq.), which initially sought to impose nearly
unlimited liability on assignees of many Georgia mortgage loans.
66  Martin  C. Bryce,  Jr.,  Foreclosure Developments, Mortgage Fraud, Counterclaims and Defenses, CONSUMER
FINANCE LAW QUARTERLY  REPORT,  Spring 2010; Citing as examples:  Hunt v. U.S.  Tobacco Co.,  538 F.3d 217,
224-26 (3d Cir. 2008) (Pennsylvania's  Unfair Trade Practices and Consumer Protection Law); Cattie v. Wal-Mart
Stores, Inc., 504 F. Supp. 2d 939, 947 (S.D.  Cal. 2007) (California's Unfair Competition Law); Peltier Enter., Inc. v.
Hilton, 51 S.W. 3d 616, 624 (Tex. App. 2000) (Texas'  Deceptive Trade Practices Act); Lidecker v. Kendall College,
194 111. App. 3d 309, 314 (1990)(Illinois'  Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act); Zeeman v. Black,
156 Ga. App.  82, 87 (1980)  (Georgia Fair Business Practices Act); Sanders v. Francis, 277 Or. 593, 561 P.2d 1003
(1977)  (Oregon's Unlawful Trade Practices Act).
See Arthur E.  Wilmarth,  Jr.,  The Financial Services Industry's Misguided Quest to  Undermine the Consumer
FinancialP rotection Bureau, 31 REV. BANKING & FIN. L. 881, 931 (2012).
6 See Burlingame, supra note 14, at 473.
69 Title I of the Consumer Credit Protection Act, Pub. L. 90-321,  82 Stat. 146, enacted June 29, 1968.
7o  Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Report on the Causes of the Financial Crisis (Jan. 27, 2011); available at:
http://fcic-static.law.stanford.edu/cdn media/fcic-news/2011-0127-fcic-releases-report.pdf  ("The  Commission89 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
Although disclosure  statutes such as  TILA and HOEPA were designed to prevent "the
uninformed use of credit,"7  and the FTC Act was designed to challenge "unfair or deceptive acts
or practices," 72 the  existing regulation  gives rise to what  is best described  as "whack-a-mole"
problems.  That  is,  the  existing  regulation  resolved  only  problems  that  were  known  or
foreseeable  and  could  not  resolve  "unknown  unknowns."73  Indeed,  discussing  regulation
targeting the  downstream  financial  industry, Darren Bush noted the  problem with reactionary,
rather than anticipatory, regulation.  "[T]he  missing piece in this discussion of economic crises is
an examination of the  ex-ante regulation of failed markets and the  economy as a whole."74  A
regulatory  scheme that avoids this trap would enable a challenge to conduct that threatens harm,
before that harm is realized.
In  addition,  changing  market  conditions  likely  exposed  the  reactionary  nature  of the
existing  regulations.  For instance,  rapidly  rising property  prices  (attributed  to  years  of low
interest  rates)  increased  the  temptation  for borrowers  to  misrepresent  their  circumstances  on
applications  in order to qualify for loans.75  On the other side, loan originators were encouraged
to create more loans by the ability to retain little or no exposure on those loans by packaging and
selling loans as investment devices.  The former aspect of the market would likely decrease the
effectiveness  of disclosure  statutes.76  The latter, which has acquired the epithet, "originate-to-
distribute,"7   switched the  focus to  the fees  from creating  and packaging  loans  as  investment
devices, as opposed to focusing on the quality of the underlying loans.
concluded that the crisis was avoidable and was caused by: Widespread failures in financial regulation, including the
Federal  Reserve's  failure to  stem  the  tide  of toxic  mortgages;  Dramatic  breakdowns  in  corporate  governance
including too many financial firms acting recklessly and taking on too much risk; An explosive mix of excessive
borrowing  and risk by households and Wall Street that put the  financial system  on a collision course with crisis;
Key policy makers ill prepared for the crisis, lacking a full understanding of the financial system they oversaw; And
systemic breaches in accountability and ethics at all levels.").
1 15 U.S.C.A.  § 1601(a).
72 15 U.S.C.  § 45.
73  See Darren Bush, Too Big to Bail:  The Role of Antitrust in DistressedI ndustries, 77 ANTITRUST  L.J. 277, 278
(2010).  We  borrow  the  phrase  "unknown  unknowns"  from  then-Defense  Secretary  Donald  Rumsfeld's
characterization  of threats from Iraq (another phenomenon that likely presents whack-a mole characteristics).  See
Donald  H.  Rumsfeld,  DoD  News  Briefing,  Feb.  12,  2002,  http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/
transcript.aspx?transcriptid=2636.
74 Bush, Too Big to Bail, at 278.
Andrew J. Ceresney, Gordon Eng, Sean R. Nuttall, Regulatory Investigations and the Credit Crisis: The Search
for Villains, 46 AM. CRIM. L. REv. 225, 236-37 (2009).
6 Designed to protect consumers, TILA aims to provide consumers with a "meaningful disclosure of credit terms,"
but has no impact on consumers'  fraudulently filling out credit applications.
n  See Peter H. Hamner, The Credit Crisis and Subprime Litigation: How Fraud Without Motive  "Makes Little
Economic Sense",  1 U. PUERTO  RICO  Bus.  L.J.  103,  117  (2010)  (discussing  the  "originate-to-distribute"  and
"subprime lawsuit narrative").
8 Id (citing Frederic S. Mishkin, Governor of the Bd. Of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Speech at the
U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York: On "Leveraged Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage Meltdown" (Feb. 29,
2008)  http://  www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20080229a.htm  (last visited  Oct.  29,  2012)  (in
which Frederic Mishkin discusses the misaligned  incentives of lenders));  see also Ben Bernanke, Chairman of the
Bd.  Of Governors  of the  Federal Reserve  System,  Address  at the Federal Reserve  Bank  of Chicago's  Annual
Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Illinois: Risk Management in FinancialI nstitutions (May
15,  2008),  http:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke200805l5a.htm  (last visited Oct. 29, 2012)
("[the revenues of the originators of subprime mortgages were often tied to loan volume rather than to the quality of
the underlying credits, which induced some originators to focus on the quantity rather than the quality of the loans
being passed up the chain.").2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 90
Regulators could not be expected to foresee problems that were deemed unlikely by even
the most expert of observers.  Agency  capture problems arose  due, partly to powerful  political
interests  supporting  the  regulated  entities  and,  partly  to  competition  for  fees  from  regulated
entities.79  Thus,  in a general  sense,  consumers were  defeating  disclosure  statutes  designed to
protect  them,  loan originators  were  faced  with  an incentive  to  loosen  lending  standards  and
approve  more loans,  and regulators were unable to predict or correct the  growing problems in
consumer lending.
Further,  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  (GLB)  Act,80  also known  as  the  Financial  Services
Modernization Act of 1999, rapidly changed market conditions in the mortgage lending industry.
The  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act,  which  repealed  part  of Franklin  Roosevelt's  Banking  Act  of
1933,  more commonly known as the Glass-Steagall  Act,82 was a very significant development
in securities regulation.  Although commentators will differ on the role the GLB Act played with
respect  to  the  financial  crisis,83  the  GLB  Act presented  a vastly  changed  marketplace  where
"firewalls"  between financial institutions, in place for over sixty years, had been removed.
Existing  consumer-protection  based  regulation  undermines  consumers'  incentives  to
educate  themselves with regard to the transactions at issue.  Mark Armstrong recently observed
the  concern  for moral  hazard  if transaction  terms  are  restricted  or  consumers  are  allowed  a
remedy  for improvident transactions.84  This understanding  flows from the  "well understood"
concern that "if someone is insured, she will take less  care protecting  her possessions.""  The
insurance  in the consumer protection story is the regulatory scheme and the possessions are the
consumer's  interests  in the transaction terms.  So "[t]he  victim  of a scam, or an unexpectedly
high  credit  card penalty  charge,  will  usually be  more  vigilant  in the  future."86  Armstrong's
moral hazard  argument relies on a rational choice model of consumer behavior.87  But it holds
for  boundedly  rational  consumers  as  well.  Evidence  from  empirical  studies  of individuals'
behavior demonstrates that education and experience reduces the effect of cognitive biases.88
Lastly, consumer-protection-based  regulation is inherently  disempowering.  An approach
that outlaws substantive transaction terms, which may be appropriate for a subset of consumers,
limits those consumers'  abilities to choose from among the broadest possible array of available
transactions.  As Neil Averitt and Robert Lande argue, consumer protection laws should preserve
consumers'  abilities  to  exercise  choice,  while  antitrust  laws  should  preserve  the  existence  of
79 See Rachel E. Barkow, InsulatingA  gencies: Avoiding Capture through InstitutionalD  esign, 89 TEX. L. REv.  15,
44-45 (2010) (describing capture concerns for banking regulators based on "regulator shopping).
80  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Financial  Modernization  Act, PL  106-102,  Nov.  12,  1999,  113  Stat  1338 ("An Act To
enhance  competition  in the financial  services  industry by  providing a prudential framework  for the  affiliation of
banks, securities firms, insurance companies, and other financial services providers, and for other purposes.")
8 12 U.S.C.  § 24; 12 U.S.C.  § 378(a)(1), 21(a)1.
82 id
83  See e.g., Eric Lipton & Stephen Labaton, A DeregulatorL ooks Back, Unswaved, N.Y. TIMES, Nov. 16, 2008, at
Al.
84  Mark Armstrong, Economic Models of Consumer Protection Policies, MPRA PAPER No.  34773,  at 2-3  (Nov.
2011), availablea t mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/34773.
8 Id. at 3; see also generally Steven Shavell, On Moral Hazard and Insurance, 93 Q. J. ECON. 541 (1979).
8 Armstrong, supra note 84 at 4.
8  Id. at 2.
88 Cf  Gregory  Mitchell,  Why  Law  and Economics' Perfect Rationality Should Not  be Behavioral Law  and
Economics'EqualI ncompetence, 91 Geo. L.J. 67, 87-94 (2002) (education mitigates the impact of cognitive bias).91 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
choice.89  The two schemes would work at cross-purposes if consumer protection regulation were
permitted to remove consumer choice.
3.  REFORMS TO MORTGAGE LENDING REGULATIONS
Congress  responded  to  the perceived  weakness  in  existing  regulation  of the  financial
industry with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act ("Dodd-Frank"
Act).90  The Dodd-Frank Act revised regulation of the mortgage lending industry  in the United
States.91  According  to  Professor  Pridgen,  Dodd-Frank  "takes  a  much  more  substantive
regulatory  approach than has been seen until recently in federal  credit regulation."92  Reforms
include  new requirements that consumer borrowers'  have the abilities to make payments;  new
limits on broker compensation models that preclude  one pernicious compensation device, yield-
spread-premiums; and limits on prepayment penalties, among other reforms.93
The Dodd-Frank Act has both expanded and restricted coverage of existing statutes and
regulations in the mortgage lending industry.94  For instance, the Act established a new "duty of
care" for residential mortgage originators.  However, the "duty of care" only requires a mortgage
originator:  (1) to be licensed or registered as a loan originator if required by the SAFE Act95; and
(2)  to include the unique identifier provided by the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing  System and
Registry (NMLSR) on all loan documents.96
Title  XIV  of the  Dodd-Frank  Act  enacted  several  new  requirements  for  mortgage
originators.97  Under Title XIV a loan originator is required to make a good faith and reasonable
effort based upon verified information that "at the time the loan is consummated, the consumer
has a reasonable ability to repay the loan."  This provision may have been designed to respond to
the above noted incentive for lenders to focus on the quantity of loans approved, as opposed to
the  quality  of loans  approved.  However,  a "qualified  mortgage"  will be free  of many  of the
restrictions  and limitations imposed by Title XIV on other mortgage loans, presenting the same
concerns of easy avoidability that we encounter under HOEPA.98  Although the Dodd-Frank Act
89 Neil W. Averitt & Robert Lande, Using the "Consumer Choice" Approach to Antitrust Law, 74 ANTITRUST L.J.
175, 181 (2007).
90 The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, P.L. 111-203 July 21, 2010, 124 Stat. 1376.
91 Robert A. Cook and Meghan Musselman, Summary of the Mortgage Lending Provisions in the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer ProtectionA ct, 64 CONSUMER FIN. L.Q. REP. 231 (Summer/Fall, 2010).
92 Dee Pridgen, Putting Some Teeth in TILA:  From Disclosure to Substantive Regulation in the Mortgage Reform
andAnti-PredatoryL ending Act of2010, 24 LoY. CONS. L. REv. 615, 616 (2012).
93 See id. at 627-28 (citing 15 U.S.C.  1639c).
94 See id. for a greater discussion of the impact of the Dodd-Frank Act on mortgage lending regulation in which the
authors detail Dodd-Frank's expanded HOEPA coverage, new mortgage originator rules, increased penalties,  new
disclosure burdens, and new escrow and force-placed insurance rules, among other reforms.
95 Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 ("SAFE Act"), 12 U.S.C.  § 5100, et seq.
96 See, e.g., Cook and Musselman, supra note 91; the authors note, "By placing this duty in TILA, the Dodd-Frank
Act allows the TILA penalties to be imposed on a mortgage originator for a failure to comply with these rules." See
also id.
97 Dodd- Frank Act, infra, note 98.
98  Dodd-Frank  Act  § 1491;  A "qualified  mortgage"  is  defined  as a mortgage  loan  "(i)  that does  not allow  for
negative  amortization and is not a balloon loan, (ii)  for which the creditor verifies and documents the borrower's
income  and  assets,  (iii)  that  is  underwritten  using  a  fully-amortizing  payment  schedule  (for  an  ARM  loan,
underwritten based on the maximum rate permitted during the first five years of the loan term) taking into account
all applicable taxes, insurance and assessments, (iv) for which total points and fees do not exceed  3% of the total
loan amount, and (v) that complies with debt-to-income ratios established by the Federal Reserve Board."  Dodd-
Frank Act §  1411; see Robert M. Jaworski,  Jaworski on the Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act,
2010 LEXISNEXIS EMERGING ISSUES 5346 (Oct. 6, 2010).2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 92
provides  a  new  enforcement  role  for  the  FTC  with  respect  to  home  appraisals,99  and  has
increased  penalties  for  violations  of  TILA,100  the  reforms  do  not  promise  to  negate  the
justification for resort to antitrust law and policy into this area.
Dodd-Frank's effectiveness has yet to be determined.  "The Dodd-Frank Act may have a
significantly greater  [or lesser] effect depending on how the new Bureau of Consumer Financial
Protection ["CFPB"] exercises its considerable powers."' 0  In late January 2013  the CFPB took
a  substantial  step,  promulgating  seven  rules  pertaining  to  mortgage  lending.  The  new  rules
impact statutes that are mainstays of mortgage regulation, such as TILA and RESPA.102  Many
of these new rules will go into effect on June 1, 2013, and the last of the rules will go into effect
in January 2014.103
One  notable example  is  the agency's  ability  to repay ("ATR")  and qualified mortgage
("QM") standards rule.  That requires "mortgage lenders to consider consumers'  ability to repay
home  loans  before  extending  them credit."104  At  a minimum,  "creditors  will  be  required  to
consider  eight  underwriting  factors:  (1) current  or reasonably  expected  income  or assets;  (2)
current employment status; (3) the monthly payment on the covered transaction; (4) the monthly
payment on any  simultaneous  loan; (5) the monthly payment for mortgage-related  obligations;
(6)  current debt obligations, alimony, and child support; (7) the monthly debt-to-income  ratio or
residual  income;  and  (8)  credit  history." 05   In  addition,  creditors  will  be  required  to  use
"reasonably  reliable  third-party  records  to  verify  the  information  they  use  to  evaluate  the
factors."106
The  second  part of the  rule  deals  with  "qualified  mortgages."  The  Dodd-Frank  Act
provides that a creditor that extends a "qualified mortgage" presumptively satisfied the ability-to-
repay requirements.  Here, "[Lt]he  line the [CFPB] is drawing is one that has long been recognized
as  a rule  of thumb  to  separate  prime  loans  from  subprime  loans." 07  In addition,  the  CFPB
99 Dodd-Frank Act, supra note 98.
100 "TILA penalties have been increased as follows: the class action liability cap is raised to $1,000,000;  mortgage
originators are subject to TILA penalties for compensation and steering violations; the heaviest penalties (by far) are
applied  to  violations  of the rules related  to  appraisal  independence;  and  state  attorney  general  enforcement  is
expanded."  Id
1o1 Cook & Musselman, supra note 91 at "Summary".
102  TILA-related rules:  Loan  originator  compensation  requirements,  mortgage  servicing  requirements,  high-cost
mortgage  and  homeownership  counseling  amendments,  escrow  requirements  for  higher-priced  mortgages,  and
ability to repay and qualified mortgage standards; RESPA-related rules: homeownership counseling amendments,
and mortgage  servicing requirements  (See Proposed Rules Bureau of Consumer FinancialP  rotection, High-Cost
Mortgage  and  Homeownership  Counseling  Amendments  to  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act  (Regulation  Z)  and
Homeownership  Counseling Amendments  to the  Real Estate  Settlement Procedures  Act (Regulation X),  78  FR
6856-01  (Jan. 31,  2013)); ECOA-related  rules:  disclosure and delivery  requirements for copies of appraisals  and
other written valuations (See Proposed Rules Bureau of Consumer FinancialP rotection, Disclosure and Delivery
Requirements  for  Copies  of Appraisals  and Other  Written  Valuations  Under the Equal Credit  Opportunity  Act
(Regulation B), 78 FR 7216-01 (Jan. 31, 2013).
103 See  CFPB, Ability to Repay Summary, cfpb.com;  available at: http://www.consumerfinance.gov/regulations/
ability-to-repay-and-qualified-mortgage-standards-under-the-truth-in-lending-act-regulation(-lza/s t accessed:  Feb.
10, 2013).
104 See id.
105S ee id.
106 See id.
107 See  CFPB, Ability to Repay Summary, cfpb.com;  available at: http://www.consumerfinance.gov/regulations/
ability-to-repay-and-qualified-mortgage-standards-under-the-truth-in-lending-act-regulation(-lza/s t accessed:  Feb.
10, 2013).93 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
exempted  smaller  creditors  from  certain  provisions  because  "[lt]he  [CFPB]  believes  that the
discipline  imposed when  small  creditors  make  loans that  they  will  hold  in their  portfolio  is
sufficient to protect consumers' interests in this regard." 08
III. A ROLE FOR ANTITRUST  LAW
The  limitations  of targeted  regulation  in preventing  a harmful  spiral in which harmful
conduct  leads to  market structure  characterized  by  dominance  or market leadership,  which in
turn facilitates harmful conduct, suggests that legal protections must not rely on foresight on the
part of regulators; must not rely on whack-a-mole responses to problems as they appear; must be
structured to limit concerns  for agency capture  by  regulated entities;  must not  limit consumer
choice; and must not present moral hazard concerns.109
Antitrust  offers  a  quiver  of legal  protections  that  satisfy  those  requirements.  Broad
private rights of action create  incentives  for consumers or competitors to bring suit, mitigating
the problem  of limited regulator  foresight into the long-term consequences  of a course  of bad
conduct.  Private plaintiffs are likely to be better informed about the actual or threatened market
effects  of an  observed  course  of conduct  because  they themselves  participate  in  the  market.
Private plaintiffs also have financial incentives to seek both injunctive and monetary relief before
possible extra-market consequences of the conduct are realized.
Second-order regulation, like antitrust, mitigates agency capture concerns.  The decision-
makers - courts - are diffuse, unelected and life-tenured (in the federal  system), and subject to
appellate  review.  Federal  enforcement  agencies  will not be  free from capture  concerns.  But
those concerns are mitigated in antitrust because the agencies are themselves generalists; the two
federal  agencies compete between themselves - and with state enforcers - in their enforcement
programs; and private enforcement remains a check on public enforcers'  abdication of their role.
A. BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION As BAD ANTITRUST CONDUCT
The  antitrust  approach  to  behavioral  exploitation  operates  by  treating  behavioral
exploitation as conduct of concern under the antitrust laws.  A plaintiff can challenge  behavioral
exploitation  with  a  showing  of general  intent  and  a  market  effect,  giving  rise  to  antitrust
remedies including injunctive relief and treble damages liability.  Our approach differs from too-
big-to-fail approaches because we  do not advocate  challenges  on the basis of market structure,
which can be achieved through innocent and even efficient conduct.  Our approach differs from
the status quo of antitrust doctrine because we expand the class of conduct that will be seen to
raise concerns.
There are three broad categories  of antitrust analysis  under the modem state of doctrine.
First is dominant firm conduct, whereby  a firm engages  in conduct  of concern and in doing so
creates, threatens  to create,  or preserves a monopoly position.110  Remedies are available under
Section  2  of the  Sherman  Act  on  a  showing  of both  market  power  (dominance)  and  bad
conduct."  Second is concerted  conduct, whereby more than one firm agrees jointly to engage
in a course  of conduct of concern.112  Remedies  are available under Section 1 on a showing of
1os  Proposed Rules Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Ability  To  Repay  Standards  Under the  Truth  in
Lending Act (Regulation Z), 78 FR 6622-01  (Jan. 30, 2013).
109 See supra Part II.F (describing the failings of the regulatory status quo).
See  Mark Anderson & Max  Huffman, 1qbal, Twombly, and the Expected Cost of False Positive Error, 20
110 
CORNELL J. L. & PUB. POL'Y 1, 41 (2010).
n. 15 U.S.C.  § 2.
112 See Anderson et al., supra note 110, at 29.2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 94
agreement and bad conduct.113  Third is merger review, whereby firms seek to combine to create
a single firm, and after the combination the market structure will facilitate harmful conduct.114
All  three  categories  of analysis  rely on a showing  of harmful  conduct.  It is  subject to
interpretation  and common-law  what exactly constitutes  such harmful conduct."'  Liability for
monopolistic activity requires proof of both market power and harmful conduct." 6  Liability for
concerted  activity requires proof of agreement and harmful conduct."7  Merger review requires
proof of actual or likely harmful effects from the merger, which turns on increased incentive and
opportunity  to engage  in either unilateral  or concerted  harmful  conduct."8  A relatively  non-
controversial definition of harmful conduct would require the threat of market-wide harm and the
possibility of regulation without unduly restricting economically desirable activity.119
Behavioral  exploitation  antitrust is  a new approach  that one  commentator  has recently
described in detail 20 and other commentators are beginning to accept.  None of the examples of
harmful  conduct  that  have  presented  bases  for  antitrust  liability  are  easily  analogous  to
behavioral  exploitation.  The  most  likely  extension  of current  doctrine  would  be  a creative
application  of the theory  of predatory  pricing.  Predatory  pricing occurs  when a firm prices its
product or service below the firm's costs to provide the product or service.121  In understanding
the subprime boom as a series of improvident loan transactions that were cheap relative to their
risks (a component of lender cost structure), we might find an example of below-cost pricing.122
Maurice  Stucke  has  suggested  a  comparable  expansion  of the  malleable  definition of
harmful  antitrust  conduct  for  deception  that  brings  about  market  effects.  Recognizing  that
deceptive  conduct  lacks any  redeeming  characteristics  and presents  real  competitive  dangers,
Stucke  argued  for  application  of  antitrust's  "quick  look"  standard  to  reviewing  deceptive
conduct,  shifting the  burden of proof to the defendant to demonstrate  a lack of harm  once the
conduct  is proved.123  Behavioral  exploitation has a  stronger claim than deception to antitrust
remedies.  Existing  regulation  at  both  the  federal  and  state  levels  prohibits  and  remedies
deception,  including  in  consumer  subprime  mortgage  lending.124  In  contrast,  behavioral
113 15 U.S.C.  § 1.
114 15 U.S.C.  § 18(a).
115 See, e.g., Competition and Monopoly:  Single Firm Conduct Under Section Two of the Sherman Act § 1 (2008)
(report  withdrawn)  (noting that  bad conduct  for  Section 2 purposes  is  "willful  acquisition  or maintenance  of
monopoly power" as opposed to "growth or development as a consequence of a superior product, business acumen,
or historic accident") (quoting Grinnell).
116 See Anderson et al., supra,n ote 110.
1  See id. at 30.
1  U.S. Dep't of Justice & Federal Trade Comm'n, Horizontal Merger Guidelines §§  6, 7 (2010).
119 This first principles  understanding  of what constitutes  bad  conduct invokes the complex question of optimal
deterrence.  See  generally Daniel A.  Crane,  The Economics of Antitrust Enforcement, in ANTITRUST  LAW  &
ECONOMICS  1, 3-5 (Keith N. Hylton, ed., 2010).  Trusting that, as Crane observes id. at 4, there are ample forces at
play seeking to undermine existing, and limit innovation in the development of, antitrust liability rules, we leave it to
others to articulate the over deterrence argument.
120 Huffman, supra note 11,  at 130-35.
121B  rooke Group v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Co., 509 U.S. 209 (1993).
122 See id at 9-17, ("below an appropriate measure of cost").  Brooke Group also requires a dangerous probability of
recoupment  of the losses incurred during the course of predation.  Recoupment  ordinarily  is found when  a firm
achieves  a  durable  monopoly  position.  A  plaintiff might  be  able  to  establish  the  dangerous  probability  of
recoupment over the course of a borrower's long-term relationship with the lender.  Scholarship does not discuss
"below-cost lending," although the idea certainly emerges in the context of political benefits or kickbacks.
123 See id. at 11,  13-19.
124 See, e.g., Truth in Lending Act, 15 U.S.C.  1601 et seq.; Federal Trade Commission Act, 15 U.S.C. § 45.95 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
exploitation  is  regulated  only  at  the  margins.  Applying  an  antitrust  remedy  for  behavioral
exploitation does not threaten the same level of redundancy.
Applying  behavioral  exploitation  antitrust  to  the  consumer  subprime  mortgage
marketplace, we propose that behavioral exploitation meets the conduct element of a claim under
Sherman Act  section  1 or  2  or merger review  under  Clayton  Act  section  7.125  Considering
briefly  the  state  of the  consumer  subprime  mortgage  marketplace  leading  up  to  2007,  we
conclude that behavioral  exploitation  antitrust fits most naturally with merger review; might be
(with some  doctrinal adjustment)  an appropriate  fit with a challenge to concerted  action under
section 1;  and is unlikely  to inform  a challenge to dominant firm conduct under section 2.  We
order the following sections in order of most to least appropriate fit.
1. BEHA VIORAL EXPL OITA TION ANTITRUST IN MERGER REVIEW
Injunctive  and damages remedies under Clayton Act, section 7,  and FTC Act, section 5,
(injunction  only)  for  a  merger  that  "tends  to  create  a  monopoly"  arises  where  the  merger
increases  the  incentive  and  opportunity  for a  firm to  engage  in  conduct  of concern.126  The
merger theory will be the simplest application of behavioral  exploitation antitrust in an industry
characterized by mergers with substantial increases in concentration.
Merger enforcement under the Clayton Act does not require proof of harmful conduct, in
contrast with the dominant firm conduct and concerted conduct we discuss above.  The recently
revised Merger Guidelines recognize increased opportunity and incentive to raise prices to be an
effect  that  provides  a  basis  for blocking  a  merger,127 although  raising  prices  in  isolation  is
conduct  that  benefits  competition  by  incentivizing  market  entry.128  Similarly,  increased
likelihood of tacit collusion provides a basis for blocking a merger,129 although the tacit collusion
itself, under the current state of the law, is not illegal.130  In both cases the competitive harm is in
the merger itself rather than in the conduct that it allows.
A  successful  merger  challenge  usually  requires  proof of an  increase  in  concentration
sufficient  to have  a  market effect.131  Merger review  in  a market  such  as  that for  consumer
subprime  mortgage  lending  under  behavioral  exploitation  antitrust  would  not  change  that
requirement.  A merger between two firms engaged in behavioral  exploitation,  or in which the
acquiring  firm engages in behavioral  exploitation, can be expected to increase the incidence of
that conduct in the market.  In either circumstance the merger limits competitive constraints that
may exist on its continuing - i.e., there is one fewer firm that might find it advantageous to stop
and to educate consumers as to the existence of the conduct.132
Increased  concentration  also  increases  the  likelihood  of  tacitly  collusive  behavioral
exploitation.  Tacit  collusion  occurs  when competitors  act  in coordinated  fashion rather  than
competing,  but do  so without the agreement necessary  to bring about a section  1 violation for
conspiring.  One market structure characteristic that increases the likelihood of tacit collusion is
125  See  U.S.  Dep't of Justice & Fed. Trade Comm'n, Horizontal Merger Guidelines §§  6,  7 (2010) (discussing
unilateral and coordinated effects in merger review) [hereinafter "Merger Guidelines"].
126 See id. at § 1 (noting concerns for incipient price increases, output reductions, reductions in innovation,  or other
"diminished competitive constraints or incentives").
127 See Merger  Guidelines,  supra  note 125, at § 6.3.
128 See Merger Guidelines,s upra note 125 at § 9.2.
129 See Merger Guidelines,s upra note 125, at § 7.
130 See supra, section II.B.1.
131 Cf Merger Guidelines, supra note 125, at § 2.1.3 (increases in concentration "presumed to be likely to enhance
market power").
132 We discuss infra our view that this competitive effect is unlikely in any event.2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 96
concentration.  Where  a  merger  brings  about  increased  concentration,  which  increases  the
likelihood of tacitly collusive behavioral exploitation, that merger creates an incipient harm that
may be sufficient to permit antitrust remedies.
2. BEHA VIORAL EXPL OITA TION ANTITRUST IN A CONCERTED ACTIoN CHALLENGE
Sherman  Act  section  1 provides  a  basis  for  competitors,  government  enforcers  and
consumers  to  challenge  groups  of firms who  act  by  agreement.  Concerted  conduct  requires
proof  of two  elements:  agreement  and  conduct.  Under  behavioral  exploitation  antitrust,
engaging  in behavioral  exploitation  with  general  intent, producing  a market effect,  meets  the
conduct element.  Antitrust remedies should be available on proof of agreement.
We do not know of evidence that mortgage lenders actually conspired, whether explicitly
or  implicitly,  with  regard  to  transaction  terms  or  marketing  tactics  employed  in  consumer
subprime  mortgage  lending  in the  years  leading to  the  financial  crisis.  Instead, the  market
appears  to have  been  vigorously  competitive.  Proving  the  existence  of an agreement  would
require  relying  on  evidence  of tacit collusion, by  which  lenders  achieved  de  facto  consensus
through a course of interdependent  conduct.
Faced  with behaviorally  exploitative  conduct by  a competitor, a firm  may compete  by
itself, eschewing the conduct and advertising its knowledge of its competitor's actions.  The firm
also  may  find it  profitable to  engage  in the  same conduct  itself.  Evidence  of industry-wide
behavioral exploitation in consumer home mortgages suggests firms found the latter option more
appealing.  The welfare effect is the same as if the competitors had colluded.  In the absence of a
merger review proceeding, section 1 and FTC Act section 5 are the most frequently cited sources
of authority for challenging tacitly collusive harmful conduct.
The law is clear that tacit collusion based on interdependent conduct does not amount to
an agreement cognizable under section 1.133  There have been calls to broaden the definition of
agreement to include tacit collusion.  Richard Posner argued in  1969 that there  is no economic
distinction between tacit and actual collusion.  Both present the same welfare effects and should
be  outlawed.134   Some  have  suggested  a  middle  ground,  outlawing  tacit  collusion  under the
broader language of FTC Act section 5 but not under section 1.135  The middle-ground  approach
has  the  perceived  benefit  of preventing  excessive  litigation  by  private  plaintiffs,  who  have
standing to enforce the Sherman Act but not the FTC Act.136
We  advocate  an  expansive  enforcement  program  for  tacitly  collusive  behavioral
exploitation in consumer subprime mortgage lending.  Consumer subprime mortgage lending has
proved to be subject to enduring "lemons equilibria," where  sub-optimal transaction terms push
out welfare maximizing terms.137  The benefits of antitrust enforcement  under section  1 or FTC
133S ee Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S.  554 (2007); Max Huffman, The Necessity of PleadingE  lements in
Private Antitrust Conspiracy Claims, 10 U. PA. J. Bus. & EMP. L. 627 (2008).
134 Richard  Posner, Natural Monopoly  and its  Regulation, 21  STANFORD L. REv.  548 (1969);  see also POSNER,
ANTITRUST LAW (2d ed. 2001).
135 See Donald F. Turner, The Definition qfAgreement Under the Sherman Act:  Conscious Parallelism and Refusals
to Deal, 76 Harv. L. Rev. 655, 682 (1962).
136 See Thomas B. Leary, A Suggestion for the Revival of Section 5, Antitrust Source, Feb. 2009, at 1, 1-3.  But see
William E. Kovacic & Mark Winerman, Competition Policy and the Application of Section 5 of the Federal Trade
Commission Act, 76 ANTITRUST  L.J. 929, 939 & n.54, 948 & n.84 (2010) (noting that Section 5 standards may be
used to interpret state laws that do allow for private enforcement, and that Section 5 holdings may serve as precedent
in later private litigation).
137 For an application of the theory of lemons equilibria to consumer home mortgage lending, see Janger & Block-
Lieb, supra note 13.97 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
Act section 5 outweigh the harms from over-enforcement.  We believe it is possible to limit an
expanded enforcement  program targeting tacit collusion to markets with characteristics  like that
for consumer subprime mortgage lending.  Under our middle-ground  approach, tacitly collusive
conduct in consumer lending would provide a basis for both private and public enforcers to sue
seeking damages and injunctive relief.
3. BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATIONANTITRUST INA DOMINANT FIRM CONDUCT CHALLENGE
Proof of dominant firm conduct in violation of Sherman Act section 2 requires proof of
both monopoly power (or a dangerous probability  of achieving it) and bad conduct.  Section 2
presents the simplest example of an enforcement theory relying on behavioral exploitation.  The
claim works this way:  A plaintiff, probably a competitor, sues Countrywide  Financial in 2006.
That competitor may be Wells Fargo, which testified to the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission
that it lost money by refusing  to engage in the most extreme  forms of subprime lending.  The
plaintiff would argue that Countrywide was on its way to achieving market dominance because it
acted with intent in exploiting consumer biases, inducing them to enter into transactions that are
suboptimal.  The result is that the plaintiff is prevented from lending to those same consumers -
presumably making smaller loans, but ones that are more consistent with the consumer's abilities
to pay - the phenomenon of bad loans crowding out good loans or even wholly different types of
lending  (e.g.,  student loans).  The competitor's  remedy would treble the hypothetical profit on
the  loans that were  lost to the  competitor  plaintiff competitor,  as  well as  injunctive relief to
prevent the defendant from engaging in the conduct in future transactions.
Government  enforcers  might  also  bring  enforcement  actions  seeking  injunctive  relief
against further behavioral exploitation.  In an extreme case, the government enforcer might seek
a  structural  remedy  to  reduce  the  size  of the  dominant  firm.138  Consumer  enforcement  is
hypothetically available, but is not realistic.  It is difficult to envision a basis for monetary relief
to consumers, and consumers lack incentives to finance a lawsuit seeking injunctive relief.
Available evidence does not suggest that any firm achieved sufficient market presence to
meet the standards for dominance required by section 2.  In a nation- or world-wide market for
financial products with ease of entry and exit into mortgage  lending,  it seems unlikely  market
dominance  or the  dangerous  probability  of its occurring,  as  section  2 requires,  might ever be
achieved.
B. ANTITRUST  AVOIDS  THE PROBLEMS  WITH  THE  LEADING APPROACHES  TO  CONSUMER
MORTGAGE REGULATION
The problems with consumer-protection  style regulation that we detail in Part II, above,
demonstrate the need for legal protections  (1) that do not depend on regulator foresight, (2) that
do not present concerns  for agency capture, (3) are not whack-a-mole  in nature, and (4)  do not
present  consumer  choice  or  moral  hazard  concerns.  Antitrust  enforcement  meets  those
requirements.
1.  COMPETITION FOR  ENFORCEMENT MITIGATES  PROBLEMS  OF No  FORESIGHT  AND
AGENCY  CAPTURE
U.S.  antitrust is known  for  its "decentralized  and  largely  uncoordinated"  enforcement
mechanisms.139  Those include enforcement by two federal agencies - the Department of Justice
and  the  Federal  Trade  Commission;140  federal  "sectoral"  regulators  with  public  interest
138 Cf United States v. Microsoft, 87 F. Supp. 2d 30 (DDC 2000) (providing for a structural remedy).
139 Crane, Economics ofEnforcement, supra note 119, at 1.
140 See 15 U.S.C.  § 4 (DOJ); 15 U.S.C.  § 45 (FTC).2012]  BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST  98
mandates,  which  frequently  include  competition  policy  enforcement;141  enforcement  of both
federal and state law by state attorneys general;142 and enforcement  by private plaintiffs.143  The
procedural  mechanisms  and remedies available  to the various enforcers  differ as well, creating
what one commentator calls a "crazy quilt of enforcement mechanisms." 144
Antitrust does not rely on neutral  or foresighted regulators.  The competitive,  belts and
suspenders  form  of antitrust enforcement  mitigates  both  of these  concerns.  One  result  of the
diffuse  nature  of  U.S.  antitrust  enforcement  is  the  competition  for  enforcement  that  it
produces.145  "As an independent agency, the FTC is perhaps less quickly responsive to external
political  forces  than the  Antitrust  Division."146   Another  benefit  of overlapping  enforcement
authority is that we have many sets of eyes on potential problems.  Where government enforcers
are  blind  to  something,  consumers  and  competitors  may  see  them.  Where  consumers  and
competitors know too little, government enforcers have enhanced fact-finding powers. 147  So it is
less likely something slips by.
The  role of state  attorney  general  and private  plaintiff enforcement  both in supporting
federal government antitrust enforcement and in filling gaps left by federal government inactivity
also has been recognized.148  A ready example  of state attorney general activity is the continued
pursuit  of Microsoft  Corporation  by  state  enforcers  after  the  Justice  Department  settled  its
claim. 149  A  similar  situation  occurred  when  state  enforcers  continued  to  challenge  the
CNBC/Financial News Network merger in bankruptcy court in 1991.150
141 See, e.g.,  Jonathan B. Baker, Sector Specific Competition Enforcement at the FCC 1 (Sept. 21,  2010) ("sector-
specific  enforcement by the FCC complements generalist competition enforcement to the benefit of competition in
the communications  industry"),  available at transition.fcc.gov/osp/projects/baker-enforcement-091210.pdf;  Henry
L. Thaggert, Antitrust & Public Procurement, 7 COMP.  L. INT'L 82, 84 n.30 (2011)  (noting the role of the General
Accounting Office in ensuring competitive conditions in government contracting).
142 See  15  U.S.C.  § 15c (state enforcement  of federal law); see, e.g.,  N.Y. Gen. Bus. L.  § 340 et seq. (New York
State antitrust law).
143 15 U.S.C.  § 15.
144 Crane, Economics ofEnforcement, supra note 119, at 1.
145 See James J. Park, Rules, Principles,a nd the Competition to Enforce the Securities Laws, 100 CAL. L. REV.  115
(2012) ("A number of commentators contend that decentralized enforcement leads to competition by enforcers that
checks underenforcement.").  Id. at n.52  ("The idea that  enforcement  is optimized  through competition  between
enforcers  has  been  made  in  other  contexts.  See,  e.g.,  Richard  S.  Higgins  et  al.,  Dual Enforcement  of
the Antitrust Laws, in PUBLIC  CHOICE & REGULATION  154 (Robert  J. Mackay et al. eds.,  1987)  (concluding that
competition  among  enforcers  leads  to  efficient  enforcement);  Gary  S.  Becker  &  George  S.  Stigler,  Law
Enforcement,  Malfeasance,  and  Compensation  of Enforcers,  3 J. LEGAL  STUD.  1, 14  (1974)  (observing  that
enforcers could compete);
William E. Kovacic, ProcurementR eform and the Choice of Forum in Bid Protest Disputes, 9 ADMIN.  L.J. OF AM.
U. 461, 493 (1995)  ("Federal antitrust enforcement  authority is shared by the Department of Justice and the Federal
Trade  Commission  (FTC),  and  these two agencies compete to establish  preeminence  as  the  leading government
bureau  for  the  scrutiny  of many  forms  of business  conduct,  including  mergers.").  Cf  Spencer  W.  Waller,
Prosecution by Regulation:  The Changing Nature of Antitrust Enforcement, 77 OR. L. REV.  1383,  1418 (1998)
(noting the competing agency phenomenon).
146 Daniel A. Crane, Does Monopoly Broth Make Bad Soup?, 76 ANTITRUST L.J. 663 (2010).
147 See, e.g.,  15 U.S.C. § 46 (FTC's general investigatory powers).
148 DANIEL A. CRANE, THE INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE OF ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT 145 (Oxford University Press
2011)  (noting the "power of states to be more aggressive in antitrust enforcement than the federal government"); id.
at 163 ("private enforcement of the antitrust laws vastly outstrips public enforcement").
149 See New York v. Microsoft Corp., 297 F. Supp. 2d 15,  19-20 (D.D.C. 2003).
150See PennsylvaniaA ttacks Award ofFNN to CNBC, 60 ANTITRUST & TRADE REG. REP. (BNA) 698, 699 (1991).99 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
Private  plaintiff enforcement  by  both consumers  and competitors  also complements  or
replaces  federal government  enforcement.  For example, Bell Atlantic Corp. v.  Twombly was a
private action brought by consumers after the Department of Justice closed its investigation and
declined to pursue the alleged conduct.'5 Consumer plaintiffs sued over conduct conducted as
1 
part of a joint venture between Shell Oil Company and Texaco Inc. after the FTC had approved
the joint venture.152  Competitor Sprint Corporation brought its own complaint  challenging the
AT&T/T-Mobile  merger,  in  what  one  news  outlet  reported  as  a  supplement  to  the  Justice
Department's suit.153
Strong financial and/or competitive incentives exist for private plaintiffs to bring antitrust
claims.154   Those  incentives  increase  the  likelihood  of  aggressive  regulation  by  antitrust
enforcement,  which  promises  to  fill  the  gaps  in  regulation  in  the  pre-crisis  status quo.
Importantly,  the  incentives  operate  independently  of foresight  about  extra-market,  economy-
wide harms,  so private plaintiffs  can be relied on to use their antitrust enforcement  authority
when extra-market harms  are not otherwise  observable. 5'5  Private  enforcement  offers another
benefit.  Knowledgeable  consumers and competitors are the plaintiffs best situated to understand
the potential harm from a course of behavioral exploitation.  They are likely to be more nimble in
responding to the conduct than would be public enforcers.
The  unique  structure of antitrust  enforcement  also  substantially  mitigates  concerns  for
agency  capture.156   That  is  for  at  least  three  reasons:  First,  unlike  the  banking  regulators
discussed  above, the antitrust enforcement  agencies  are not closely tied to any  one industry. 57
Second, the FTC has a bipartisan structure,  which Rachel Barkow  notes offers the promise of
unbiased decisions.  Third, competition  for enforcement  acts as a check on inactivity by any
one  enforcing  entity.  Tim  Wu  observes  the  lesser  public  choice  concerns  with  antitrust
enforcement  vis-A-vis  one  sectoral regulator (the FCC), noting that deferring to regulators over
antitrust "ignores the public choice problems that can make alternatives to antitrust ineffective  ..
A strong firm can overpower an agency, which is why I think the antitrust law must always be
around as a backup." 59
2. ANTITRUST'SRULE OFR  EASON A VOIDS WHACK-A-MOLE REGULATION
The  story  of consumer protection-based  regulation  in the  consumer  mortgage  industry
has not been a happy one.  The regulation is insufficient to cure all potential problems.  Congress
151 See 550 U.S. 544 (2007).
152 See Texaco Inc. v. Dagher, 547 U.S.  1 (2006).
153 See Tom Schoenberg et al.,  Sprint Allowed to Pursue Legal Challenge to AT&T-T-Mobile  Deal, BLOOMBURG,
Nov.  3, 2011,  available at bloomberg.com/news/2011-11-02/at-t-loses-bid-to-dismiss-sprint-s-antitrust-challenge-
to-t-mobile-deal.html.
154 See Max Huffman, A Standing Framework for Private ExtraterritorialA ntitrust Enforcement, 60 SMU L. REV.
103, 114 (2007) (private plaintiffs are "motivated solely by their individual best interests").
155 By contrast, prescient regulators  who sought to act during a time of economic  expansion risked  being labeled
Henny Pennys.
156  But  see  Daniel  Crane,  Rethinking  Merger  Efficiencies,  110  U.  MICH.  L.  REv.  347.  379  (2011)
("Public choice literature suggests that antitrust enforcers are not merely detached public servants on a truth-seeking
expedition.")  (citing THE CAUSES  AND  CONSEQUENCES  OF ANTITRUST:  THE PUBLIC CHOICE PERSPECTIVE  (Fred  S.
McChesney  &  William  F.  Shughart  11  eds.,  1995)  (discussing  the  application  of public choice theory  to
antitrust enforcement)).
157 Commentators  note that overrepresentation  of any one  industry presents the greatest single basis  for capture
concerns.  Rachel E. Barkow, InsulatingA  gencies: Avoiding Capture through InstitutionalD  esign, 89 TEX. L. REV.
15, 22 (2010).
151I d at 21.
159Interview with Tim Wu, FTC Policy Advisor, 25 Antitrust 55, 57 (Summer 2011).2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 100
has tended to regulate  in reaction to perceived  existing problems,  rather than proactively ward
off incipient  ones.  It  is also  subject to arbitrage,  opening  new opportunities  for deceptive  or
behaviorally  exploitative  conduct.  Short of onerous regulation of substantive  transaction terms
that would  have the  effect of foreclosing  access  to  the market  to both  marginal  lenders  and
marginal borrowers, consumer protection regulation cannot escape the problems of narrowness,
reactivity, and opportunity for arbitrage.
Antitrust's rule of reason avoids whack a molel60 regulation.  The rule of reason is the
regulatory version of a very large tent, directing courts to consider a "broad range of factors" in
deciding  whether  conduct is harmful  (and therefore  an antitrust violation) or is not.161  It is a
"fact-intensive"  inquiry. 162  Conduct with harmful welfare  effects that exceed the benefits by a
sufficient margin to warrant the expense of investigation and prosecution potentially is subject to
antitrust  challenge.  That  malleable  definition  is  broad  enough to  encompass  the  behavioral
exploitation conduct that we discuss here.163
3. CONSUMERS RETAIN CHOICE AND ARE NOT SUBJECT TO MORAL HAZARD CONCERNS
Two  benefits  of  the  behavioral  exploitation  antitrust  approach  to  mortgage  lending
regulation flow from the nature of the antitrust remedy.  Antitrust enforcement  targets market-
wide conduct and effects rather than transaction-level  conduct  and effects, mitigating  concerns
that  (1)  less-efficient  competitors  might  use  regulation  and  litigation  to  protect  themselves
against  their  efficient  rivals,  and  (2)  consumers  use  regulation  and  litigation  to  avoid  the
consequences of improvident decisions.
A  major  failing  of  consumer-protection-based  regulatory  schemes  is  the  regulatory
removal  of consumer  choice.164  In this  sense,  mortgage  lending  is  no  different  from  selling
widgets:  regulation  that  prescribes  the  dimensions  of a  widget  prevents  a  consumer  from
satisfying  a different  want or need  by purchasing  a widget  of a different  size.  If we assume
nearly infinite variability in ideal transaction terms (not an extreme assumption in a market with
millions of transactions entered yearly), regulation that prohibits or limits access to any contract
terms necessarily prevents some would-be contracting parties from maximizing their utility.165
The emphasis in the Dodd-Frank Act on protecting  consumers by limiting opportunities
to engage in certain mortgage transactions raises the concern for limited choice.  Even the most
potentially  abusive  of  transaction  terms  present  economically  rational  options  for  some
customers.  For one  example,  an "option ARM"  is  a  form  of subprime  mortgage  transaction
frequently touted as abusive because it couples a low introductory interest rate with interest-only
160 Whack-a-mole is an arcade game in which the player's objective is to hit representations of moles with a padded
mallet.  The moles re-emerge randomly from a set of holes, and the  game is designed  such that is impossible to
suppress all of the moles for any period of time.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whac-A-Mole.
161 Edward D. Cavanagh,  The Rule of Reason Re-Examined, 67 Bus. LAW.  435, 435 (2012) (criticizing the open-
ended and ambiguous nature of the rule of reason).
162Id. at 436.
163 The open-ended nature of the rule of reason inquiry has its down-sides as well.  See Cavanagh, supra note 161, at
265 (Because the targeted regulatory alternative has been so demonstrably insufficient, we favor the open-ended and
ambiguous rule of reason.).
164 See Timothy J. Muris,  The Benefits, and Potential Costs, qf FTC-Style Regulation in Protecting Consumers, 8
COMP.  L. INT'L 11,  14 (2012) (consumer protection programs  may limit sellers'  abilities to offer what consumers
demand).
165  Innovation  in mortgage  products  became  permissible  in the  1980s  when  federal  legislation  recognized  the
problems of state laws that limited consumer choice by restricting consumers to narrow parameters for transaction
terms.  See MCLEAN & NOCERA, ALL THE DEVILS ARE HERE: THE HIDDEN  HISTORY OF THE FINANCIAL CRISIS 29
(discussing the Alternative Mortgage Transaction Parity Act of 1982).101 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
or  minimum  payment  requirements.166  Under  Dodd-Frank,  the  option  ARM  is  considered  a
"non-qualified  mortgage,"167 a status that limits the ability of and incentives for brokers to make
the  lending product  available  to consumers.  But it  is not  difficult to envision  an appropriate
customer  for such a mortgage:  a borrower faced  with a known large  future income  stream -
perhaps  a college football player who has been drafted in the first round, or a trust beneficiary
who stands to access the corpus of the trust at a known point in time.
Antitrust  enforcement  based  on behavioral  exploitation  does  not  suffer  the  failing  of
limiting consumer choice.  As a second-order regulatory scheme, antitrust almost never prohibits
conduct without demonstrated effects (only when rules of per se illegality apply).168  Behavioral
exploitation offers a remedy only upon proof of a market effect.  Lenders retain broad discretion
to negotiate transaction terms that meet consumer demand.  It is possible, of course, that lenders
will  shy  away  from transaction  terms  that do  not represent  industry  standards  because  of a
perceived  danger  of antitrust  liability,  creating  a  chilling  effect  on  innovation  in  mortgage
markets.  We limit or eliminate that chilling effect with our requirement of a market effect for
behavioral exploitation antitrust.  Antitrust remedies will be available only where that discretion
is abused in a sufficiently broad range of cases to have a non de minimis market effect.
Consumer protection  regulation  presents  moral  hazard  concerns  by  freeing  consumers
from the consequences  of their decisions. 169  That  concern is not present  in the  application of
behavioral  exploitation  antitrust to  consumer  subprime  mortgages  for two reasons.  First, the
repeat player  circumstance  is infrequent  in the context  of mortgage  transactions,  and perhaps
even  less  frequent  for  subprime  mortgages.  Consumers  do  not  complete  such  transactions
frequently  enough to become  conditioned  by  over availability  of remedies.  Second, a  single
consumer with buyer's remorse does not meet the requirement of a market effect.  Only across a
large number of transactions, can the market effects be found.
C. THE LIMITS OF BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST
We  are cognizant of the dominant modern view that innovation in theories  of antitrust
harm, like the theory we propose, must be justified in terms of the cost of regulation balanced
against  the  cost  of not  regulating.170  But  we  also  do  not  ignore  that  courts,  enforcers,  and
commentators  have  largely  internalized  the  concern  regarding  over-enforcement,  or  false
positives, that the dominant strain of antitrust thought succeeded in advancing in the  1970s and
1980s.171  Behavioral  exploitation antitrust is an innovative theory of enforcement that promises
to help to rein  in otherwise  difficult-to-regulate  conduct that is well understood to bring about
negative  welfare  effects.  If applied in the  consumer  subprime  mortgage  industry,  behavioral
exploitation antitrust promises to mitigate an under-enforcing  status quo.
166  See  Option  Adjustable-rate  Mortgage  - Option  ARM,  INVESTOPEDIA,  (May  10,  2012)
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/o/option  ARM.asp#axzzluUMXUubZ.
167 See 15 U.S.C.  § 1639C(b)(2)(A)  (listing criteria for a mortgage loan to be a qualified mortgage).
1s Per se illegality  is reserved  for  a narrow  class  of conduct  including price  fixing,  bid rigging,  and  market
allocation, which  are deemed  always  to be  harmful and  to lack  serious  countervailing  benefits.  See generally
Anderson et al., supra note 110.
169 Armstrong, supra note 84 (Where exemplary damages might be available, the concern is even greater.)
170 See Avishalom Tor, Unilateral,A nticompetitive Acquisitions of Dominance or Monopoly Power, 76 ANTITRUST
L.J. 847, 852-53 (2010); see also Crane, supra note 119 at 3-4.
171 Crane, supra note 119, at 4 ("courts tend to frame liability rules in a deliberately underinclusive manner ...  [T]he
recent tendency in US antitrust law has been to tilt both the procedural rules and su[bstan]tive liability rules toward
underinclusion").  See  also Huffman, supra note 11  (describing  the position of Chicago  School  adherents with
regard to antitrust enforcement).2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 102
The  countervailing  concern regarding  over-enforcement,  from a behavioral  exploitation
theory  of liability  standpoint,  is  the  chilling  effect  on  desirable  activity  - most  notably  in
advertising  and related  communication  with  regard  to products  and services.  Advertising  is
designed to accomplish the  same goals  as is behavioral  exploitation: to convince  consumers to
purchase or borrow from the advertising seller/lender, whether by bringing a new consumer into
the market or by  stealing a consumer from a competitor.  Agencies, judges and commentators
have  noted the  competitive  concerns  that  flow  from advertising  restrictions.172  According  to
then-FTC  Chairman  Robert Pitofsky  in  1995,  "Advertising  is a key  source of price  and other
information and when competitors band together to restrict it, consumers lose."173  We recognize
the concern that a theory of liability targeting behavioral  exploitation might be deployed against
pro-competitive advertising conduct.  The response to this over-enforcement concern is two-fold.
First, behavioral exploitation  is much more than advertising,  which communicates  and
even  persuades  consumers  with  regard  to  the  merchant's  products.  Behavioral  exploitation
targets established  cognitive biases  to induce decisions that consumers would not make but for
the merchant's  conduct.  It describes a narrow class of conduct that has demonstrated effects on
consumer  decision-making.  Second, the  antitrust theory of behavioral  exploitation  recognizes
the potential for over-enforcement  concerns.  It addresses those concerns by narrowly  cabining
the claim, including requiring proof of both general intent on the part of the defendant, and non-
de minimis effects on the marketplace.174
Behavioral exploitation antitrust is limited to protect against overreaching in enforcement
and  the  consequent  dangers  of  false  positives  in  enforcement.  Criticisms  of  the  theory
nonetheless  continue  to  exist.  These  include  the  limited ability  of behavioral  economics  to
inform antitrust in general; de minimis impacts of transaction-level  conduct; and the possibility
of consumer education to overcome the welfare effects of behavioral exploitation.  We explore
below the protections against over-enforcement and responses to those criticisms.
1. INTENT AND EFFECTS
Behavioral  exploitation  as  a theory of antitrust  liability  relies on proof of:  (1) general
intent on the part of the merchant seller, and (2) an effect on the market.'75  The required proof of
general intent limits enforcement against innocent advertising conduct, mitigating chilling effect
concerns from enforcement spillovers.  A merchant might be held to have had sufficient intent to
exploit  a particular  decision-making  heuristic  if it  had  studied the heuristic  or paid for focus
groups to learn the most effective way to increase consumer response.176  Proof that a merchant
merely offered an array of products-though it might well nonetheless trigger the same heuristic
and cause a market effect'77-would  be insufficient to meet the requirement of proving intent.
172 See JOHN E. CALFEE, FEAR OF PERSUASION:  A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON ADVERTISING  AND REGULATION  17 (1997)
(describing FTC positions on state-law limits on advertising); California Dental Ass'n v. FTC, 526 U.S.  756, 784-
85  (1999)  (Breyer, J.,  dissenting)  (agreeing  with Federal  Trade Commission  and  Ninth Circuit that  advertising
restrictions present competitive concerns).
173  FTC Press Release,  "Auto Dealers  Association  Settles Charges  Over Alleged  Advertising Boycott,"  (Aug.  1,
1995).
5 4See Huffman, supra note 11, at 143.
17 1d. at 143.
176 General intent is consistent with other standards in civil antitrust claims.  See, e.g.,  United States v. Aluminum
Co. of Am.,  148 F.2d 416, 432 (2d Cir. 1945); Ronald A. Cass & Keith N. Hylton, Antitrust Intent, 74  S. CAL.  L.
REV.  657,  661  (2001).  A  merchant  has  this  mental  state  if it  acts  deliberately,  knowing  of the  probable
consequences of its actions.
17 See Huffman, supra note 11, at 129-30.103 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
For example,  sales manuals describing the benefits of opaque pricing strategies or setting
out  scripts for sales pitches  might make  strong evidence.  Testimonial  evidence  by  current or
former  employees may  be available.  One  leading  commentator  on behavioral  exploitation by
merchants,  Robert  Cialdini,  supported  his  own  academic  research  with  "a  decidedly  more
entertaining program of systematic immersion into the world of compliance professionals - sales
operators,  fund-raisers,  recruiters,  advertisers,  and  others."  His  immersion  program  included
observation, interviews, and review of written materials including sales manuals. 78
The required proof of market effect serves to prevent overuse of behavioral  exploitation
in  consumer,  competitor,  and  government  suits  based  on antitrust  laws.179  An effect  on the
market requires a market failure that competition cannot be relied on to mitigate.  That will occur
where,  for  example,  the  course  of behavioral  exploitation  assists  a  firm  in  establishing  or
maintaining  a  monopoly  position.1so  Bar-Gill  notes,  "sellers  benefit  from  the  divergence
between perceived and actual benefits and between perceived and actual prices. They will design
their products and prices  to maximize  this divergence."' 8'  The  firm that is most  effective  at
doing this will succeed and become dominant, unless other firms successfully imitate the strategy
or  consumers  become  sufficiently  educated  about  the  firm's  conduct  that  it  ceases  to  be  a
successful strategy.
The behavioral exploitation  theory is not novel in requiring  a market effect.  A market
effect requirement is nearly ubiquitous in antitrust, with the (increasingly narrow)  exception of
conduct  held  to  be  illegal per se.182 Such  an  effect existed  in Eastman Kodak Co. v.  Image
Technical Services Inc.183, where  on remand  from the  Supreme  Court's holding  that a lock-in
sufficed to demonstrate market power, a jury concluded that Kodak did have a monopoly in the
parts after-market  despite the  competitive market for its equipment.184  Proving that the effect
flows  from  the  behavioral  exploitation,  rather  than  some  other  cause,  is  a  more  complex
problem,  but no  more so than the causal  demonstration  required throughout antitrust litigation
focusing on a defendant's conduct.  Private plaintiffs are saddled with a causation requirement as
a matter of the antitrust standing doctrine, 85  and all plaintiffs, including public enforcers,  face
functionally the same burden under the rule of reason.186
17s Cialdini, Psychology ofPersuasion,s upra note 22, at xii-xiii.
179 The danger to be avoided includes, for example, the threat of treble damages liability in a suit by a purchaser
suffering buyer's remorse.  See Edwards, supra note 11,  at 360 ("Could a consumer who impulsively purchases a
candy bar and a copy of a gossip magazine claim that he has suffered a cognizable injury under the FTC Act?").
1so Establishing, maintaining, or creating a dangerous probability of establishing a monopoly through a course of bad
conduct implicates Section 2 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C.  § 2.
181 Bar-Gill, Competition and Consumer Protection,s upra note 35, at 5. Bar-Gill works from the same assumption
we do, that behavioral exploitation is a less expensive strategy than is product innovation.
182 See Chicago Bd. of Trade v. United States, 246  U.S.  231,  238 (1918)  (defining the rule of reason to include
examination of "the nature of the restraint and its effect, actual or probable"); Leegin Creative Leather Prods., Inc. v.
PSKS,  Inc.,  551  U.S.  877,  886-87  (2007) (per se rules "eliminate[]  the need to  study the reasonableness  of an
individual restraint in light of the real market forces at work").
183 504 U.S. 451 (1992).
184 See Image Technical Servs., Inc. v. Eastman Kodak Co.,  125 F.3d 1195, 1201 (9th Cir. 1997).
See 15  U.S.C.  § 4 (harm must be "by reason of' a violation  of the antitrust laws); Palmyra Park Hosp., Inc. v.
1s5 
Phoebe Putney Mem'l Hosp., 604 F.3d 1291,  1299 (11th Cir. 2010) (holding that plaintiff s harm must be of the sort
that makes the conduct illegal).
1s6 See, e.g.,  Brooke  Grp., Inc. v. Brown  & Williamson Tobacco  Corp.,  509  U.S.  209,  225  (1993)  (requiring a
showing of a causal connection between conduct and an increase in prices); Cal. Dental Ass'n v. FTC, 526 U.S. 756,
774-77 (1999) (government enforcement action where Court required proof that the complained of conduct caused a
harmful effect).2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 104
2. CRITICISMS AND RESPONSES
Others who have recognized the reality of behavioral exploitation have not taken the next
step  in  proposing  an  antitrust  remedy.  A  common  recommendation  is  improved  disclosure
regulation, designed with a recognition of the realities of limited abilities to understand and use
voluminous and complicated disclosures. 87
a. The Limits ofBehavioral Antitrust
Some criticize the entire practice of developing antitrust rules on the basis of behavioral
law and economics teaching, arguing,  among other things, that behavioral economics  opens to
door  to  undisciplined  analysis. 88   Some  may  see  behavioral  economics  as  "liberalism
masquerading  as  economic  thinking."189  Among  the  critics  of behavioral  antitrust,  Joshua
Wright  and Judd  Stone  most  directly  address  the  antitrust theory  of behavioral  exploitation.
While acknowledging that behavioral economics offers interesting lessons in consumer behavior,
and thus is, in theory, relevant for antitrust analysis, Wright and Stone contend that the methods
of antitrust economics as currently practiced are sufficient to accommodate cognitive biases that
influence  consumer  decisions.  They also argue that behavioral  economists  have not produced
theories  that accommodate  the many,  sometimes conflicting,  proven cognitive biases.190  This
argument  builds  on  Gregory  Mitchell's  argument  that  deviations  from  rational  choice
assumptions are non-uniform, so fail to produce a workable alternative theory.191
Those  challenges  might  together  be  summed  up  as  expressions  of doubt  as  to  the
possibility  of articulating  a  general  theory  of antitrust  economics  on the  basis  of currently
available  research.  Such criticisms  were more  compelling before  the  increasingly  substantial
body of evidence supporting the existence  of cognitive biases and demonstrating their operation
in real world transactions had been developed.  Empirical evidence is both more voluminous and
more  directly  applicable  to  real-world  settings,  with  much  of it  derived  from  actual  market
settings.192  Just as Posner once observed Chicago School antitrust economics began as isolated
attacks on then-existing antitrust economics,193 behavioral antitrust is developing by starting with
individual  instances of observed  deviations from rational choice theories.  Where those theories
18  See James  M. Lacko  & Janis K.  Pappalardo,  Improving Consumer Mortgage Disclosures, FTC Bureau  of
Economics Staff Report 121-28 (2007) ("Better disclosures are feasible").
18  See Douglas Ginsburg & Joshua D. Wright, Antitrust Sanctions, 6 COMPETITION POLICY INT'L 3 (2010).
189 Rosch speech (characterizing the views of critics).
190 Others  go further to  question the  viability  of any  policy measures pursued  on the  basis  of the  lessons from
behavioral economics research.  Gregory Mitchell was an early critic who argued in part that non-uniform deviations
from  rationality  assumptions  suggested that reforms  on the basis of behavioral lessons  should  be modest.  See
Gregory Mitchell,  Why  Law and Economics' Perfect Rationality Should Not Be Tradedf or Behavioral Law and
Economics' Equal Incompetence, 91  GEO. L.  J. 67  (2002).  Richard  Epstein  argued  that  "notwithstanding  the
potential resource  misallocations that may flow from these errors" in failing to optimize individual utility, the law
should not remedy those misallocations outside of preventing  fraud.  Richard Epstein, Human Errors and Market
Corrections, 73  U. CHI. L. REv.  111,  118-120  (2006).  Matthew Edwards  expressed concern with the necessarily
paternalistic  nature  of policymaking  on  the basis  of observed  bounds  on  consumer rationality.  See  Matthew
Edwards,  The FTC and New Paternalism, 60 ADMIN.  L. REv. 323,  333-36 (2008) (canvassing  critical reactions).
Tom  Brown  and  Lacey  Plache  argued  that  empirical  evidence  is  insufficient  to  support  many  of the  policy
recommendations  that have been advocated  on the basis of behavioral  economics research.  See Tom Brown  &
Lacey Plache, Paying With Plastic: Maybe Not So Crazy, 73 U. CHI. L. REv. 63, 66 (2006).
191 See Mitchell, supra note 190.
192 See Reeves & Stucke, supra note 22, at 1538.
193 Richard Posner, The ChicagoS chool ofAntitrust Analysis, 127 U. Pa. L. Rev. 925, 926 (1979).105 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
are  robust, they  should  influence  the  development  of legal rules,  such  as  the  creation  of the
behavioral exploitation theory we advance here.
b. BehavioralE  xploitation is De Minimis
A second challenge to the expansion of antitrust liability to cover instances of behavioral
exploitation  is that the harm in any  one instance  of behavioral exploitation  is transaction level
harm, and its regulation is the stuff of the law of contract and consumer protection, vis-A-vis the
market in which the  transaction occurs  the harm  frequently  will be de minimis, producing  no
harm  to  "competition."  This  argument  has  been  leveled  against  efforts  to  regulate  tortious
conduct through antitrustl94 and against efforts to regulate deception through antitrust.195  The de
minimis  challenge  applies  equally  to  behavioral  exploitation,  where  harm  occurs  at  the
transaction  level.  A  single  $250,000  mortgage  transaction  will  not  impact  competition  in  a
market for home mortgage lending that in 2006 was worth $2.5 trillion. 196
Arguments  that behavioral  exploitation  should be regulated  under the law of consumer
protection  are  ultimately  unconvincing.  First,  comparisons  to  tort  law  and  deception  are
misplaced.  Both of those  fields are well  regulated  under common  law  and federal  and  state
statute.  Adding an antitrust remedy is at best redundant and possibly threatens inefficient over-
enforcement.  Behavioral  exploitation  is  regulated  only marginally  under  common  law  and
federal and state consumer protection laws.  In the 2002 study of the welfare effects of predatory
lending that we discuss above,  Stein noted that the conduct causing welfare effects was entirely
legal.197  An antitrust remedy targeting this conduct would not be redundant.  In its absence, we
have a status quo characterized by inefficient under-enforcement.
Second,  the  de  minimis argument  proves  both  too  much.  Nearly  all  of antitrust  is
concerned  with  conduct  in  which  any  single  instance  would have  a  de  minimis impact  on
competition.198  Consumer transactions,  in the ordinary  course,  must be aggregated  to produce
the kind of market-wide  harm that supports antitrust treatment.199  Where  a course  of conduct
impacts  a large enough number of individually de minimis transactions,  it will produce the kind
of market effect that justifies antitrust intervention.200
c. Consumer Education Is a Cure
A third criticism is that competition  will lead to consumer education that will mitigate
harms  from behavioral  exploitation.  Implicit  in this criticism  is the  concern  that providing  a
remedy  removes  or  limits  consumers'  incentives  to  become  educated  with  regard  to  the
transactions in which they are engaged.
Consumer education relies on either third-party intervention; competitor intervention; or
sufficient  repeat  interactions,  causing  consumers  to  self-educate.  Durable  goods  markets  or
markets  for  long-term  financial  contracts  are  unlikely  to  permit  consumer  self-education.
194 See Joshua D.  Wright, Antitrust Analysis of Category Management:  Conwood v.  U.S. Tobacco Co.,  17 S. CT.
ECON. REv. 311, 332 & n.69 (2009) (analyzing antitrust claims based on vandalizing competitor retail equipment).
195 See IIIB Herbert Hovenkamp, Antitrust Law T 782d (3d ed. 2006) (deceptive disparagement  of a rival has a de
minimis competitive impact).
196  Financial  Crisis  Inquiry  Report, supra note  70,  at  70  (noting  $600  billion  subprime  mortgage  originations
representing 23.5% of the total mortgage originations in 2006).
197 See Stein, supra note 44.
198 The exception is merger review, in which the conduct of concern is two firms'  combining to create an unwieldy
level of concentration.
199 See Huffman, supra note 11, at 142 n.211 (single instance of price fixing is de minimis).
200 Conversely, nobody seriously could argue that all conduct with a substantial competitive impact represents  an
antitrust harm.  Blowing up a competitor's  factory or assassinating a competitor's chief executive would impact
competition, but neither is believed to present antitrust harms.2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 106
Competitor education through advertising is a possibility, but where a firm achieves dominance
through  behavioral  exploitation,  competitors  will  not  sufficiently  understand  the  dominant
merchant's  marketing  strategy  to  create  effective  educational  advertising  and/or will  not have
sufficient market presence for educational advertising to have an impact.  A small local lending
institution would have found it impossible to achieve sufficient advertising distribution to make a
campaign challenging conduct by a major national lender like Countrywide Financial worth the
candle.
Too, behavioral  exploitation, unlike its cousin, deception, is subtle.  If, for example, the
product  in question  is a long-term  lending contract, and the merchant exploits  the consumer's
tendency  to over-optimism  ("you are sure to  have earned  a raise  by the  time the interest rate
adjusts"),  it is not clear what educational  advertising would undermine the merchant's conduct.
The relevant information would be "you are not statistically likely to have earned that raise" -
but any such statement is at best likely to be ineffective, and at worst may offend.
Competitor  education is an unreliable  cure for the  market failure  behavioral  education
causes  for another reason.  Competitors  are likely to find it a better  strategy to  imitate, rather
than  to  undermine,  behavioral  education  by  a  merchant.  Richard  Posner  recognized  this
phenomenon  in  the  context  of markets  for  harmful  products,  like  cigarettes.21  Bar-Gill
demonstrated  that little  advantage  is to  be gained  by  a  competitor  from consumer  education,
apart from the first-mover advantage of being the first firm fully to disclose product attributes or
pricing.  Xavier  Gabaix  and  David  Laibson  go  further,  arguing  that,  "it  is  not  possible  to
profitably lure . . .myopes .. .to non-exploitative firms."202  This demonstrates the second basis
for  antitrust  concern - concerted  behavioral  exploitation,  which  can  occur  even  in a  market
without  a dominant firm.203  Concerted  exploitation  can either be through actual agreement or
consciously  parallel  conduct, although under the current  state of the law of concerted conduct,
consciously parallel conduct does not establish that element of the offense.204
We can therefore expect market failures caused by behavioral exploitation to be sustained
over  a  sufficiently  large  time  horizon to  lead to  both  intra-market  and  external  harm.  With
specific regard to the home mortgage marketplace, the targeted regulation that exists either has
been  proved,  or can  be  expected  to be,  insufficient  to  prevent  or remedy  those  failures  and
harms.
IV. MOVING TO BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST
Antitrust exists to cure for market failures that arise where one firm, or a group of firms,
is (are) able to profit at the expense of consumers by charging quality-adjusted prices exceeding
what  the  consumers  would pay,  but  for the  conduct  on the  part  of the  firm(s).  Behavioral
exploitation  antitrust operating  in the  consumer  subprime  mortgage  industry  would allow the
application  of antitrust remedies  to transaction-level  conduct  in consumer  subprime  mortgage
lending, if it is undertaken with general intent and on a broad enough scale to produce a market
effect.  In this  final  Part  we  argue  antitrust  standards  should  be  relaxed to  permit  resort  to
201 See Richard A. Posner, Regulation ofAdvertising by the FTC, Evaluative Studies, vol. 11, AM. ENTER. INST. FOR
PUB. POLICY RESEARCH  (1972).
202  Xavier  Gabaix & David Laibson, Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information Suppression in
Competitive Markets, MIT DEP'T OF ECON. WORKING PAPER (2005), available at papers.ssrn.com/abstract=728545.
203 Concerted conduct potentially implicates Section 1 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C.  § 1.
204 See Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544 (2007).107 WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW [VOL. 4:77
antitrust  review  and  remedies  in  the  market  for  consumer  subprime  mortgages  and  closely
analogous marketplaces.
Evidence regarding the consumer subprime mortgage industry prior to the 2007 financial
crisis  suggests  that,  even  under  a  definition  of harmful  conduct  that  includes  behavioral
exploitation,  antitrust remedies would be difficult to achieve under the current state of doctrine.
The subprime mortgage market lacked sufficient concentration and sufficient barriers to entry to
satisfy modem standards for challenging a merger as "tending to create  a monopoly."  A lack of
evidence that market participants reached either express or implied agreement, rather than acting
independently  or tacitly  colluding, undermines  efforts  to pursue remedies  under Sherman Act,
section  1.  And insufficient market  share by even  Countrywide Financial,  the most substantial
player  in the  consumer subprime  mortgage market, coupled  with insufficient barriers  to entry,
makes enforcement against dominant firm conduct under Sherman Act, section 2, unlikely.205
All  three  avenues  of analysis  should  remain  available  should  the  market  structure  or
observed conduct change sufficiently to meet the existing requirements.  A course of mergers or
failures  might well  render the  subprime  mortgage  market  sufficiently  concentrated  to present
both dominant firm and monopolization by merger concerns,  and evidence  of actual agreement
would  implicate  section  1.  Other  avenues  exist  to  a  closely  cabined  course  of  broader
enforcement  intended  to  prevent  and  to  remedy  known  welfare  effects  in  this  and  similar
industries.
Standards for blocking and remedying harm caused by a merger might be broadened to
encompass transactions not leading to a monopoly position, as traditionally defined.  There is an
increasing understanding that market share is a highly imperfect proxy for the welfare harm from
a merger.206  Such an understanding would permit courts to block a merger on a demonstration of
actual  or  likely welfare  effects  through unilateral  or  coordinated  conduct.  This  approach  to
merger review allows  a challenge that increases the likelihood  of harm regardless  of structural
changes  in the market.  Under this approach, a relative lack of concentration and low barriers to
entry would not hinder merger challenges claiming incipient behavioral exploitation.
The  long-standing  rule  for  proving  agreement  under  section  1, which  excludes  tacit
collusion, has been the subject of occasional challenge in the courts and frequent questioning by
commentators.  It is well  understood  that tacitly collusive  conduct  presents the  same  welfare
effects, as does agreement.  For that reason, noted judges and commentators have questioned a
definition  of agreement that  is too narrow to encompass  such conduct.207  The law governing
tacit collusion has been firmly  established and recently reaffirmed.208  It also rests on a sound
basis:  imposing  liability  for profit-maximizing  interdependent  conduct  dampens incentives  for
vigorous  competitive  activity.  Any relaxation  of the strict requirement  for proving agreement
under  section  1 to  allow  challenges  to  tacit  collusion  should  be  narrowly  cabined  to  avoid
overreaching in enforcement.  We believe a narrow rule permitting challenges to tacitly collusive
behavioral  exploitation in markets that are shown to be subject to enduring "lemons  equilibria,"
like  that  for  consumer  subprime  mortgage  lending,  serves  the  needs  of permitting  antitrust
205 See supra notes 127-139 and accompanying text.
206 For example, the revised Horizontal Merger Guidelines consider "market shares and concentration in conjunction
with the reasonably available and reliable evidence for the ultimate purpose  of determining whether a merger may
substantially lessen competition."  Merger Guidelines, supra note 125, at § 5.
207 See Max Huffman, The Necessity of PleadingE  lements in PrivateA ntitrust Conspiracy Claims, 10 U. PA. J. Bus.
& EMP. L. 627, 646-49 (2008) (discussing authorities).
208  See Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544 (2007).2012] BEHAVIORAL EXPLOITATION ANTITRUST 108
enforcement  where  other  regulatory  approaches  have  proved  ineffective  while  not
inappropriately  chilling aggressive unilateral competitive conduct.
The limited broadening of existing approaches to antitrust enforcement  discussed in the
prior paragraphs  brings to bear  the benefits  of belts  and suspenders  enforcement,  competition
among  enforcers,  and the unique  incentives  facing private plaintiffs, to  regulating  excesses  in
consumer  subprime mortgage  markets like those that led to the  2007 financial crisis.  Another
approach is to rely on broader language  in the Federal Trade Commission Act to base a broader
theory of enforcement  against behavioral  exploitation antitrust.  Instead of enforcing  sections  1
and 2 of the Sherman Act, the Federal Trade Commission enforces a broad prohibition of "unfair
methods  of competition."  Although there is value  generally to  employing the  FTC Act to its
fullest extent consistent with the efficiency principles underlying antitrust enforcement, the FTC
Act lacks a private  right of action and a competitive enforcement  regime.  It offers few of the
advantages of antitrust enforcement generally.
V. CONCLUSION
The  grass-roots  cause of the  2007  financial crisis  was the  market for consumer  home
mortgages.  That market was rife with failures, including deception and behavioral exploitation.
The  particular  nature  of mortgage  lending-in  the  words  of the  CEO  of  one  lender,  its
"bewildering  array"  of terms  and  fees209 -created  a particularly  vulnerable  industry  in which
behavioral  exploitation  could  flourish.  In  turn,  the  market  provided  substantial  short-term
success  for  firms  engaged  in  conduct  with well-documented  welfare  effects.  The  regulatory
status  quo  ante  consumer  subprime  mortgage  lending  was  inadequate.  Mortgage  lending
regulation  is  concerned  with  conduct  at  the  transactional  level.  That  regulation  proved
insufficient to remedy  effects that were felt market, and economy-wide.  Repeat-player  lenders
could successfully avoid regulation by complying with the letter of the law while relying in large
part on inexperienced consumers'  ability to understand complicated terms.
Our  argument above operates under  several  premises.  Behavioral  exploitation disturbs
efficient resource allocation, as consumers would otherwise act differently,  but for the conduct.
Behavioral  exploitation  occurred  in  the  mortgage  lending  industry  leading  up  to  the  2007
financial  market  crisis,  and  in the  absence  of regulation  realistically  designed  to  prevent  it,
persists today.  The 2007 financial market crisis was caused, in large part, by failures-caused in
part by  inefficient  resource  allocation-in  consumer home  mortgage  lending  firms.  Antitrust
law exists to prevent market failures; thus, antitrust law could and should be used to prevent the
pervasive type of market failures that led to the 2007 financial crisis.
Ours is a far-reaching argument.  Many have recognized the welfare effects in behavioral
exploitation, including in subprime lending.  A handful of writers seem to agree that transaction
level harms  should give rise to antitrust remedies,  although that exceeds the bounds of antitrust
doctrine  and the mainstream  of antitrust scholarship.  However,  the market failures caused by
behavioral exploitation at the individual transactional level had broad welfare effects both in the
market and external to it.  In the aggregate, those individual transactions presented  competitive
harm raising antitrust concerns.  The impact of behavioral  exploitation in the mortgage lending
industry was not and is not confined to individual transactional level  concerns. Rather, in order
for firms undertaking to profit from the behavioral  exploitation of the type we suggest occurred
209 Testimony of Scott Stern, CEO of Lenders One, United States Senate Banking, Housing and Finance Committee
(April 10, 2008).109  WILLIAM & MARY POLICY REVIEW  [VOL. 4:77
in mortgage  lending practices,  a firm must consistently  and systemically  engage in behavioral
exploitation.
Rather than the individual  transactional level focus of disclosure  statutes in place today,
antitrust provides  an  avenue to  regulate the  mortgage  industry  at the  firm  level.  In turn, by
regulating  firm-level conduct, antitrust regulation will remove incentives  for a particular firm to
engage  in  "mortgage  malpractice,"  which  success  and  profits  require  more  than  just  one
transaction.  Indeed, by removing incentives to engage in "bad" conduct at both transactional and
firm levels, and even encouraging competitors  to monitor one another's conduct, antitrust may
be  an  elegant  and  even  superior  solution  to  the  grass-roots  problems  that  ultimately  led  to
massive economic dislocations that were exposed in the 2007 financial crisis.