 
ARTICLES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Virtual  Witness  Confrontation  in 
Criminal Cases: A Proposal to Use 
Videoconferencing  Technology  in 
Maritime Piracy Trials 
 
Yvonne M. Dutton* 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
  Maritime piracy is a serious problem, yet states are not 
prosecuting captured pirates with any regularity.  One of the 
many reasons cited to explain this phenomenon focuses on the 
expense and difficulty of mounting cases of such international 
proportions and which involve evidence, suspects, victims, and 
witnesses from around the globe.  In an effort to help close the 
impunity  gap  that  surrounds  piracy,  this  Article  offers  a 
potential solution to the difficulties associated with obtaining 
live witness testimony.  It proposes a rule to allow witnesses 
under some circumstances to testify remotely by way of two-way, 
live videoconferencing technology.  While remote testimony need 
not become the norm in maritime piracy cases, the proposed rule 
is  carefully  structured  to  balance  both  the  public’s  and  the 
defendant’s interest in a fair trial.  
 
                                                                                                                       
  * Associate Professor, Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law. 
1283 1284   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
  I.   INTRODUCTION ..............................................................   1285 
  II.    TWO-WAY, LIVE VIDEOCONFERENCING  
TECHNOLOGY (VCT) ......................................................   1289 
  III.    SOME APPROACHES USED TO ANALYZE WHEN  
TO ALLOW PROSECUTION WITNESSES TO TESTIFY  
BY TWO-WAY, LIVE VCT IN CRIMINAL TRIALS ..............   1292 
A.   Remote VCT Prosecution Testimony in   
  International Criminal Courts ..........................   1292 
1.  The International Criminal Tribunal  
  for the Former Yugoslavia ...........................   1293 
2.  The International Criminal Tribunal  
for Rwanda ...................................................   1296 
3.  The Special Court for Sierra Leone ............   1299 
4.  The International Criminal Court ..............   1300 
B.   Remote VCT Prosecution Testimony in  
  Federal Courts in the United States ..................   1303 
1.  U.S. Supreme Court Cases Guiding  
  Lower Court Decisions on Whether to  
  Admit Remote Adult Prosecution-  
  Witness Testimony .......................................   1304 
a.  Coy v. Iowa  .............................................   1305 
b.  Maryland v. Craig .................................   1307 
2.  Federal Circuit Split on the Proper  
  Test to Apply in Determining When  
  to Permit Adult Prosecution Witnesses  
  to Testify by Two-Way, Live VCT ...............   1308 
3.  The Supreme Court After Craig: Some 
Confrontation Clause Guidance, but  
No Resolution of the Circuit Split ...............   1314 
  IV.   THE PROBLEM OF MODERN MARITIME PIRACY AND  
THE NEED TO ENCOURAGE STATES TO USE THE  
AVAILABLE  LAWS TO PROSECUTE PIRATES  
INSTEAD OF RELEASING THEM ......................................   1317 
A.   The Continuing Threat of Modern  
  Maritime Piracy ..................................................   1318 
B.   The International Law Authorizing Piracy 
  Prosecutions ........................................................   1320 
C.   The Tendency to Release, Rather than  
  Prosecute, Captured Pirates ...............................   1323 
D.   The Need to Encourage More Piracy  
  Prosecutions by Improving Access to  
  Witness Testimony ..............................................   1327 
  V.   A PROPOSAL TO ALLOW TWO-WAY, LIVE VCT  
WITNESS  TESTIMONY IN MARITIME PIRACY TRAILS .....   1330 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1285 
A.   Testimony Necessary to the Fair and Just  
  Resolution of the Case .........................................   1332 
B.   Witness Unable or Unwilling for Good  
  Reason to Testify in Person ................................   1333 
C.   Transmission and Other Safeguards to  
  Protect Defendant’s Fair-Trial Rights ...............   1336 
  VI.    CONCLUSION ..................................................................   1339 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
  Advancements  in  technology  have  now  made  it  possible  for 
courts  around  the  globe  to  secure  the  testimony  of  witnesses 
remotely. Through two-way, live videoconferencing technology (VCT), 
a witness’s image and voice can be transmitted from any location in 
the world to the courtroom where the trial is taking place.1 The 
benefits  of  using  such  technology  can  obviously  be  significant  in 
circumstances where witnesses would have to travel great distances 
at great cost and at great inconvenience, while also risking their 
health or safety, to testify live at a trial. When seeking the testimony 
of foreign witnesses who are beyond the subpoena power of the court, 
the promise of remote testimony may be the only way to obtain that 
witness’s cooperation and evidence.2  
  Notwithstanding that many commentators and courts seem to 
embrace the benefits of remote witness testimony in civil cases,3 not 
all agree on the propriety of allowing prosecution witnesses to testify 
by  two-way,  live  VCT  against  defendants  in  criminal  trials.  The 
arguments against remote testimony in criminal trials include the 
                                                                                                                       
  1.  See Fredric I. Lederer, The Potential Use of Courtroom Technology in Major 
Terrorism Cases, 12 WM. & MARY BILL RTS. J. 887, 907 (2004) [hereinafter Lederer, 
Courtroom Technology] (describing videoconferencing equipment and its increasing use 
in courtrooms); Fredric I. Lederer, The Road to the Virtual Courtroom? A Consideration 
of Today’s—And Tomorrow’s—High-Technology Courtrooms, 50 S.C. L. REV. 799, 802 
(1999) [hereinafter Lederer, Virtual Courtroom] (“Given that judges, counsel, and 
witnesses need not be in the same location, there is a real possibility of trials in which 
no physical commonality is present.”). 
  2.  See Lynn Helland, Remote Testimony—A Prosecutor’s Perspective, 35 U. 
MICH. J.L. REFORM 719, 725 (2002) (stating that, from the author’s perspective as a 
federal prosecutor for twenty years, although citizens of foreign countries will refuse to 
travel to the United States to testify, many have indicated they would be willing to 
accommodate less burdensome requests). 
  3.  See Lederer, Courtroom Technology, supra note 1, at 906–07 (stating that 
remote witness testimony has been used in civil cases in both the United States and 
abroad); see also FED. R. CIV. P. 43(a) (authorizing the use of VCT in civil cases “[f]or 
good cause in compelling circumstances and with appropriate safeguards”). 1286   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
following: remote testimony may violate the defendant’s right to be 
confronted with the evidence against him because the testimony is 
not “face-to-face”;4 remote testimony cannot ensure truthfulness to 
the same extent as requiring the witness to testify live before the 
defendant;5 and remote testimony does not provide the court and jury 
with  the  same  opportunity  as  does  live  testimony  to  assess  the 
demeanor and truthfulness of the witness.6 On the other hand, a 
number of courts have concluded that the “interests of justice” and 
other exceptional circumstances justify allowing some witnesses to 
testify  remotely  against  defendants  in  criminal  cases.  Various 
international criminal courts have permitted two-way, live VCT in 
some cases when the witness would otherwise be unwilling or unable 
to attend a trial in person because of safety, health, or work-related 
concerns.7 In addition, although courts in the United States generally 
seem wary of allowing remote testimony in criminal trials, some have 
allowed  adult  witnesses  to  testify  via  two-way,  live  VCT  under 
circumstances in which the witness would not otherwise be willing or 
able to appear at the trial because of safety or health concerns, or 
because they were beyond the court’s subpoena power.8  
                                                                                                                       
  4.  See,  e.g.,  Richard  D.  Friedman,  Remote  Testimony,  35  U.  MICH.  J.L. 
REFORM 695, 701–08 (2002) (discussing the Confrontation Clause implications of 
allowing remote witness testimony against defendants in criminal cases). 
  5.  See, e.g., United States v. Bordeaux, 400 F.3d 548, 554 (8th Cir. 2005) (“The 
Constitution favors face-to-face confrontations to reduce the likelihood that a witness 
will lie.”). 
  6.  Fredric  Lederer,  The  Legality  and  Practicality  of  Remote  Witness 
Testimony, PRAC. LITIGATOR, Sept. 2009, at 19, 27 (noting the concern that remote 
testimony may impede the fact finder’s ability to observe and determine the witness’s 
demeanor). 
  7.  See  Riley  A.  Williams,  Videoconferencing:  Not  a  Foreign  Language  to 
International Courts, 7 OKLA. J.L. & TECH. 54 (2011) (“Through videoconferencing, 
unavailable witnesses can be transmitted into courtrooms.”); see also, e.g., INT’L CRIM. 
CT. R. P. & EVID., available at http://www.icc-cpi.int/NR/rdonlyres/F1E0AC1C-A3F3-
4A3C-B9A7-B3E8B115E886/140164/Rules_of_procedure_and_Evidence_English.pdf 
(providing in Rule 67 that the court may allow a witness to give audio or video 
testimony, provided the technology allows the witness to be examined by all parties at 
the time the witness testifies); SPECIAL CT. FOR SIERRA LEONE R. P. & EVID., available at 
http://www.sc-sl.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=yNjqn5TIYKs%3d&tabid=176  (providing 
in Rule 85D for video testimony at the order of the trial court); Int’l Tribunal for the 
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of Int’l Humanitarian Law 
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia Since 1991, Rules of Procedure and 
Evidence, U.N. Doc. IT/32 (Feb. 11, 1994) [hereinafter ICTY RPE], reprinted in 33 I.L.M. 
484  (1994)  (providing  in  Rule  81  bis  that  proceedings  may  be  conducted  by 
videoconference link if consistent with the interests of justice). 
  8.  See, e.g., United States v. Gigante, 166 F.3d 75, 79–82 (2d Cir. 1999) 
(finding no Confrontation Clause violation where the trial court allowed a witness in an 
organized-crime case to testify from a remote location since the witness’s health 
prevented him from traveling and the defendant’s health also prevented him from 
traveling to a distant location to depose the witness); Harrell v. State, 709 So. 2d 1364, 
1367–70 (Fla. 1998) (affirming decision to allow two Argentine nationals living in 
 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1287 
  This Article proposes a rule for use in maritime piracy cases that 
would allow witnesses under some circumstances to testify remotely 
by way of two-way, live VCT so as to better facilitate the prosecution 
of those cases. Maritime piracy is the oldest crime over which states 
can exercise universal jurisdiction.9 Most states are also parties to 
the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which codifies 
piracy’s status as a universal-jurisdiction crime.10 Yet, even as pirate 
attacks continue to rise in number and severity,11 pirates face little 
risk  that  they  will  be  prosecuted  and  punished  for  their  crimes. 
Instead  of  prosecuting  pirates,  for  the  most  part,  the  world 
community has been content to simply release them.12  
  One reason offered to explain this reluctance to prosecute focuses 
on the expense and difficulty of mounting cases of such international 
proportions  and  which  involve  evidence,  suspects,  victims,  and 
witnesses  from  around  the  globe.13  If  live  witness  testimony  is 
                                                                                                                       
Argentina to testify remotely by live satellite video against the defendant in a case 
charging him with robbing the two Argentines while they were on vacation in Miami 
because, among other things, the witnesses lived beyond the subpoena power of the 
court). 
  9.  See Miriam Cohen, The Analogy Between Piracy and Human Trafficking: A 
Theoretical Framework for the Application of Universal Jurisdiction, 16 BUFF. HUM. 
RTS. L. REV. 201, 201 (2010) (noting that the doctrine of universal jurisdiction was 
developed to address piracy that occurred on the high seas). 
  10.  See United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Dec. 10, 1982, 1833 
U.N.T.S. 397 [hereinafter UNCLOS]; Chronological Lists of Ratifications of, Accessions 
and  Successions  to  the  Convention  and  the  Related  Agreements,  UNITED  NATIONS 
DIVISION  FOR  OCEAN  AFF.  &  L.    SEA,  http://www.un.org/Depts/los/reference_files/ 
chronological_lists_of_ratifications.htm (last updated Oct. 4, 2012). The United States is 
not a party to UNCLOS; however, it ratified an earlier version of the treaty with 
identical provisions regarding piracy. See Geneva Convention on the High Seas, Apr. 
29, 1958, 13 U.S.T. 2312, 450 U.N.T.S. 82 (discussing and defining piracy). 
  11.  According to the International Maritime Bureau (IMB), the number of 
reported yearly pirate attacks in 2011 was almost double the number reported in 2007, 
and most attacks now involve the use of weapons. See Int’l Chamber of Commerce 
International Maritime Bureau Rep, Jan. 1–Dec. 13, 2011, Piracy and Armed Robbery 
Against Ships, at 5, 10 (2011) [hereinafter ICC–IMB 2011 Report] (reporting 263 actual 
and attempted attacks in 2007 compared to 445 in 2011). The IMB includes in its 
annual report acts of piracy and acts of armed robbery against ships, as well as 
attempts of the same. The IMB’s definition of piracy includes illegal acts of violence 
against a ship travelling on the high seas or any act of inciting the same. Id. at 3. Its 
definition of armed robbery against ships includes acts of violence—or any act of 
inciting an act of violence—against a ship located “within a State’s internal waters, 
archipelagic waters and territorial sea.” Id. 
  12.  See, e.g., U.N. Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Rep. of the Special 
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues Related to Piracy off the Coast of 
Somalia, ¶ 43, U.N. Doc. S/2011/30 (Jan. 24, 2011) (by Jack Lang) [hereinafter Lang] 
(reporting  that  nine  out  of  ten  pirates  captured  by  the  world’s  navies  are  not 
prosecuted). 
  13.  See James Kraska, Coalition Strategy and the Pirates of the Gulf of Aden 
and the Red Sea, 28 COMP. STRATEGY 197, 207 (2009) (describing the logistical 
 1288   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
required, those expenses can be particularly substantial since the 
state would have to pay the costs of transporting witnesses who 
reside in different parts of the world to the trial. Obtaining live 
testimony is not only difficult from a cost perspective, however. States 
may not be able to compel nonnationals to attend a trial in person. 
States also may not be able to entice witnesses to attend if they are 
ill, working at sea, or concerned for their safety—which can be the 
case  with  crew  members  who  have  survived  an  attack  or  naval 
officers who have assisted in capturing pirates during an attack. 
Indeed,  in  his  January  2011  report,  the  Special  Adviser  to  the 
Secretary-General on Legal Issues Related to Piracy off the Horn of 
Africa,  Mr.  Jack  Lang,  noted  that  the  requirement  of  in-person 
testimony was proving to be an obstacle to swift trials “either because 
the victims do not wish to go to lengths to give evidence, are afraid, or 
their employers may not allow them to testify.”14  
  Allowing the state to produce some witnesses remotely under 
certain  circumstances  can  alleviate  some  of  the  difficulties  of 
obtaining the evidence necessary to successfully prosecute maritime 
pirates while at the same time furthering the interests of justice. This 
Article proposes that courts allow prosecution witnesses to testify by 
two-way, live VCT in maritime cases on a case-by-case basis in the 
interests of justice, upon proof by the requesting party that (1) the 
testimony is necessary to the fair and just resolution of the case, (2) 
the witness is unable or unwilling for good reason to travel to the 
court  to  testify  in  person,  and  (3)  the  transmission  will  use 
appropriate safeguards to protect the defendant’s rights to a fair trial 
and to ensure that the witness understands the obligation to testify 
truthfully. This test balances the interests of the various parties to 
the proceeding and also ensures that the trial can proceed with the 
evidence  needed  to  resolve  criminal  matters  fairly,  justly,  and 
expeditiously. The state would not lose valuable witness testimony; 
would not have to pay great sums for witness travel; and could try 
cases more swiftly, without the need to accommodate witness travel 
schedules. Witnesses would be spared the inconvenience of traveling 
great distances, at a cost to their health, safety, or job security. 
Defendants’ rights to a fair trial are also protected when witnesses 
testify  remotely  using  two-way,  live  VCT:  witnesses  will  have  to 
confront defendants with their testimony; defendants and witnesses 
will be able to view each other; the defendant will be able to subject 
witnesses  to  contemporaneous  cross-examination  during  the  trial; 
and the court and any jury will still be able to see the witness, hear 
                                                                                                                       
difficulties associated with prosecuting pirates because the cases can involve ships, 
cargo, victims, witnesses, and suspects from a host of different countries). 
  14.  Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 61. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1289 
the testimony, and assess witness credibility. Defendants can even 
benefit from a rule that allows some witnesses to testify remotely 
because  trials  can  proceed  and  be  resolved  more  swiftly  without 
requiring defendants to linger in custody awaiting their day in court. 
While it need not become the norm, allowing witnesses to testify 
remotely in maritime piracy trials under some circumstances would 
further  the  interests  of  justice  and  also  prompt  more  states  to 
embrace their duty to prosecute pirates instead of simply releasing 
them.  
  Part II of this Article discusses the technology of two-way, live 
VCT and some of its perceived advantages and disadvantages. Part 
III examines several approaches used to analyze the issue of whether 
to admit two-way, live VCT witness testimony against defendants in 
criminal  cases.  Specifically,  this  Part  examines  the  rules  and 
decisions of various international criminal courts, focusing on their 
reasons for allowing or denying remote prosecution-witness testimony 
in particular circumstances. With that same focus, this Part also 
examines the law in the federal courts of the United States as it 
relates to remote prosecution-witness testimony in criminal trials. 
Part IV follows with a description of the modern piracy problem, the 
international law governing the crime of maritime piracy, and the 
need  to  further  encourage  states  to  use  the  available  laws  to 
prosecute pirates, instead of releasing them and allowing them to 
continue their illegal activities. In Part V, this Article discusses the 
proposed rule for allowing prosecution witnesses to testify remotely in 
maritime  piracy  trials  by  way  of  two-way,  live  VCT  under  some 
circumstances in the interest of justice.  
II.  TWO-WAY, LIVE VIDEOCONFERENCING TECHNOLOGY (VCT) 
  Two-way,  live  VCT  permits  witnesses  to  testify  remotely  in 
courtrooms  around  the  world  from  any  location,  as  long  as  both 
locations  are  equipped  with  the  necessary  technology.  That 
technology  relies  on  point-to-point  data  connections  between 
locations,  which  must  house  a  camera,  a  microphone,  screens  to 
display  visual  images,  and  the  videoconferencing  hardware  (the 
“codec”).15 In order to transmit images and sound, the equipment on 
                                                                                                                       
  15.  See Lederer, supra note 6, at 20 (describing the required equipment for 
standard videoconferencing). Professor Frederic Lederer is Chancellor Professor of Law 
and Director of the Center for Legal and Court Technology at the William and Mary 
Law School. For many years, he has been involved with the law school’s high-
technology courtroom, the McGlothlin Courtroom. Fredric Lederer, WILLIAM & MARY L. 
SCH., http://web.wm.edu/law/faculty/bios/fulltime/lederer-46.php?svr=law (last visited 
Oct. 20, 2012). 1290   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
each  end  must  be  connected  to  an  Integrated  Services  Digital 
Network  (ISDN),  which  relies  on  something  similar  to  high-
bandwidth telephone lines, or an Internet Protocol (IP).16 Two-way, 
live  VCT  transmits  high-quality  video  images  that  are  fully 
synchronized  with  audio  from  one  location  to  the  other 
simultaneously.17  
  Most videoconferencing today is increasingly delivered via the IP 
mode and it can be effectively free as long as the court or other 
location has an internet connection.18 “ISDN-based videoconferencing 
requires specialized communications lines” and will require a per-call 
charge in addition to any monthly subscription cost for the line.19 
While both methods can produce clear images and voice—especially 
when using newly available high-definition technology—the IP-based 
method can potentially encounter some interference if bandwidth is 
being used by others during the witness’s remote testimony. ISDN-
based  methods  will  be  more  reliable  in  this  regard,  but  more 
expensive.20  
  Worth  noting  is  that  the  technology  is  ever-improving  and 
becoming  increasingly  affordable.21  The  ability  to  produce 
videoconferencing images in high definition is one recent innovation 
mentioned  above.  Other  innovations  include  the  ability  to 
concurrently  transmit  digital  documents  on  one  screen  while  the 
video  image  is  being  displayed  on  another.22  Also,  while 
videoconferencing systems have typically used flat-panel televisions 
to  display  content,  some  manufacturers  have  developed  desktop 
monitors with high-definition features.23 More sophisticated systems 
include remote controls to allow “zooming” or “panning” functionality 
and some have screen options that allow the display of multiple views 
of the courtroom or participants.24 Quite recent features of newer 
VCT  systems  use  cameras  that  will  track  courtroom  participants 
wearing a unique “badge” that signals the camera to follow their 
movements.25  
                                                                                                                       
  16.  Lederer, supra note 6, at 20. 
  17.  Id. 
  18.  Id. at 21. 
  19.  Id. 
  20.  See id. (“ISDN tends to give a more dependable connection but is being 
increasingly abandoned in favor of the less expensive IP method of connection.”). 
  21.  See Williams, supra note 7, at 1 (discussing evolving technology in the 
courtroom). 
  22.  See Lederer, supra note 6, at 20 (“High-end videoconferencing equipment 
permits the concurrent transmission of computer images.”). 
  23.  See id. at 21 (describing the various types of monitors used in courtrooms).  
  24.  See Williams, supra note 7, at 3 (noting various aspects of advanced 
videoconferencing systems). 
  25.  See id. (discussing the features and functionality of the “badges”). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1291 
  Experiments with VCT remote witness testimony at William and 
Mary Law School’s high-technology McGlothlin Courtroom, moreover, 
indicate  that  while  the  technology  cannot  exactly  replicate  the 
situation of live, face-to-face witness testimony in the courtroom, it 
can come quite close. In that courtroom, the technology can display a 
witness’s image directly behind the witness stand, a judge’s image 
directly behind the bench, and counsels’ images at counsel tables. 
That technology also permits remote witnesses to see different views 
of the courtroom and speakers.26 Furthermore, the results of some 
controlled experiments and anecdotal evidence indicate that jurors 
tend to perceive remote witnesses very similarly to how they perceive 
witnesses  who  testify  live  in  the  courtroom.27  Indeed,  Professor 
Fredric Lederer suggests that as the technology continues to improve, 
image and voice quality may become so good that one may have 
difficulty observing that a remote witness is not physically present.28  
  Judges also seem to be increasingly comfortable using VCT in a 
variety  of  proceedings  that  previously  would  have  required  all 
participants  to  appear  together  in  the  same  room.  International 
criminal tribunals, especially the International Criminal Tribunal for 
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), have successfully used VCT for remote 
witness testimony.29 Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and 
Singapore  all  permit  remote  VCT  witness  testimony  in  some 
circumstances.30  In  the  United  States,  Federal  Rule  of  Civil 
Procedure 43(a) authorizes using remote witness testimony during 
                                                                                                                       
  26.  See Lederer, Courtroom Technology, supra note 1, at 908 (noting the ability 
of a remote witness to see either a single camera image or multiple images of William 
and Mary Law School’s McGlothlin Courtroom). 
  27.  See id. (“[R]emote appearances appear to be treated by the courtroom 
participants just as if those persons were physically in the courtroom.”). 
  28.  Lederer, supra note 6, at 29. 
  29.  See, e.g., Sanja Kutnjak Ivkovic, Justice by the International Criminal 
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, 37 STAN. J. INT’L L. 255, 286 (2001) (noting that 
the ICTY allowed eleven witnesses in the Prosecutor v. Tadíc case to testify remotely 
from a location in the former Yugoslavia); see also Williams, supra note 7, at 11–13 
(discussing  the  standards  for  using  remote  witness  testimony  in  the  ICTY  and 
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)). 
  30.  See Jeremy Barnett, The United Kingdom, 12 WM. & MARY BILL RTS. J. 
687, 690 (2004) (stating that courts in the United Kingdom use VCT to allow child and 
foreign witnesses to testify in certain kinds of criminal cases); Julian Borkowski, Court 
Technology in Canada, 12 WM. & MARY BILL RTS. J. 681, 682 (2004) (reporting that in 
Canada, courts use VCT in various civil and criminal matters); Ros Macdonald & Anne 
Wallace, Review of the Extent of Courtroom Technology in Australia, 12 WM. & MARY 
BILL RTS. J. 649, 650 (2004) (stating that courts in Australia began using VCT to allow 
vulnerable witnesses to testify in remote locations removed from the courtroom); 
Richard  Magnus,  The  Confluence  of  Law  and  Policy  in  Leveraging  Technology: 
Singapore Judiciary’s Experience, 12 WM. & MARY BILL RTS. J. 661, 663–64 (2004) 
(explaining that VCT is used in many types of court proceedings in Singapore, such as 
bail hearings, pretrial conferences, civil trials, and criminal trials, for specified offenses 
to allow vulnerable witnesses to testify remotely). 1292   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
civil  trials  “in  compelling  circumstances  and  with  appropriate 
safeguards.”31  Federal  appellate  court  judges  have  used  VCT  to 
conduct oral arguments.32  
  Of course, even if many courts are comfortable using VCT and 
conclude that its use is practical and proper in certain instances, it 
does not necessarily follow that remote prosecution-witness testimony 
should become the norm in criminal cases in the United States or 
elsewhere. Criminal cases are a unique category of proceedings that 
can  result  in  a  defendant  losing  his  freedom  if  convicted.  Thus, 
commentators and courts are right to advocate that limitations be 
placed on the ability to use remote prosecution-witness testimony. 
They are also right to advocate that the remote experience be as 
similar as possible to the live experience for both the witness and the 
individuals in the courtroom. With these concerns in mind, Part III 
below  discusses  some  approaches  used  by  various  international 
criminal courts and by federal courts in the United States to analyze 
the question of when to admit two-way, live VCT witness testimony 
against defendants in criminal cases.  
III.  SOME APPROACHES USED TO ANALYZE WHEN TO ALLOW 
PROSECUTION WITNESSES TO TESTIFY BY TWO-WAY, LIVE VCT IN 
CRIMINAL TRIALS 
A. Remote VCT Prosecution Testimony in  
International Criminal Courts 
  The  international  criminal  courts  generally  seem  to  look 
favorably  on  the  use  of  two-way,  live  VCT  prosecution  witness 
testimony, at least under some circumstances in which witnesses 
with  necessary  or  useful  evidence  would  otherwise  be  unable  or 
unwilling to testify in person. For example, the ICTY, the Special 
Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL), and the International Criminal Court 
(ICC)  all  have  procedural  rules  permitting  witnesses  to  testify 
remotely in certain situations.33 Although the International Criminal 
Tribunal  for  Rwanda  (ICTR)  has  no  specific  procedural  rule 
                                                                                                                       
  31.  FED. R. CIV. P. 43(a). 
  32.  See Advantages of Videoconferencing Grow with Use, U.S. CTS. (Aug. 2006) 
http://www.uscourts.gov/news/TheThirdBranch/06-08-01/Advantages_of_ 
Videoconferencing_Grow_with_Use.aspx (describing a recent Federal Judicial Center 
report surveying appellate court judges and their use of videoconferencing). 
  33.  See supra note 7 and accompanying text. Rule 81 bis was adopted to replace 
Rule 71 bis on July 12, 2007, to allow for greater use of testimony by VCT. See Rules of 
Procedure and Evidence of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, 
UN  ICTY,  http://www.icty.org/sections/LegalLibrary/RulesofProcedureandEvidence  (last 
visited Oct. 20, 2012). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1293 
addressing VCT witness testimony, the tribunal has granted some 
requests to allow witnesses to testify remotely when “‘necessary to 
safeguard the witness’s security’ or in the interest of justice.”34  
1.  The  International  Criminal  Tribunal  for  the  Former 
Yugoslavia35 
  The ICTY allows remote testimony pursuant to Rule 81 bis of its 
Rules of Procedure and Evidence if such testimony is consistent with 
the interests of justice.36 Although Rule 81 bis itself does not define 
the interests of justice, a review of the Tribunal’s decisions provides 
guidance on what is required to satisfy that standard. Specifically, 
the ICTY will only allow VCT witness testimony when the moving 
party shows that (1) “the witness is unable, or has good reasons to be 
unwilling,” to come to the court; (2) the testimony is “sufficiently 
important  to  make  it  unfair  to  the  requesting  party  to  proceed 
without it”; and (3) the accused will “not be prejudiced in the exercise 
of his or her right to confront the witness.”37 Thus, the ICTY interests 
of justice test balances the witness’s needs with those of the parties to 
the trial process: it ensures the parties can present the evidence 
                                                                                                                       
  34.  Prosecutor  v.  Nizeyimana,  Case  No.  ICTR-00-55C-T,  Decision  on 
Prosecutor’s Extremely Urgent Motion for Testimony via Video-Link, ¶ 5 (Feb. 14, 
2011). 
  35.  In 1993, the United Nations established the International Tribunal for the 
Prosecution  of  Persons  Responsible  for  Serious  Violations  of  International 
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia Since 1991 to 
preside over trials against those who had committed atrocities and crimes against 
humanity during the armed conflict in the Balkans. See generally PAUL R. WILLIAMS & 
MICHAEL P. SCHARF, PEACE WITH JUSTICE?: WAR CRIMES AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN THE 
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA 98–101 (2002) (“[I]n February 1993, the War Crimes Commission 
joined a growing international chorus publicly calling for the creation of a Nuremberg-
like tribunal to try persons believed to be responsible for atrocities in the former 
Yugoslavia.”). 
  36.  ICTY RPE, supra note 7. 
  37.  See,  e.g.,  Prosecutor  v.  Karadžić,  Case  No.  IT-95-5/18-T,  Decision  on 
Prosecution’s Motion for Testimony To Be Heard via Video-Conference Link, ¶¶ 5–6 
(Int’l Crim. Trib. for the Former Yugoslavia June 17, 2010); Prosecutor v. Stanišić, 
Case No. IT-03-69-T, Decision on Prosecution Motions To Hear Witnesses by Video-
Conference Link, ¶ 8 (Int’l Crim. Trib. for the Former Yugoslavia Feb. 24, 2010); 
Prosecutor  v.  Gotovina,  Case  No.  IT-06-90-T,  Reasons  for  Decision  Granting 
Prosecution’s Motion To Cross-Examine Four Proposed Rule 92 bis Witnesses and 
Reasons for Decision To Hear the Evidence of Those Witnesses via Video-Conference 
Link, ¶ 7 (Int’l Crim. Trib. for the Former Yugoslavia Nov. 3, 2009); see also Prosecutor 
v. Tadíc, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Decision on the Defence Motions To Summon and Protect 
Defence Witnesses, and on the Giving of Evidence by Video-Link, ¶ 19 (Int’l Crim. Trib. 
for the Former Yugoslavia June 25, 1996) (describing the standard for VCT witness 
testimony that preceded the adoption of a formal rule: namely, that the witness’s 
testimony is so important that it would be unfair to proceed without it and that the 
witness is unable or unwilling to come to the Tribunal to testify). 1294   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
required to show the guilt or innocence of the defendant, while at the 
same  time  protecting  the  defendant’s  interest  in  being  able  to 
examine the witnesses against him.  
  As to the first criterion, the ICTY has concluded that concerns 
related to the witness’s health and safety may satisfy the requirement 
that the witness be unable or unwilling for good reason to testify in 
person. For example, in Prosecutor v. Stanišić, the Tribunal decided 
the  prosecutor  had  sufficiently  established  that  one  witness  was 
unable to travel to the Hague based on a doctor’s report showing the 
poor state of the witness’s health.38 It further concluded that two 
other prosecution witnesses had “good reasons to be unwilling to 
travel” due to their advanced age since both were over seventy-five 
years old.39 In Prosecutor v. Tadíc, the Tribunal found that defense 
counsel had met its burden of demonstrating that certain witnesses 
were sufficiently unwilling to attend the trial in the Hague because 
they feared arrest by the prosecution.40 In Prosecutor v. Gotovina, 
there  was  no  specific  information  showing  that  several witnesses 
were unable or unwilling to travel to the Hague.41 Nevertheless, the 
Tribunal concluded that ordering the witnesses to be cross-examined 
by video link, rather than in person, was consistent with the interests 
of justice because the witnesses’ combined testimonies would take no 
more than one court day and because of the need to expeditiously 
conclude the trial.42  
  Regarding the third criterion of the ICTY’s interests-of-justice 
test, ICTY decisions emphasize the similarities between remote and 
live testimony and generally decline to find that remote testimony 
would violate the defendant’s rights to confront and cross-examine 
witnesses.43 In fact, in Gotovina, the Tribunal explained as follows: 
                                                                                                                       
  38.  Stanišić, Case No. IT-03-69-T, Decision on Prosecution Motions To Hear 
Witnesses by Video-Conference Link, ¶¶ 12–14. 
  39.  Id. 
  40.  Tadíc, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Decision on the Defence Motions To Summon 
and Protect Defence Witnesses, and on the Giving of Evidence by Video-Link, ¶ 19.  
  41.  Gotovina,  Case  No.  IT-06-90-T,  Reasons  for  Decision  Granting 
Prosecution’s Motion To Cross-Examine Four Proposed Rule 92 bis Witnesses and 
Reasons for Decision To Hear the Evidence of Those Witnesses via Video-Conference 
Link, ¶ 12. 
  42.  Id. The Tribunal noted that although three criteria guide the decision on 
whether to permit remote witness testimony, the ultimate determination is whether 
permitting VCT testimony “would be consistent with the interests of justice.” Id. ¶ 7. 
  43.  According to Article 21(4)(e) of the ICTY Statute, a defendant has the right 
“to examine, or have examined, the witnesses against him and to obtain the attendance 
and examination of witnesses on his behalf under the same conditions as witnesses 
against him.” Int’l Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious 
Violations of Int’l Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former 
Yugoslavia Since 1991, Updated Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the 
Former  Yugoslavia  (Sept.  2009),  http://www.icty.org/x/file/Legal%20Library/Statute/ 
statute_sept09_en.pdf. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1295 
  According to the jurisprudence of the Tribunal, video conferencing 
is an extension of the Trial Chamber to the location of the witness that 
neither denies the accused his or her right to confront the witness, nor 
causes him or her material prejudice by the physical absence of the 
witness. Video conferencing therefore respects the right of the accused 
to cross-examine and directly confront witnesses while observing their 
reactions,  and  allows  the  Chamber  to  assess  the  credibility  and 
reliability of the testimony in the same manner as for a witness in the 
courtroom. Testimony by video-conference link should be given as much 
probative value as testimony presented in the courtroom.44 
  Even when the ICTY determines that allowing remote witness 
testimony is in the interests of justice, however, the Tribunal has 
emphasized  the  need  for  safeguards  to  ensure  that  the  remote 
testimony is as similar as possible to live, in-person testimony. In its 
Tadíc decision, for example, the Tribunal suggested implementing the 
following guidelines for the orderly conduct of video-link testimony. 
First, the testimony should be given in an appropriate venue, such as 
a courtroom or embassy, where the witness would be encouraged to 
give truthful and open testimony and where “the safety and solemnity 
of the proceedings” can be guaranteed.45 In addition, a “Presiding 
Officer” should be present to oversee the proceedings, administer an 
oath so that witnesses understand their obligation to speak truthfully 
or face prosecution for perjury, and ensure that testimony is given 
freely  and  voluntarily.46  Finally,  the  technology  must  incorporate 
monitors that allow witnesses to view “the Judges, the accused, and 
the questioner,” and vice versa.47 
                                                                                                                       
  44.  Gotovina,  Case  No.  IT-06-90-T,  Reasons  for  Decision  Granting 
Prosecution’s Motion To Cross-Examine Four Proposed Rule 92 bis Witnesses and 
Reasons for Decision To Hear the Evidence of Those Witnesses via Video-Conference 
Link, ¶ 8; see also, e.g., Prosecutor v. Karadžić, Case No. IT-95-5/18-T, Decision on 
Prosecution’s Motion for Testimony To Be Heard via Video-Conference Link, ¶ 9 (Int’l 
Crim. Trib. for the Former Yugoslavia June 17, 2010) (agreeing that the use of 
videoconference link would not violate the accused’s right to confront the witness); 
Prosecutor v. Milutinović, IT-05-87, Decision on Prosecution Motion for Testimony of 
K58 To Be Heard via Video Link Conference, ¶ 2 (Int’l Crim. Trib. for the Former 
Yugoslavia Nov. 1, 2006) (granting a motion for video-link testimony with the same 
reasoning as the Gotovina court). It bears noting that in its first case considering the 
possibility of remote witness testimony in 1996, the Tribunal initially suggested that 
the “evidentiary value of testimony provided by video-link, although weightier than 
that of testimony given by deposition, is not as weighty as testimony given in the 
courtroom.” Tadíc, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Decision on the Defence Motions To Summon 
and Protect Defence Witnesses, and on the Giving of Evidence by Video-Link, ¶ 21. 
  45.  Tadíc, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Decision on the Defence Motions To Summon 
and Protect Defence Witnesses, and on the Giving of Evidence by Video-Link, ¶ 22. 
  46.  Id. 
  47.  Id. 1296   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
2.  The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda48 
  The ICTR also allows witnesses to testify remotely under some 
circumstances  that  similarly  balance  the  interests  of  the  various 
parties to the proceeding. Although Rule 90(A) of the ICTR’s Rules of 
Procedure  and  Evidence49  states  that  witnesses  should  testify  in 
person at the court, the ICTR permits remote VCT witness testimony 
when  “‘necessary  to  safeguard  the  witness’s  security’  or  in  the 
interest of justice.”50 In determining whether VCT witness testimony 
is in the interests of justice, the ICTR considers: (1) “the importance 
of  [the  witness’s]  testimony,”  (2)  “the  witness’s  inability  or 
unwillingness to attend,” and (3) “whether a good reason has been 
adduced  for  that  inability  or  unwillingness.”51  The  party  seeking 
provision  for  remote  witness  testimony  bears  the  burden  of 
demonstrating “that the witness has a credible basis for refusal, and 
that those grounds are genuinely held, giving a Chamber reason to 
believe that he or she will not testify unless a Chamber allows the 
witness  to  do  so  via  video-link.”52  When  ruling  on  a  request  for 
testimony by VCT, the ICTR will also consider the rights of the 
parties to the proceeding “by ensuring in particular that the witness’s 
appearance on a video screen instead of his/her physical presence in 
the courtroom does not reduce the parties’ ability to evaluate his/her 
testimony and to cross-examine him/her.”53  
  On the question of what constitutes a valid reason for a witness 
to be deemed genuinely unable or unwilling to testify in person, it 
                                                                                                                       
  48.  The United Nations established the ICTR in 1994 to preside over crimes 
committed during the civil war in Rwanda. See generally VIRGINIA MORRIS & MICHAEL 
P. SCHARF, THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (1998) (providing an 
in-depth account of the creation of the Tribunal and its governing rules and statute). 
  49.  Rule 90(A) of the ICTR Rules of Procedure and Evidence states that 
“[w]itnesses shall, in principle, be heard directly by Chambers.” Rules of Procedure and 
Evidence of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Rule 90(A), U.N. Doc. 
ITR/3/REV.1 (June 29, 1995). 
  50.  Prosecutor  v.  Nizeyimana,  Case  No.  ICTR-00-55C-T,  Decision  on 
Prosecutor’s Extremely Urgent Motion for Testimony via Video-Link, ¶ 5 (Feb. 14, 
2011)  (quoting  Prosecutor  v.  Bagosora,  Case  No.  ICTR-98-41-T,  Decision  on  the 
Prosecution Request for Testimony of Witness BT via Video-Link (TC), ¶ 8 (Oct. 8, 
2004)). 
  51.  Id. ¶ 6. 
  52.  Id. 
  53.  Prosecution  v.  Muvunyi,  Case  No.  ICTR-2000-55A-PT,  Decision  on 
Prosecution’s Motion To Have Prosecution Witness NN Testify by Video-Link, ¶ 2 (Dec. 
30, 2008). Like the ICTY Statute, the Statute for the ICTR provides that an accused 
has the right “[t]o examine, or have examined, the witnesses against him or her and to 
obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his or her behalf under the 
same  conditions  as  witnesses  against  him  or  her.”  Statute  of  the  International 
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda art. 20(4)(e), Nov. 8, 1994, 33 I.L.M. 1598, available at 
http://www.unictr.org/Portals/0/English/Legal/Statute/2010.pdf. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1297 
appears that health, safety, and work-related travel concerns can all 
be  sufficient  in  some  instances.  In  Prosecutor  v.  Rukundo,  the 
Tribunal allowed a witness to testify remotely for the prosecution 
because medical documentation demonstrated that he was too ill to 
travel from Rwanda to Arusha.54 It also permitted another witness in 
the  case  to  testify  by  video  when  affidavit  evidence  showed  the 
witness had been victimized in Rwanda after previously testifying 
before the Tribunal and feared similar reprisals should he be seen 
leaving Rwanda to testify again.55 Indeed, in that case, the ICTR also 
rejected  the  defense’s  request  to  require  the  parties  to  travel  to 
Rwanda to hear the witnesses testify in person, stating: 
The Chamber is not convinced that such a course of action is necessary 
in order to safeguard the right of the Accused to confront witnesses 
against  him,  or  for  the  preparation  of  cross-examination.  In  the 
Chamber’s  view  the  right  of  the  Accused  to  a  fair  trial  will  be 
adequately  preserved  by  allowing  each  of  the  Parties  to  send  a 
representative to the venue of the video-link proceedings to look after 
their respective interests. However, all the examinations of the witness 
will be conducted from the courtroom in Arusha.56 
  Regarding  work-related  travel  concerns,  in  Prosecutor  v. 
Nchamihigo, the ICTR concluded that the prosecution had met its 
burden of showing a witness was unable or unwilling to testify in 
person  when  the  evidence  showed  the  witness  was  under  travel 
restrictions imposed by his employer.57 The Tribunal explained that 
the prosecution had attempted to negotiate the witness’s release from 
his employer, but that the employer had continued to refuse.58 In 
such  circumstances,  allowing  the  witness  to  testify  remotely 
furthered the “interest of justice” standard.59 Conversely, the ICTR 
decided there was no credible basis for a witness’s refusal to testify 
when the witness claimed in only vague terms and only one week 
before he was scheduled to testify that he feared he would lose his job 
or face harassment at work if he were required to appear in person at 
the Tribunal.60  
                                                                                                                       
  54.  Prosecutor  v.  Rukundo,  Case  No.  ICTR-2001-70-PT,  Decision  on  the 
Prosecutor’s Urgent Motion for Witnesses BPA and BLR To Give Testimony via Video-
Link, ¶ 13 (Mar. 1, 2007). 
  55.  Id. ¶¶ 5, 14. 
  56.  Id. ¶ 15. 
  57.  Prosecutor  v.  Nchamihigo,  Case  No.  ICTR-2001-63-T,  Decision  on  the 
Prosecution Motion To Hear the Testimony of Witness LM by Video-Link, ¶¶ 5–6 (Jan. 
25, 2007). 
  58.  Id. ¶ 6. 
  59.  Id. ¶ 7. 
  60.  See  Prosecutor  v.  Nizeyimana,  Case  No.  ICTR-00-55C-T,  Decision  on 
Prosecutor’s Extremely Urgent Motion for Testimony via Video-Link, ¶¶ 1, 8 (Feb. 14, 
2011) (emphasizing that the defendant’s fear of losing employment is not a credible 
basis for a refusal to testify). 1298   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
  In  sum,  the  ICTR  has  concluded  in  various  situations  that 
allowing  some  witnesses  to  testify  remotely  would  further  the 
interests of justice and also properly balance the interests of the 
various parties to the proceeding, while still ensuring a fair trial. 
However, the ICTR has also emphasized that “[h]earing testimony via 
video-link is an exceptional measure, granted only upon sound and 
legitimate justification based on proper documentation.”61 Moreover, 
a review of the Tribunal’s jurisprudence indicates that not all judges 
are convinced that testimony by VCT truly and fully replicates the 
experience of live, in-person witness testimony. In a 2006 decision, 
one chamber of the ICTR expressed concerns about the Tribunal’s 
ability to assess the demeanor of a particularly important prosecution 
witness  should  that  witness  testify  remotely.62  In  considering  a 
prosecution motion urging a reconsideration of the chamber’s decision 
denying the request to allow that witness to testify by VCT, the 
chamber  explained  that  although  it  agreed  the  prosecution  had 
shown that the witness had reasons to fear for his safety should he 
testify in person, it was also satisfied that the ICTR could provide 
heightened security measures sufficient to ensure the witness’s safety 
in Arusha.63 In a subsequent case, Prosecutor v. Nizeyimana, the 
ICTR  again  emphasized  the  ability  of  the  court  in  Arusha  to 
safeguard witnesses to allow for testimony in person.64 The Tribunal 
noted that it was willing to accommodate witnesses who fear for their 
safety, but that those witnesses would only be able to testify remotely 
upon affidavit evidence clearly stating the precise nature of their 
fears and when it found there were no other appropriate methods to 
ensure the witness’s safety in Arusha.65 
                                                                                                                       
  61.  Prosecutor v. Ndahimana, Case No. ICTR-2001-68-T, Decision on Defence 
Motion To Hear the Testimony of Witnesses BX7 and FB1 via Video Link, ¶ 16 (Feb. 
25, 2011).  
  62.  Prosecutor v. Zigranyirazo, Case No. ICTR-2001-73-T, Decision on the 
Prosecution Joint Motion for Re-Opening Its Case and for Reconsideration of the 31 
January 2006 Decision on the Hearing of Witness Michel Bagaragaza via Video-Link, 
¶ 22 (Nov. 16, 2006). 
  63.  Id. ¶ 24.  
  64.  See  Nizeyimana,  Case  No.  ICTR-00-55C-T,  Decision  on  Prosecutor’s 
Extremely Urgent Motion for Testimony via Video-Link, ¶ 5 (stating that, while 
witnesses should generally appear in person, testimony in lieu of physical appearance 
may be used “when necessary to safeguard the witness’s security” (quoting Prosecutor 
v.  Bagosora,  Case  No.  ICTR-98-41-T,  Decision  on  the  Prosecution  Request  for 
Testimony of Witness BT via Video-Link (TC), ¶ 8 (Oct. 8, 2004)). 
  65.  See id. (stating that the burden of proof rests with the party making the 
request to show the grounds of the witness’s fear and that the witness would not testify 
other than by video-link). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1299 
3.  The Special Court for Sierra Leone66 
  According to Rule 85(D) of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence 
of the SCSL, “[e]vidence may be given directly in court, or via such 
communications media, including video, closed-circuit television, as 
the  Trial  Chamber  may  order.”67  Decisions  of  the  SCSL  provide 
guidance on when remote video testimony is proper under Rule 85(D). 
Similar to the ICTY and ICTR, the SCSL allows remote testimony by 
VCT only when it would further the interests of justice and after 
considering the particular circumstances making the witness unable 
to travel to the court.68 Indeed, in Prosecutor v. Taylor, the court 
rejected  the  prosecution’s  request  for  a  rule  allowing  parties  to 
present witness testimony by VCT as a general matter unless the 
party opposing the request showed good cause as to why denying the 
remote  method  of  testimony  existed  for  a  particular  witness.69 
Rather,  the  court  noted  that  although  Rule  85(D)  imposes  no 
conditions on the use of video testimony, it and other rules of the 
court demonstrate a general preference for witnesses to give evidence 
directly in the presence of the court.70 Even though the rules also do 
not require “a face to face” confrontation between the accused and 
every individual, the court emphasized that it must make decisions 
about the conduct of the trial that further the “interests of justice,” 
                                                                                                                       
  66.  The SCSL was established by agreement between the United Nations and 
the Government for Sierra Leone in August 2000. The SCSL has the power to 
prosecute persons who are most responsible for serious violations of international 
humanitarian and Sierra Leone law committed in Sierra Leone since 1996. Statute of 
the Special Court for Sierra Leone art. 1, Aug. 14, 2000, 2178 U.N.T.S. 138 [hereinafter 
SCSL  Statute],  available  at  http://www.sc-sl.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=uClnd1M 
JeEw%3d&tabid=176. 
  67.  SPECIAL CT. FOR SIERRA LEONE R. P. & EVID., available at http://www.sc-
sl.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=yNjqn5TIYKs%3d&tabid=176. 
  68.  See, e.g., Prosecutor v. Taylor, Case No. SCSL-03-1-T, Decision on Public 
Prosecution Motion To Allow Witness TF1-303 To Give Testimony by Video-Link (Nov. 
18, 2008) (granting prosecution’s unopposed motion to permit remote testimony where 
witness recently gave birth);  Prosecutor v. Taylor, Case No. SCSL-03-01-PT-217, 
Decision on Prosecution Motion To Allow Witnesses To Give Testimony by Video-Link), 
¶¶ 25–27  (Mar.  30,  2007),  http://www.sc-sl.org/Documents/SCSL-03-01-PT-217.pdf 
(denying prosecution motion for a general order allowing parties to present testimony 
remotely unless the opposing party shows good cause to deny this method of receiving 
testimony by particular witnesses). 
  69.  Taylor, Case No. SCSL-03-01-PT-217, Decision on Prosecution Motion To 
Allow Witnesses To Give Testimony by Video-Link, ¶¶ 25–27. 
  70.  Id. ¶¶ 22–24. The SCSL does not grant the accused a right to confront or be 
confronted by the witnesses against him. However, pursuant to Article 17 § (4)(e) of the 
Statute of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, among the rights guaranteed to an 
accused is the right “[t]o examine, or have examined, the witnesses against him or her 
and to obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his or her behalf under 
the same conditions as witnesses against him or her.” SCSL Statute, supra note 66. 1300   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
and  not  for  “no  reason  at  all.”71  The  court  concluded  that  any 
decisions to exercise its discretion to permit remote VCT witness 
testimony would take into account the interests of justice, would be 
considered on a case-by-case basis, and would address the particular 
circumstances making the witness unable to come to the court.72 
  Like the ICTY, the SCSL has also required that some safeguards 
be  implemented  so  that  remote  witness  testimony  resembles  in-
person  courtroom  testimony  as  much  as  possible.  The  court  has 
required witnesses to testify from a courtroom where the “safety and 
solemnity  of  the  proceedings”  can  be  guaranteed.73  It  has  also 
required  the  presence  of  a  “Courtroom  Officer”  to  oversee  the 
proceedings, to inform witnesses of their duty to testify truthfully or 
be  subject  to  a  prosecution  for  perjury,  and  to  “ensure  that  the 
testimony is given freely and voluntarily.”74 In addition, the court has 
permitted the parties to have a representative in the remote location 
to  monitor  the  proceedings.75  Finally,  as  to  the  adequacy  of  the 
technology, the SCSL requires that witnesses be able to view “the 
Judges, the Accused and the questioner” from a monitor.76  
4.  The International Criminal Court77 
  Under Rule 67 of the ICC’s Rules of Procedure and Evidence, the 
ICC  may  permit  a  witness  to  testify  remotely  by  audio  or  video 
provided that (1) the technology permits the witness to be examined 
by all parties at the time of the witness’s testimony and (2) the trial 
chamber ensures the “venue chosen for the conduct of the audio or 
video-link testimony is conducive to the giving of truthful and open 
testimony and to the safety, physical and psychological well-being, 
                                                                                                                       
  71.  Taylor, Case No. SCSL-03-01-PT-217, Decision on Prosecution Motion To 
Allow Witnesses To Give Testimony by Video-Link, ¶¶ 25–26. 
  72.  Id. ¶ 26. 
  73.  Taylor, Case No. SCSL-03-1-T, Decision on Public Prosecution Motion To 
Allow Witness TF1-303 To Give Testimony by Video-Link, 3. 
  74.  Id. 
  75.  Id. 
  76.  Id. 
  77.  The ICC came into existence in July 2002 after the required sixty states 
had ratified the Rome Statute creating the court. The ICC is the first permanent, 
treaty-based international criminal court. States that have ratified the treaty creating 
the ICC agree that investigations may be commenced against the state’s own nationals 
for the covered crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, or war crimes, as long as 
those crimes were committed after the court came into existence or after the state 
ratified the treaty, whichever is later. Rome Statute of the International Criminal 
Court art. 11, July 17, 1998, 2187 U.N.T.S. 3, 91 [hereinafter Rome Statute]. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1301 
dignity  and  privacy  of  the  witness.”78  The  limited  case  law 
interpreting  and  applying  Rule  67  in  the  ICC’s  relatively  brief 
existence suggests that the court views it as broadly authorizing 
remote witness testimony. While recognizing the presumption that 
witnesses will ordinarily testify live,79 the court has stated that it will 
authorize the use of audio or video-link testimony when necessary, so 
long as the venue for the testimony would be conducive to “‘the giving 
of  truthful  and  open  testimony  and  to  the  safety,  physical  and 
psychological well-being, dignity and privacy of the witness.’”80 It has 
also  emphasized  that  it  is  not  required  to  limit  applications  for 
remote video testimony to only those situations in which witnesses 
were unwilling or unable to attend court proceedings for medical or 
other reasons.81 Rather, “subject to the fundamental dictates of a fair 
trial,” the ICC may consider a wide variety of factors in determining 
whether under the circumstances of the particular case a witness 
should be permitted to testify remotely using VCT.82  
                                                                                                                       
  78.  INT’L  CRIM.  CT.  R.  P.  &  EVID.,  available  at  http://www.icc-cpi.int/NR/ 
rdonlyres/F1E0AC1C-A3F3-4A3C-B9A7-B3E8B115E886/140164/Rules_of_procedure_ 
and_Evidence_English.pdf. 
  79.  See  Rome  Statute,  supra  note  77,  art.  69(2)  (providing  that  witness 
testimony shall be given in person unless provided by Article 68 or other rules). 
Whether the ICC can actually require witnesses to travel to the Hague to testify in 
person, however, is another matter. Article 64(6)(b) of the Rome Statute empowers the 
court to “[r]equire the attendance and testimony of witnesses,” but Article 93(1)(e) 
imposes upon States Party only the duty to facilitate the voluntary appearance of 
individuals to appear as witnesses. See Claus Kress, The Procedural Law of the 
International Criminal Court in Outline: Anatomy of a Unique Compromise, 1 J. INT’L 
CRIM. JUST. 603, 616 (2003) (noting the apparent inconsistency between the two 
articles). 
  80.  Prosecutor  v.  Lubanga  Dyilo,  Case  No.  ICC-01/04-01/06,  Decision  on 
Various Issues Related to Witnesses’ Testimony During Trial, ¶ 41 (Jan. 29, 2008) 
(citing INT’L CRIM. CT. R. P. & EVID. 67(3)). The court further explained that it would 
make decisions about allowing such remote testimony “on a case-by-case basis, taking 
into account the views and concerns of the witness, the parties and, where relevant, the 
participants.” Id. 
  81.  See Prosecutor v. Lubanga Dyilo, Case No. ICC-01/04/01-06, Redacted 
Decision on the Defence Request for a Witness To Give Evidence via Video-Link, 
¶¶ 3, 15–16 (Feb. 9, 2010) (granting defense’s request to permit adult witness to testify 
remotely where witness lived in conditions of extreme poverty, had never used many 
modern conveniences, had no passport, and would have been extremely vulnerable and 
uncomfortable if she had to leave the general area where she currently resided); see 
also Prosecutor v. Bemba Gombo, Case No. ICC-01/05-01/08-947, Redacted Decision on 
the “Request for the Conduct of the Testimony of Witness CAR-OTP-WWWW-0108 by 
Video-Link,” ¶¶ 5–15 (Oct. 12, 2010) (rejecting defense’s suggestion that remote VCT 
adult witness testimony should only be allowed in cases where medical reasons 
physically prevent witnesses from traveling or where testifying live would affect 
psychological well-being of witness). 
  82.  Lubanga, Case No. ICC-01/04/01-06, Redacted Decision on the Defence 
Request for a Witness To Give Evidence via Video-Link, ¶ 15. 1302   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
  In fact, in Prosecutor v. Bemba Gombo, the ICC explained that 
Rule 67 permits remote VCT witness testimony “whenever necessary, 
provided that the Statute and the Rules are respected and that such 
measures are not prejudicial to, or inconsistent with, the rights of the 
accused.”83 The court noted that the rights granted to the accused 
according to Article 67(1)(e) of the Rome Statute are to “examine or 
have examined the witnesses against him or her.”84 Because VCT 
technology permits the witness to be examined by the defense at the 
time the witness is testifying remotely in court,85 the court stated 
that the rights granted to an accused are therefore not compromised 
by remote testimony.86  
                                                                                                                       
  83.  Bemba, Case No. ICC-01/05-01/08-947, Redacted Decision on the “Request 
for the Conduct of the Testimony of Witness CAR-OTP-WWWW-0108 by Video-Link,” 
¶ 10. 
  84.  Id. ¶ 11 (internal quotation marks omitted). Although an earlier draft of 
the Rome Statute guaranteed an accused the right to “confront and cross-examine” 
witnesses, the final draft adopted the text of Article 14(3)(e) of the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, pursuant to Article 67(1)(e), guarantees an 
accused the right “[t]o examine, or have examined, the witnesses against him or her.” 
William A. Schabas, Rights of the Accused, in COMMENTARY ON THE ROME STATUTE OF 
THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT: OBSERVERS’ NOTES, ARTICLE BY ARTICLE 845, 
859 (Otto Tiffterrer ed., 1999). Therefore, the rights granted to an accused under the 
Rome Statute as concerns examining witnesses are identical to those provided to an 
accused in the statutes creating the ICTY, ICTR, and SCSL. Compare Rome Statute, 
supra note 77, art. 67(1)(e), with supra notes 43, 53, 70 (discussing the similar 
provisions of the ICTY, ICTR, and SCSL). 
  85.  Reports indicate that the ICC technology allowing for remote VCT witness 
testimony  functioned  well  during  trials.  See  Duane  W.  Krohnke,  International 
Criminal  Court:  Recent  Developments  in  Other  ICC  Investigations  and  Cases, 
DWKCOMMENTARIES, (Nov. 11, 2011, 4:53 AM) http://dwkcommentaries.wordpress.com/ 
2011/11/18/international-criminal-court-recent-developments-in-other-icc-
investigations-and-cases/ (reporting by ICC Deputy Prosecutor on developments in the 
ICC and noting that some witnesses in the situation for the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC) testified by way of video-link from the DRC without any technical 
problems). 
  86.  See  Bemba,  Case  No.  ICC-01/05-01/08-947,  Redacted  Decision  on  the 
“Request for the Conduct of the Testimony of Witness CAR-OTP-WWWW-0108 by 
Video-Link,” ¶¶ 1–2, 12 (granting request to permit prosecution witness to testify 
remotely by VCT because of witness’s personal circumstances, which appear from the 
redacted decision to have required his presence at important work); see also Prosecutor 
v.  Bemba  Gombo,  ICC-01/05-01/08-2101-Red2,  Public  Redacted  Decision  on  the 
“Prosecution Request To Hear Witness CAR-OTP-PPPP-0036’s Testimony via Video-
Link,” ¶¶ 9–10 (Feb. 3, 2012) (permitting prosecution witness to testify remotely by 
VCT given witness’s health status and because the defense’s ability to appropriately 
question the witness would “mitigate any prejudice to the accused’s rights as enshrined 
in Article 67(1)(e) of the Statute”). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1303 
B. Remote VCT Prosecution Testimony in Federal Courts 
in the United States 
  This subpart focuses on federal court decisions, rather than state 
court decisions, because in the United States, maritime piracy is a 
crime under federal law.87 Accordingly, it is the federal courts in the 
United States that are most likely to face the question of whether to 
allow adult prosecution witnesses to testify by two-way, live VCT in 
the types of cases with which this Article is concerned.  
  Like the international criminal courts, some federal courts in the 
United States have permitted adult prosecution witnesses to testify 
remotely  in  criminal  cases.  A  review  of  the  case  law,  however, 
indicates some wariness in allowing prosecution witnesses to testify 
remotely.  Moreover,  that  review  shows  that  the  various  federal 
courts—and  even  individual  judges  within  those  courts—do  not 
necessarily agree on the circumstances under which that testimony is 
proper.  
  One reason for this lack of an apparent consensus is the fact that 
the Supreme Court has not actually taken a case requiring it to 
decide  whether  and  under  what  circumstances  adult  prosecution 
witnesses are constitutionally permitted to testify by two-way, live 
VCT in criminal cases. As a result, lower courts are left to interpret 
other relevant existing Supreme Court precedent to determine the 
precise nature of a defendant’s rights under the Confrontation Clause 
of the Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which grants the 
accused the right to “be confronted with the witnesses against him.”88 
Some federal courts view the Confrontation Clause as essentially 
guaranteeing the defendant a general right to contemporaneously 
cross-examine adverse witnesses.89 Under this view, a defendant’s 
Confrontation Clause rights do not differ substantially from the fair-
trial rights guaranteed to defendants under the rules of the various 
international criminal courts and the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights, which grant the accused a right “to examine or 
have examined” the witnesses against him.90 However, some courts in 
                                                                                                                       
  87.  See 18 U.S.C. § 1651 (2006) (stating that piracy as defined by the law of 
nations is a federal crime). 
  88.  U.S. CONST. amend. VI. 
  89.  See, e.g., Marc Chase McAllister, Two-Way Video Trial Testimony and the 
Confrontation Clause: Fashioning a Better Craig Test in Light of Crawford, 34 FLA. ST. 
U.  L.  REV.  836,  841–42  (2007)  (describing  the  underlying  protections  of  the 
Confrontation Clause according to Supreme Court precedents as encompassing a right 
to cross-examine adverse witnesses and a right to a face-to-face confrontation). 
  90.  See  sources  cited  supra  note  84.  The  European  Convention  for  the 
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) similarly grants an 
accused the right “to examine or have examined the witnesses against him.” European 
 1304   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
the United States view a defendant’s Confrontation Clause rights as 
including a more specific right to examine witnesses face-to-face in 
the defendant’s physical presence.91 Whether a court in the United 
States is more or less inclined to permit remote prosecution-witness 
testimony  in  criminal  cases  depends  in  part  on  the  level  of 
significance  it  attaches  to  the  face-to-face  component  of  the 
defendant’s Confrontation Clause rights.92 
  This subpart discusses the two Supreme Court cases that have 
so far guided lower federal court decisions on whether to permit adult 
prosecution witnesses to testify remotely in criminal cases. It then 
discusses the two different tests that the federal appellate courts 
have used to determine whether to admit this testimony in light of 
the  Supreme  Court’s  guidance.  The  subpart  concludes  by  briefly 
noting  some  more  recent  developments  in  the  Supreme  Court’s 
jurisprudence as relates to the Confrontation Clause and the question 
of when adult witnesses might be able to testify remotely by two-way, 
live video in criminal cases.  
1.  U.S. Supreme Court Cases Guiding Lower Court Decisions on 
Whether to Admit Remote Adult Prosecution-Witness Testimony 
  The Supreme Court cases to which the lower courts have turned 
for  guidance  when  deciding  whether  to  permit  remote  adult 
prosecution-witness testimony are Coy v. Iowa93 and Maryland v. 
Craig.94 Both of those cases addressed the nature of the defendant’s 
Confrontation Clause rights in the context of live testimony by child 
witnesses during trial, but outside the immediate presence of the 
defendant.  As  the  discussion  of  those  cases  below  illustrates, 
however, the Court has not been exactly consistent—or unanimous—
in its statements about the nature of a defendant’s Confrontation 
Clause rights and how absolutely the clause requires witnesses to 
                                                                                                                       
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms art. 
6(3)(d), June 1, 2010, C.E.T.S. No. 5, amended by Protocol Nos. 11, 14. The ECHR was 
adopted in 1950 and entered into force in 1953. All forty-seven member states of the 
Council of Europe have ratified it. See DAVID HARRIS, MICHAEL O’BOYLE & COLIN 
WARBRICK, LAW OF THE EUROPEAN CONVENTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 1–2 (2d ed. 2009). 
  91.  See, e.g., United States v. Yates, 438 F.3d 1307, 1312–14 (11th Cir. 2006) 
(en banc) (holding that the accused has a right to physical face-to-face confrontation). 
  92.  Compare United States v. Gigante, 166 F.3d 75, 80–81 (2d Cir. 1999) 
(disagreeing with defendant that Sixth Amendment Confrontation Clause rights could 
only be preserved by “face-to-face confrontation with [witnesses] in the same room”), 
with Yates, 438 F.3d at 1315–16 (suggesting that the Confrontation Clause grants the 
defendant a “right to face-to-face physical confrontation” that can only be denied in 
certain limited circumstances and indicating that “confrontation through a video 
monitor is not the same as physical face-to-face confrontation”). 
  93.  487 U.S. 1012 (1988). 
  94.  497 U.S. 836 (1990). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1305 
testify  face-to-face  in  the  physical  presence  of  the  defendant  in 
criminal cases.  
a.  Coy v. Iowa 
  In Coy v. Iowa, the Supreme Court reversed a sexual-assault 
conviction, concluding that the lower court’s decision to permit two 
child witnesses to testify behind a large screen where they could not 
see  the  defendant  violated  the  defendant’s  Confrontation  Clause 
rights.95 In reaching this conclusion, Justice Scalia, writing for the 
majority, stated: “We have never doubted . . . that the Confrontation 
Clause  guarantees  the  defendant  a  face-to-face  meeting  with 
witnesses  appearing  before  the  trier  of  fact.”96  Justice  Scalia 
suggested that requiring witnesses to physically face the defendant 
serves several important purposes, including making it less likely 
that witnesses will lie since “[i]t is always more difficult to tell a lie 
about a person to his face than behind his back.”97 Furthermore, even 
if the witness does lie, Justice Scalia suggested that the lie would be 
less convincing when recited in the presence of the defendant and the 
trier of fact.98 Thus, he stated that like a less explicit component of 
the Confrontation Clause, which gives the defendant the right to 
cross-examine his accuser, the component granting the defendant the 
right  to  face-to-face  confrontation  also  serves  to  “ensur[e]  the 
integrity of the fact-finding process.”99 
  Even though the Court found that the defendant’s Confrontation 
Clause  rights  were  violated  in  the  instant  case,  Justice  Scalia 
nevertheless  recognized  that  the  “rights  conferred  by  the 
Confrontation Clause are not absolute, and may give way to other 
important interests.”100 It declined to provide particulars, but the 
Court  stated  that  any  exceptions  to  the  Confrontation  Clause 
protections “would surely be allowed only when necessary to further 
an important public policy.”101 However, because there had been “no 
individualized findings that these particular witnesses needed special 
protection,” the Supreme Court held that the lower court’s decision to 
permit them to testify behind a screen “could not be sustained by any 
conceivable exception.”102  
                                                                                                                       
  95.  Coy, 487 U.S. at 1014–15, 1022. 
  96.  Id. at 1016. 
  97.  Id. at 1019 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
  98.  Id. 
  99.  Id. at 1019–20 (quoting Kentucky v. Stincer, 482 U.S. 730, 736 (1987)) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
  100.  Id. at 1020. 
  101.  Id. at 1021. 
  102.  Id. 1306   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
  It bears noting that in Coy, four Justices wrote or joined in 
separate  concurring  or  dissenting  opinions  to  voice  some 
disagreements  with  the  majority’s  reasoning  as  it  related  to  the 
nature  and  extent  of  the  rights  afforded  defendants  under  the 
Confrontation Clause.103 In her concurring opinion in which Justice 
White joined, Justice O’Connor emphasized that any right conferred 
by  the  Confrontation  Clause  requiring  the  witness  to  face  the 
defendant physically was not absolute.104 She noted that the Court 
had  stated  on  many  prior  occasions  that  the  “[c]lause  reflects  a 
preference  for  face-to-face  confrontation  at  trial”  and  that  the 
“preference may be overcome in a particular case if close examination 
of competing interests so warrants.”105 She further suggested that 
most state laws protecting child witnesses would be unaffected by the 
Court’s  opinion  and  should  not  raise  substantial  Confrontation 
Clause problems because those laws typically provide for testimony 
by  one-  or  two-way,  closed-circuit  television,  which  means  that 
testimony is essentially in the presence of the defendant.106  
  The dissent written by Justice Blackmun, and in which Chief 
Justice  Rehnquist  joined,  took  issue  with  the  Coy  majority’s 
conclusion that the plain language of the Confrontation Clause was 
meant to ensure that the witness testify face-to-face in the physical 
presence of the defendant.107 Those Justices argued instead that the 
Clause’s primary purpose is to ensure that defendants are permitted 
to  cross-examine  the  witnesses  against  them.108  To  support  their 
argument,  the  dissent  referenced  Supreme  Court  precedent 
recognizing “that the Confrontation Clause was designed to prevent 
the use of ex parte affidavits, to provide the opportunity for cross-
examination, and to compel the defendant to stand face to face with 
the jury.”109 Justice Blackmun further referenced the work of John 
Henry Wigmore, who argued that the very existence of the hearsay 
rule demonstrated that the right to confrontation is provided not so 
                                                                                                                       
  103.  See id. at 1022–35 (O’Connor and White, JJ., concurring, and Blackmun, J., 
and Rehnquist, C.J., dissenting). 
  104.  Id. at 1024 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
  105.  Id. (quoting Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 63–64 (1980)) (internal quotation 
marks omitted).  
  106.  Id. at 1023–24 (quoting Roberts, 448 U.S. at 63–64) (internal quotation 
marks omitted). 
  107.  See id. at 1021; id. at 1028 (Blackmun, J., and Rehnquist, C.J., dissenting) 
(arguing that the Court’s “apparent fascination with the witness’ ability to see the 
defendant” will lead to sacrifice of other more important confrontation interests). 
  108.  See id. at 1029 (Blackmun, J., and Rehnquist, C.J., dissenting) (analyzing 
Supreme Court precedent discussing the Confrontation Clause right in terms of the 
right to cross-examine). 
  109.  Id. at 1028 (quoting California v. Green, 399 U.S. 149, 158 (1970)) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1307 
that  the  witness  and  defendant  can  “gaze”  upon  each  other,  but 
instead to allow for cross-examination.110  
b.  Maryland v. Craig 
  Just two years later, in Maryland v. Craig, the Supreme Court 
again addressed the question of whether the Confrontation Clause 
permitted a child witness to testify live during a trial, but outside of 
the presence of the defendant.111 This time, Justice O’Connor wrote 
for the majority and Justice Scalia wrote for the dissent.112 In Craig, 
the Court held that permitting a child witness to testify by one-way, 
closed-circuit  television,  outside  the  defendant’s  presence,  did  not 
violate  the  Confrontation  Clause.113  Justice  O’Connor’s  majority 
opinion explained that the Supreme Court has “never held . . . that 
the  Confrontation  Clause  guarantees  criminal  defendants  the 
absolute right to a face-to-face meeting with witnesses against them 
at trial.”114 Rather, consistent with the reasoning reflected in her Coy 
concurrence,  Justice  O’Connor  stated  the  Court’s  “precedents 
establish that the Confrontation Clause reflects a preference for face-
to-face confrontation at trial . . . that must occasionally give way to 
considerations of public policy and the necessities of the case.”115 
Justice O’Connor went on to explain that despite the preference for 
face-to-face confrontation, “[t]he central concern of the Confrontation 
Clause is to ensure the reliability of the evidence against a criminal 
defendant by subjecting it to rigorous testing in the context of an 
adversary proceeding before the trier of fact.”116  
  In light of these principles, the Craig Court stated a two-part 
test for determining when a defendant’s confrontation rights will not 
be violated, even absent a physical, face-to-face meeting at trial with 
the witnesses against him. First, there must be a case-specific finding 
that the denial of physical face-to-face “confrontation is necessary to 
further  an  important  public  policy.”117  Second,  the  testimony’s 
                                                                                                                       
  110.  Id. at 1029 (quoting 5 J. WIGMORE, EVIDENCE § 1395, at 150 (1974)). 
  111.  See Maryland v. Craig, 497 U.S. 836, 849 (1990) (stating the question of the 
case). 
  112.  Joining in the majority opinion written by Justice O’Connor were Chief 
Justice Rehnquist and Justices White, Blackmun, and Kennedy. Id. at 840–60. Joining 
in the dissent written by Justice Scalia were Justices Brennan, Marshall, and Stevens. 
Id. at 860–70. 
  113.  Id. at 852–53, 855 (majority opinion). In Craig, the child witness testified in 
a separate room in the courthouse in the presence of the attorneys, and the testimony 
was displayed by way of a video monitor to the courtroom in which the judge, jury, and 
defendant were present. See id. at 841–42. 
  114.  Id. at 844. 
  115.  Id. at 849 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
  116.  Id. at 845. 
  117.  Id. at 850, 856. 1308   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
reliability “must be otherwise assured.”118 As to the reliability of the 
testimony,  the  Court  indicated  that  the  Confrontation  Clause 
guaranteed the defendant the following: (1) a personal examination of 
witnesses,  (2)  who  testify  under  oath,  (3)  subject  to  cross-
examination, and (4) in a manner that permits the trier of fact to 
observe the witness’s demeanor, hence aiding in an assessment of the 
witness’s credibility.119 Applying the two-part test to the case before 
it, the Craig Court held that the state might have made a case-
specific showing that permitting the child witness to testify by one-
way, closed-circuit testimony was necessary to further the important 
state interest of protecting child witnesses in child abuse cases from 
the trauma of testifying before their abusers, and remanded the case 
to the court of appeals for that determination.120 In addition, the 
Court found that the procedure used to permit the child to testify 
assured  the  reliability  of  the  evidence  presented  against  the 
defendant because the child testified under oath, the defendant was 
permitted  the  “full  opportunity  for  contemporaneous  cross-
examination,” and the judge, jury, and defendant were able to view 
the child’s demeanor—albeit by video—during the testimony.121  
2.  Federal Circuit Split on the Proper Test to Apply in Determining 
When to Permit Adult Prosecution Witnesses to Testify by Two-
Way, Live VCT  
  The  discussion  above  shows  that  the  Supreme  Court’s 
interpretation of the Confrontation Clause allows room for remote 
testimony  and  that  any  face-to-face  requirement  under  the 
Confrontation Clause may yield under certain circumstances, so long 
as other rights, such as the right to cross-examine witnesses, are 
preserved. However, neither Coy nor Craig involved the question of 
whether to allow adult prosecution witnesses to testify by two-way, 
live VCT in criminal cases. Accordingly, this subpart examines the 
two different approaches that federal circuit courts have taken since 
the Supreme Court’s decision in Craig to determine whether and 
when adult prosecution witnesses may testify remotely in criminal 
cases consistent with a defendant’s Confrontation Clause rights. In 
United  States  v.  Gigante,  the  Second  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals 
concluded that “[u]pon a finding of exceptional circumstances . . . a 
trial court may allow a witness to testify via two-way closed-circuit 
television when this furthers the interest of justice.”122 The Eleventh 
                                                                                                                       
  118.  Id. at 850. 
  119.  Id. at 845–46. 
  120.  Id. at 860. 
  121.  Id. at 851. 
  122.  United States v. Gigante, 166 F.3d 75, 81 (2d Cir. 1999). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1309 
Circuit in United States v. Yates, however, concluded that Craig’s test 
for determining the propriety of one-way, closed-circuit testimony 
applied equally to determining the permissibility of two-way, live 
VCT prosecution witness testimony.123 Thus, the Eleventh Circuit 
decided that permitting a prosecution witness to testify by two-way, 
live VCT violates the defendant’s Confrontation Clause rights unless 
the court concludes that remote testimony is “necessary to further an 
important  public  policy . . . and  the  reliability  of  the  testimony  is 
otherwise assured.”124 This subpart discusses both of these cases in 
more detail below.125 
  In Gigante, the Second Circuit found no violation of a defendant’s 
Confrontation Clause rights when the trial court permitted a mob 
informant dying of inoperable cancer to testify from a remote location 
by two-way, live VCT against an alleged boss of the Genovese crime 
family who was also too ill to travel.126 The court explicitly rejected the 
defendant’s argument that the Sixth Amendment entitled him to a 
face-to-face confrontation with the witness against him “in the same 
room.”127 It also refused to apply the Craig test, explaining that the 
test in Craig was “crafted . . . to constrain the use of one-way closed-
circuit television, whereby the witness could not possibly view the 
defendant.”128  Indeed,  the  court  stated  that  the  two-way 
videoconferencing procedure “preserved the face-to-face confrontation 
celebrated by Coy.”129 Furthermore, it found that the two-way video 
procedure was sufficient to satisfy the Confrontation Clause’s central 
concern of ensuring the reliability of the evidence against a criminal 
defendant:  the  witness  “was  sworn;  he  was  subject  to  full  cross-
examination; he testified in full view of the jury, court, and defense 
                                                                                                                       
  123.  See United States v. Yates, 438 F.3d 1307, 1313 (11th Cir. 2006) (en banc) 
(stating that Craig supplies the proper test). 
  124.  See id. at 1314 (restating the Craig test applied to the two-way video 
system at hand). 
  125.  This discussion is limited to consideration of only these two cases in detail 
because they were the only two where courts actually decided what test should apply to 
the question of whether adult witnesses can testify for the prosecution in a criminal 
case by two-way, live VCT. I do not discuss in detail here the cases that involved adult 
witness testimony, but where the question was limited to determining whether the 
lower court’s decision violated clearly established federal law. See Gigante, 166 F.3d at 
81. I also do not discuss here in detail the other circuit court cases that considered the 
question of allowing child witnesses to testify remotely in sexual-assault cases. See 
generally Maryland v. Craig, 497 U.S. 836 (1990) (discussing the precedent on remote 
testimony by child witnesses to sexual assaults). 
  126.  Gigante, 166 F.3d at 79–81. 
  127.  Id. at 80. 
  128.  Id. at 80–81. 
  129.  Id. at 81. 1310   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
counsel;  and  [he]  gave  [his]  testimony  under  the  eye  of  the  [the 
defendant] himself.”130  
  Given the constitutional protections afforded by two-way video, 
the  Gigante  court  decided  that  a  more  appropriate  test  for 
determining when this remote testimony is proper should be based on 
the standard used to admit Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure Rule 
15  deposition  testimony  at  trial—an  “exceptional  circumstances” 
test.131  The  “exceptional  circumstances”  to  introduce  a  Rule  15 
deposition as substantive evidence at trial exist when the “witness’s 
testimony is material to the case and if the witness is unavailable to 
appear  at  trial.”132  The  court  thus  reasoned  that  under  the 
circumstances  of  the  case  before  it,  the  trial  court  could  have 
admitted the dying witness’s testimony via a Rule 15 deposition.133 
Yet, it also pointed out that the closed-circuit video presentation of 
the witness’s testimony that the trial court used instead actually 
afforded the defendant greater confrontation rights than if “the bare 
transcript of the [witness’s] deposition” had been admitted at trial 
against him.134 The court concluded that it made little sense to adopt 
a stricter standard than the one articulated by Rule 15 to assess the 
propriety of introducing two-way, live VCT at trial, holding that such 
testimony was constitutionally permitted when the court makes a 
finding  of  “exceptional  circumstances.”135  Those  “exceptional 
circumstances” were present according to the Second Circuit Gigante 
court because the witness’s health prevented him from traveling and 
because the defendant’s health also prevented him from participating 
in a distant deposition.136  
  By contrast, in Yates, the Eleventh Circuit held that the trial 
court’s decision to allow two Australian nationals to testify remotely 
from Australia against two defendants in a criminal trial in Alabama 
violated  the  defendants’  Confrontation  Clause  rights, 
notwithstanding that the witnesses were beyond the government’s 
                                                                                                                       
  130.  Id. at 80. During the trial, video screens transmitted the witness’s image to 
the court, the jury, defense counsel, and the defendant. The witness could also see and 
hear all courtroom participants on a video screen at his location. Id. 
  131.  Id. at 81. 
  132.  Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). Rule 15(a)(1) of the Federal Rules of 
Criminal Procedure states: “A party may move that a prospective witness be deposed in 
order to preserve testimony for trial. The court may grant the motion because of 
exceptional circumstances and in the interests of justice.” FED. R. CRIM. P. 15(a)(1). 
  133.  See Gigante, 166 F.3d at 81 (stating that the lower court judge could have 
admitted the testimony under Rule 15 without violating the Confrontation Clause). 
  134.  See id. (stating that, had the transcript of a Rule 15 deposition been used in 
court, the defendant would not have had any opportunity to visually assess the 
witness’s demeanor). 
  135.  Id. 
  136.  Id. at 81–82. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1311 
subpoena powers.137 Even though the case before it involved two-way, 
live VCT, the Yates court held that the Craig test, rather than the 
Gigante test, applied to the question of whether the remote testimony 
violated the defendants’ confrontation rights.138 In fact, the Eleventh 
Circuit noted that the Second Circuit was the only federal appeals 
court  to  make  a  distinction  between  one-  and  two-way  video 
testimony in its Confrontation Clause analysis. Other courts, instead, 
applied the Craig test in deciding whether to allow child witnesses to 
testify by two-way, live VCT.139  
  More  specifically,  the  Yates  court  disagreed  with  the 
government’s  assertion  that  two-way  video  provides  greater 
protections of a defendant’s confrontation rights than does a Rule 15 
deposition, and that two-way video testimony should therefore be 
admitted under the same standard as Rule 15 depositions.140 The 
court reasoned that because the defendant can be present at Rule 15 
depositions,  those  proceedings  do  not  result  in  any  denial  of  the 
defendant’s  constitutional  rights  to  a  “physical  face-to-face 
confrontation.”141 On the other hand, the court stated “the simple 
truth” that “confrontation through a video monitor is not the same as 
physical face-to-face confrontation.”142 It therefore held that “[t]he 
Sixth Amendment’s guarantee of the right to confront one’s accuser is 
most certainly compromised when the confrontation occurs through 
an electronic medium.”143  
  To further support its conclusion that the Craig test governed 
the situation before it, the Eleventh Circuit relied on the fact that in 
2002,  the  Supreme  Court  refused  to  recommend  to  Congress  a 
proposed amendment to Rule 26 of the Federal Rules of Criminal 
Procedure that would have explicitly permitted video testimony in 
“exceptional circumstances.”144 Under Proposed Rule 26(b), federal 
courts would have been able to authorize two-way, live VCT from a 
remote location in criminal cases “in the interest of justice” when the 
                                                                                                                       
  137.  United States v. Yates, 438 F.3d 1307, 1309–10 (11th Cir. 2006) (en banc). 
  138.  Id. at 1312–13. 
  139.  See id. at 1313–14 (referencing cases in the Sixth, Eighth, Ninth, and 
Tenth Circuits where courts applied the Craig test in determining whether to admit 
two-way, live VCT testimony of child witnesses in sexual-abuse cases). 
  140.  See id. at 1314 (rejecting the government’s argument that Craig should 
govern). 
  141.  Id. 
  142.  Id. at 1315. 
  143.  Id. The Yates court did not use the precise words in the Confrontation 
Clause, which grant an accused the right “to be confronted with” witnesses, rather than 
a right “to confront” witnesses. U.S. CONST. amend. VI. 
  144.  Yates, 438 F.3d at 1314; see also Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules 
of Criminal Procedure (Apr. 29, 2002) (appendix to statement of Breyer, J.) [hereinafter 
Proposed  Rule  26(b)],  http://www.fedcrimlaw.com/members/keyweb/FRCP-2002.pdf 
(providing the text of the proposed amendment referenced in Yates). 1312   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
requesting party established (1) “exceptional circumstances for such 
transmission”, (2) the transmission used “appropriate safeguards”, 
and (3) the witness was otherwise “unavailable” to attend the trial in 
person.145  In  its  Committee  Notes,  the  Advisory  Committee 
emphasized  that  Proposed  Rule  26(b)  should  have  satisfied  the 
various interests of the parties to the proceeding and also protected 
the  defendant’s  Confrontation  Clause  rights.146  However,  as  the 
Eleventh Circuit emphasized in Yates, a majority of the Supreme 
Court refused to approve the amendment, and it was not adopted.  
  However,  it  was  not  only  the  Supreme  Court’s  refusal  to 
recommend  the  amendment  that  seems  to  have  influenced  the 
Eleventh Circuit’s decision in Yates. The majority also seems to have 
placed great weight on a separate statement filed by Justice Scalia, 
wherein he indicated that the proposed amendment was of “dubious 
validity under the Confrontation Clause.”147 Justice Scalia argued 
that  the  Craig  test  should  apply  and  limit  the  use  of  remote 
testimony in criminal cases to instances in which there had been a 
case-specific showing that it was “necessary to further an important 
public  policy.”148  Of  course,  as  the  dissent  in  Yates  pointed  out, 
Justice Scalia’s statement has no official legal weight and may not 
reflect the reasoning of the remaining Justices in the majority who 
refused to recommend Proposed Rule 26(b).149 Furthermore, although 
the  Yates  majority  makes  no  mention  of  it,  Justices  Breyer  and 
O’Connor filed a dissenting statement indicating that they failed to 
see Confrontation Clause issues with the proposed amendment to 
                                                                                                                       
  145.  Proposed Rule 26(b), supra note 144, at 7. The proposed rule defined 
unavailability by reference to Rule 804(a)(4)–(5) of the Federal Rules of Evidence, 
which essentially states that witnesses are unavailable either if they are dead or 
infirm, or if the person seeking the witness’s testimony is unable to procure it by 
process  or  other  reasonable  means.  See  FED.  R.  EVID.  804(a)(4)–(5).  As  one 
commentator has noted, Proposed Rule 26(b) can be faulted for simply incorporating 
Rule 804(a)’s standards of unavailability. For example, Rule 804(a)(4) deems a witness 
unavailable if he is dead, but obviously a dead witness cannot testify remotely. See 
Friedman, supra note 4, at 708–11 (explaining how Proposed Rule 26(b)’s incorporation 
of Federal Rules of Evidence 804(a)(4)–(5) “breed[s] confusion”). 
  146.  See Proposed Rule 26(b), supra note 144, at 8–12 (explaining how the rule’s 
various  procedures  and  safeguards  allow  the  amendment  to  be  a  “prudent  and 
measured step”). 
  147.  Yates, 438 F.3d at 1314–15 (quoting Proposed Rule 26(b), supra note 144, at 
1). 
  148.  Id. at 1315 (quoting Proposed Rule 26(b), supra note 144, at 1–2). 
  149.  Id. at 1324–25 n.8 (Tjoflat, Marcus & Birch, JJ., dissenting) (stating that 
Justice  Scalia’s  comments  represent  “nothing  more  than  the  legal  musings  of  a 
Supreme Court Justice on an issue that has yet to be briefed and argued in a case or 
controversy before the Court”). In his dissent, Judge Tjoflat further remarked that 
Justice Scalia’s suggestion that the proposed amendment was of “dubious validity” is a 
statement that “easily can be made of every constitutional challenge the Supreme 
Court elects to hear.” Id. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1313 
Rule  26  since  under  Rule  15  the  trial  court  could  otherwise 
constitutionally  admit  an  absent  witness’s  nonvisual  deposition 
testimony against a criminal defendant.150 Nevertheless, it appears 
that Justice Scalia’s statement did persuade the Eleventh Circuit 
that it should be wary of taking anything but a very strict approach 
toward admitting remote video testimony.  
  Thus, for all of the foregoing reasons, the Yates court concluded 
that prosecution witnesses could testify by remote two-way, live VCT 
only  when  allowing  that  procedure  would  “further  an  important 
public policy” and when “the reliability of the testimony is otherwise 
assured.”151 Applying this test, the court found that the first prong 
was not met in the case before it.152 The district court had made case-
specific findings that video testimony was necessary to further the 
important public policies of (1) providing the fact finder with crucial 
evidence from witnesses who were beyond the court’s subpoena power 
and otherwise unwilling to travel to the United States to testify and 
(2)  resolving  the  case  expeditiously  and  justly.153  The  Eleventh 
Circuit, however, held that although “presenting the fact-finder with 
crucial evidence is, of course, an important public policy,” under the 
circumstances  of  the  case,  including  the  possibility  of  a  Rule  15 
deposition in Australia with all necessary parties present,154 “the 
prosecutor’s need for the videoconference testimony to make a case 
and to expeditiously resolve it are not the type of public policies that 
are important enough to outweigh the Defendants’ rights to confront 
                                                                                                                       
  150.  See Proposed Rule 26(b), supra note 144, at 4 (statement of Breyer, J.) (“It 
is not obvious how video testimony could abridge a defendant’s Confrontation Clause 
rights in circumstances where an absent witness’ testimony could be admitted in 
nonvisual form via deposition regardless.”). 
  151.  Yates, 438 F.3d at 1314–15. Yates, however, was not a unanimous decision, 
with three judges dissenting from the court’s opinion. Id. at 1319–36 (Tjoflat, Birch & 
Marcus, JJ., dissenting); id. at 1327–36 (Marcus, Tjoflat & Birch, JJ., dissenting). 
  152.  Id. at 1315–16 (majority opinion). 
  153.  Id. 
  154.  Id.  at  1316.  The  court  stated  that  the  record  did  not  provide  any 
evidentiary support explaining why the defendants and the witnesses could not all 
participate in a pretrial deposition in Australia, especially given that under Rule 15, 
the government must pay the cost of attendance for defendants who cannot themselves 
afford to pay. Furthermore, although it addressed the fact that foreign countries have 
refused entry to some defendants wishing to appear at Rule 15 depositions, it noted 
there was no finding in this case showing that the defendants could not travel to 
Australia to be present for a deposition. Id. at 1317–18 (referencing United States v. 
McKeeve, 131 F.3d 1, 7–9 (1st Cir. 1997), wherein the defendant was not permitted to 
attend a Rule 15 deposition because he was in custody and the United Kingdom 
refused to assume temporary custody of him). As mentioned above, the court also 
disagreed  with  the  government  that  permitting  the  defendant  to  cross-examine 
witnesses against him by two-way, live video testimony during trial in the presence of 
the  court  and  jury  provided  greater  Confrontation  Clause  protections  than  did 
permitting the defendant to attend an in-person, pretrial deposition. Id. at 1318. 1314   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
their  accusers  face-to-face.”155  Having  thus  decided  that  the  first 
prong of the Craig test was not met, the Yates court did not address 
whether the reliability prong was satisfied.156  
3.  The  Supreme  Court  After  Craig:  Some  Confrontation  Clause 
Guidance, but No Resolution of the Circuit Split 
  Because  the  Supreme  Court  has  not  decided  a  case  directly 
addressing  the  question  of  whether  and  when  the  Confrontation 
Clause  permits  the  introduction  of  two-way,  live  VCT  for  adult 
prosecution-witness testimony against defendants in criminal cases, 
the exact formulation of any U.S. rule for allowing such testimony 
remains unknown at this time. The Supreme Court has, however, 
offered some additional guidance on the nature of the protections 
afforded defendants by the Confrontation Clause. It has also issued a 
statement in connection with a denial of a petition for certiorari 
indicating that Craig may not “obviously answer[ ]” whether two-way, 
live VCT witness testimony is permissible in criminal cases.157 Both 
of these developments are discussed below.  
  First,  in  2004,  the  Supreme  Court  decided  Crawford  v. 
Washington, wherein it held that out-of-court testimonial statements 
could only be admitted against a defendant in a criminal trial if the 
witness was unavailable and the defendant had a prior opportunity 
for cross-examination.158 To reach its conclusion, the Crawford Court 
                                                                                                                       
  155.  Id. at 1316. 
  156.  Id. at 1318. Contrary to the Yates court, but on similar facts, the Florida 
Supreme Court applied the Craig test and concluded that permitting two Argentine 
nationals living in Argentina to testify remotely using two-way, live VCT did not 
violate the defendant’s confrontation rights. See Harrell v. State, 709 So. 2d 1364 (Fla. 
1998). In Harrell, the court found three important public policies that would be 
furthered by allowing the testimony: (1) the witnesses “lived beyond” the court’s 
subpoena power; (2) one witness was too sick to travel to the United States; and (3) the 
testimony of these two victim-witnesses was essential to the case and necessary to the 
important state interest in resolving criminal matters expeditiously and justly. Id. at 
1369–70. It further concluded that the second part of the Craig test was satisfied 
because (1) “the witnesses were placed under oath by a court clerk in Miami”; (2) the 
defense was able to cross-examine the witnesses; and (3) the jury could observe the 
witnesses and the witnesses could observe the jury during their testimony. Id. at 1371. 
In reviewing a subsequent federal habeas petition, the Eleventh Circuit held (several 
years before deciding Yates) that the Florida Supreme Court’s application of the Craig 
test to the facts before it did not violate clearly established federal law. Harrell v. 
Butterworth, 251 F.3d 926, 931–32 (11th Cir. 2001); see also Horn v. Quarterman, 508 
F.3d 306, 320 (5th Cir. 2007) (finding no violation of clearly established federal law 
where trial court allowed terminally ill witness to testify by remote two-way VCT since 
the state’s interest in protecting seriously ill witnesses could satisfy Craig’s necessity 
prong). 
  157.  Wrotten v. New York, 130 S. Ct. 2520, 2520 (2010). 
  158.  See  541  U.S.  36,  68  (2004)  (explaining  the  demands  of  the  Sixth 
Amendment). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1315 
overruled Ohio v. Roberts, which held that a hearsay declarant’s out-
of-court statement could be admitted at trial against a defendant 
without  violating  the  Confrontation  Clause  as  long  as  (1)  the 
declarant is “unavailable” to testify at trial and (2) the prior out-of-
court  statement  bears  “adequate  indicia  of  reliability.”159  Such 
reliability under Roberts could be inferred when the evidence fell 
within a “firmly rooted hearsay exception” or when the evidence was 
shown to be otherwise trustworthy.160 The Crawford Court, however, 
held that reliability must be assessed “in a particular manner: by 
testing in the crucible of cross-examination”—as opposed to by some 
judicial determination of reliability.161  
  Although  the  Crawford  decision  dealt  only  with  out-of-court 
pretrial witness statements, some commentators have suggested that 
the Confrontation Clause analysis in that case may implicitly limit 
the Court’s holding in Craig.162 Recall that Craig held that a witness 
could  testify  at  trial  outside  the  defendant’s  immediate  presence 
without violating the defendant’s rights to be confronted with adverse 
witnesses  when  “the  reliability  of  the  testimony  is  otherwise 
assured”—a test that Crawford concluded was improper.163 Those 
commentators  thus  suggest  that  the  Craig  test  for  permitting 
witnesses to testify outside of the direct presence of the defendant 
might be constitutionally suspect after Crawford because the Craig 
test uses a “reliability of the evidence” standard.164 
  While  those  commentators  correctly  point  out  the  Crawford 
Court’s retreat from the “reliability” standard, there is nevertheless 
reason to conclude that the Craig test is not constitutionally suspect. 
Although the Craig Court used the reliability language, its focus, like 
                                                                                                                       
  159.  448 U.S. 56, 66 (1980). 
  160.  Id. 
  161.  Crawford, 541 U.S. at 61–62. 
  162.  See, e.g., G. Michael Fenner, Today’s Confrontation Clause (After Crawford 
and Melendez-Diaz), 43 CREIGHTON L. REV. 35, 88–89 (2009) (“The problem with the 
holding from Craig is that fourteen years later, in Crawford, the Court’s interpretation 
of the Confrontation Clause changed radically.”); McAllister, supra note 89, at 868 
(highlighting a particular passage in the Crawford case as a suggestion that “an 
overwhelming majority of the current Supreme Court Justices would find the Craig 
test constitutionally suspect”). 
  163.  Maryland v. Craig, 497 U.S. 836, 850–51 (1990). It bears noting, however, 
that the Yates decision was rendered after the Supreme Court’s decision in Crawford, 
yet the Eleventh Circuit adopted the Craig test and did not suggest that Crawford had 
rendered it inapplicable. In fact, the majority specifically stated that Crawford would 
not govern the question of whether a prosecution witness could constitutionally testify 
remotely during trial because it applies only to “testimonial statements made prior to 
trial.” United States v. Yates, 438 F.3d 1307, 1314 n.4 (11th Cir. 2006) (en banc). 
  164.  McAllister, supra note 89, at 868; see also Fenner, supra note 162, at 88–89 
(suggesting that Craig’s holding was called into question by Crawford’s Confrontation 
Clause analysis, which indicated that “reliability of the testimony” can only be assured 
by cross-examination, not by any other method). 1316   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
the  Crawford  Court,  was  on  cross-examination  as  an  important 
component of reliability as relates to a defendant’s rights pursuant to 
the Confrontation Clause.165 The Craig Court specifically stated that 
permitting the witness to testify at trial by one-way video satisfied 
Confrontation Clause concerns because in the absence of a face-to-
face  confrontation,  “the  presence  of  the[ ]  other  elements  of 
confrontation—oath,  cross-examination,  and  observation  of  the 
witness’ demeanor—adequately ensures that the testimony is both 
reliable  and  subject  to  rigorous  adversarial  testing  in  a  manner 
functionally equivalent to that accorded live, in-person testimony.”166 
Indeed, even the Gigante court focused on the defendant’s ability to 
cross-examine the witness who was testifying remotely in that case in 
determining  that  the  procedure  satisfied  Confrontation  Clause 
concerns.167 Therefore, while commentators may be correct that the 
Supreme Court will retreat from Craig’s reliability of the evidence 
standard  post-Crawford,  for  the  purposes  of  this  Article  one  can 
assume that cross-examination will remain an important—perhaps 
the most important—factor in assessing whether the Confrontation 
Clause is satisfied should a witness be permitted to testify by two-
way, live VCT. It is beyond the scope of this Article to attempt to 
predict the precise standard the Supreme Court will adopt to test the 
admissibility of such testimony, if and when the Court is presented 
with the question.  
  Indeed, it appears that the Supreme Court may be inclined at 
some future date to take up the question, though its most recent 
guidance indicates only that Craig may not provide the proper test for 
determining  when  two-way,  as  opposed  to  one-way,  remote  video 
testimony  can  be  admitted  without  violating  the  Confrontation 
Clause. In Wrotten v. New York, the Supreme Court denied a petition 
for certiorari because of the interlocutory posture of the appeal.168 In 
a separate statement, however, Justice Sotomayor stated that the 
petition presented the important question of whether a defendant’s 
Confrontation Clause rights “were violated when the State introduced 
testimony at his trial via a two-way video that enabled the testifying 
witness  to  see  and  respond  to  those  in  the  courtroom,  and  vice 
versa.”169 She explained that in Craig, the Court recognized that “a 
                                                                                                                       
  165.  Craig, 497 U.S. at 851. 
  166.  Id. 
  167.  See United States v. Gigante, 166 F.3d 75, 80 (2d Cir. 1999) (finding that 
the  remote  procedure  used  to  present  the  witness’s  testimony  preserved  the 
defendant’s rights to confrontation since the witness was sworn; testified in view of the 
jury, the court, defense counsel, and the defendant; and was subjected to cross-
examination). 
  168.  Wrotten v. New York, 130 S. Ct. 2520, 2520 (2010). 
  169.  Id. In the underlying case from which the petition arose, the New York 
Court of Appeals had concluded that (1) permitting an elderly and ill witness to testify 
 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1317 
defendant’s right to confront accusatory witnesses may be satisfied 
absent a physical, face-to-face confrontation at trial,” but only upon a 
case-specific  finding  that  the  denial  of  such  confrontation  is 
“necessary  to  further  an  important  public  policy.”170  Justice 
Sotomayor concluded that the question raised in the petition was “not 
obviously answered” by Craig because “the use of video testimony in 
[Wrotten] arose in a strikingly different context than in Craig.”171 
Although one could conclude from this statement that any new test 
would be less restrictive since two-way remote video testimony more 
closely  simulates  live,  in-person  testimony  than  one-way  video 
testimony  does,  Justice  Sotomayor’s  statements  are  open  to 
interpretation. Again, it is beyond the scope of this Article—which is 
focused  broadly  on  proposing  a  test  that  can  be  used  in  courts 
throughout the world—to predict what test the Supreme Court will 
ultimately  adopt  for  testing  the  constitutionality  of  permitting 
prosecution witnesses to testify remotely by two-way, live VCT.  
IV. THE PROBLEM OF MODERN MARITIME PIRACY AND THE  
NEED TO ENCOURAGE STATES TO USE THE AVAILABLE  
LAWS TO PROSECUTE PIRATES INSTEAD OF RELEASING THEM 
  Having outlined generally some approaches taken by various 
international criminal courts and by federal courts in the United 
States to analyze the issue of whether to permit adult prosecution 
witnesses to testify remotely at trial using two-way, live VCT, this 
Article now moves to a discussion of the modern piracy problem and 
the reluctance of states to prosecute. In particular, it discusses how 
issues relating to the difficulties associated with mounting cases of 
such international proportions and which involve evidence, suspects, 
victims,  and  witnesses  from  around  the  globe  have  negatively 
impacted states’ willingness to prosecute piracy cases. This Article 
                                                                                                                       
remotely by two-way, live VCT was necessary to further the important public policy of 
protecting the well-being of such a witness so that criminal cases could be justly 
resolved, and (2) the procedures employed ensured the reliability of the witness’s 
testimony. People v. Wrotten, 923 N.E.2d 1099, 1101–03 (N.Y. 2009). 
  170.  Wrotten, 130 S. Ct. at 2520 (quoting Craig, 497 U.S. at 850) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
  171.  Id. On May 27, 2010, the New York First Department Appellate Division 
ruled on the pending issue that had prevented the Supreme Court from finding a “final 
judgment” from which a petition for certiorari could be taken. People v. Wrotten, 901 
N.Y.S.2d 265 (N.Y. App. Div. 2010); see also Wrotten, 130 S. Ct. 2520 (denying 
certiorari on interlocutory appeal in light of the procedural difficulties in reviewing the 
case at that stage). The defendant thereafter filed another petition for certiorari, which 
was also denied, but without any written statement. Wrotten v. New York, 131 S. Ct. 
1020 (2011). 1318   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
further addresses how a rule allowing remote prosecution-witness 
testimony in some circumstances can better facilitate the prosecution 
of  these  cases  and  also  encourage  more  states  to  undertake  the 
burden of bringing pirates to justice.  
A. The Continuing Threat of Modern Maritime Piracy  
  The  continuing  threat  of  pirate  attacks  on  ships  and  crews 
makes  traveling  in  the  world’s  shared  sea  lanes  increasingly 
dangerous. According to the International Maritime Bureau (IMB) 
Piracy Reporting Centre, between January 2007 and December 2011, 
pirates staged some 1,850 attacks worldwide.172 During the last three 
years, the number of attacks has remained above 400 per year—a 
number  that  exceeds  the  number  of  reported  attacks  in  2007  by 
approximately 50 percent.173 In fact, from January to March 2011, 
reports showed that Somali pirates had already staged ninety-seven 
attacks—more  than  one  per  day  during  that  time  period.174  In 
addition,  most  pirate  attacks  now  involve  the  use  of  weapons.175 
Pirates used guns in 245 attacks in 2011 (more than half of the total 
number of attacks that year), but they used guns in only seventy-two 
attacks in 2007 (about 25 percent of the total number of attacks in 
that year).176 Nor are the attacks without victims. In 2007, pirates 
held some 292 crew members hostage. But, in each year thereafter, 
more than 800 crew members have been held captive while pirates 
negotiated their release.177 Finally, the ransoms paid to pirates “have 
increased sevenfold in the last five years”: average ransoms increased 
from about $600,000 in 2007 to about $5 million in 2011.178 In other 
words, over time, the threat of modern maritime piracy is increasing, 
rather than decreasing.179  
                                                                                                                       
  172.  See ICC–IMB 2011 Report, supra note 11, at 5–6 (providing graphical 
break-downs of piracy attacks between January 2007 and December 2011). 
  173.  Id. 
  174.  FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE, PIRACY OFF THE COAST OF SOMALIA, REPORT, 
2010–12, H.C. 1318, at 11 (U.K.) [hereinafter FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 
REPORT]. 
  175.  ICC–IMB 2011 Report, supra note 11, at 20. 
  176.  Id. at 11. 
  177.  Id. In total, between 2007 and 2011, pirates have held over 3,500 seafarers 
hostage. They killed about sixty-two of their victims during that time period. FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at 16. 
  178.  FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at 55–56. 
Some ransoms recently paid to Somali pirates have been significantly higher. For 
example, in November 2010, a band of pirates was paid about $10 million in ransom to 
release a South Korean supertanker, the Samho Dream. See Jeffrey Gettleman, Money 
in Piracy Attracts More Somalis, N.Y. TIMES, Nov. 9, 2010, at A10. 
  179.  In fact, the number of actual pirate attacks is likely greater than the 
number reported to the IMB since most believe that ship owners have incentives to 
 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1319 
  Moreover, the threat of modern maritime piracy is broad in its 
reach.  As  Rear  Admiral  Brian  M.  Salerno  explained,  “[A]  single 
piratical attack affects the interests of numerous countries, including 
the  flag  State  of  the  vessel,  various  States  of  nationality  of  the 
seafarers taken hostage, regional coastal States, owners’ States, and 
cargo  shipment  and  transshipment  States.”180  The  evidence  from 
2011 alone supports the Rear Admiral’s statement. The IMB reported 
that in 2011, pirates attacked ships bearing the flags of fifty-six 
different  countries181  in  the  waters  off  the  coasts  of  Somalia, 
Indonesia,  Malaysia,  the  Philippines,  Singapore,  Vietnam, 
Bangladesh, India, Benin, and Nigeria, among other places:182 “As of 
31  December  2011,  suspected  Somali  pirates  held  11  vessels  for 
ransom  with  193  crew  members  of  different  nationalities  as 
hostage.”183  
  A brief description of just two pirate attacks can help illustrate 
the multinational reach of maritime piracy. On February 9, 2011, 
pirates attacked the Greek supertanker MV Irene 900 miles off the 
coast of Somalia. When attacked, the MV Irene was carrying 2 million 
barrels of Kuwaiti oil destined for the United States and estimated to 
be  worth  $200  million.  The  twenty-five-member  crew  included 
seventeen Filipinos, seven Greeks, and one Georgian.184 Some two 
months after being taken hostage, and after the pirates received an 
astounding $13.5 million ransom payment, the ship, cargo, and crew 
were released.185 On April 8, 2011, just one day after the hostages 
                                                                                                                       
underreport  for  fear  their  ships  will  be  delayed  for  investigations  or  that  their 
insurance premiums will rise. See JOHN S. BURNETT, DANGEROUS WATERS: MODERN 
PIRACY AND TERROR ON THE HIGH SEAS 181 (2003); PETER CHALK, THE MARITIME 
DIMENSION OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY: TERRORISM, PIRACY, AND CHALLENGES FOR 
THE UNITED STATES 7–8 (2008) (noting several variables that are “directly relevant to 
the general surge in piracy over the last fifteen years”). 
  180.  Piracy Against U.S.-Flagged Vessels: Lessons Learned: Hearing Before the 
Subcomm.  on  Coast  Guard  &  Mar.  Transp.  of  the  H.  Comm.  on  Transp.  & 
Infrastructure, 111th Cong. 79 (2009) (statement of Rear Admiral Brian M. Salerno, 
Assistant  Commandant  for  Marine  Safety,  Security,  and  Stewardship,  Dep’t  of 
Homeland Sec., U.S. Coast Guard). 
  181.  See ICC–IMB 2011 Report, supra note 11, at 15–16 (providing a graphic 
breakdown of the various flag states that experienced pirate attacks between 2007 and 
2011). 
  182.  Id. at 5–6. 
  183.  Id. at 20. 
  184.  E.g., EU NAVFOR Public Affairs Office, MV Irene SL Pirated in the North 
Arabian Sea, EU NAVFOR (Feb. 9, 2011), http://www.eunavfor.eu/2011/02/mv-irene-sl-
pirated-in-the-north-arabian-sea/; Tom Scott, Somali Pirates: Steep Rise in Attacks, 
NEWS-INSURANCES (Mar. 28, 2011), http://www.newsinsurances.co.uk/somali-pirates-
steep-rise-in-attacks/0169475872. 
  185.  Anna Bowden & Shikha Basnet, Oceans Beyond Piracy, The Economic Cost 
of Somali Piracy 2011, at 11 (One Earth Future Foundation, Working Paper), available 
at http://oceansbeyondpiracy.org/sites/default/files/economic_cost_of_piracy_2011.pdf. 1320   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
from the MV Irene were released, ten pirates stormed the MV Susan 
K, a German cargo ship registered in Antigua & Barbuda. The MV 
Susan K was attacked thirty-five miles off the coast of Oman while 
travelling from Mumbai to Port Sudan with a crew that included four 
Ukrainians and six Filipinos.186 Seventy days after being captured, 
and  after  pirates  received  an  approximately  $4  million  ransom 
payment, the MV Susan K and its crew were released.187  
B. The International Law Authorizing Piracy Prosecutions 
  International law provides many legal tools for prosecuting acts 
of maritime piracy. Piracy is the oldest crime to which universal 
jurisdiction  applies,188  and  all  states  may  punish  acts  of  piracy 
occurring on the high seas even if the state has no specific nexus to 
the offense.189 Exercising universal jurisdiction over acts of maritime 
piracy is warranted because of the general heinousness of the crime 
and the fact that it is directed against ships and persons of any and 
all nations—disrupting international trade and commerce.190 Thus, 
states may use their own domestic laws to prosecute and punish 
those who commit the crime of maritime piracy, regardless of the 
nationalities of either the suspected pirates or their victims.191  
                                                                                                                       
  186.  Somali Pirates Release Greek Owned VLCC, Hijack German Cargo Ship the 
Next  Day,  MAR.  EXECUTIVE  (Apr.  11,  2011),  http://www.maritime-executive.com/ 
article/somali-pirates-release-greek-owned-vlcc-mv-irene-sl. 
  187.  Andrew Mwangura, Ransom Reported Paid for MV Susan K, SOMALIA REP. 
(June 17, 2011), http://www.somaliareport.com/index.php/post/981/Ransom_ Reported_ 
Paid_for_MV_Susan_K. 
  188.  Universal jurisdiction is defined as “criminal jurisdiction based solely on 
the nature of the crime, without regard to where the crime was committed, the 
nationality of the alleged or convicted perpetrator, the nationality of the victim, or any 
other connection to the state exercising such jurisdiction.” THE PRINCETON PRINCIPLES 
ON UNIVERSAL JURISDICTION 28 (Stephen Macedo ed., 2001). 
  189.  See Cohen, supra note 9, at 201 (explaining that the doctrine of universal 
jurisdiction was originally developed to address acts of maritime piracy occurring on 
the high seas outside of any state’s territorial jurisdiction). 
  190.  See, e.g., Kenneth C. Randall, Universal Jurisdiction Under International 
Law, 66 TEX. L. REV. 785, 794 (1988) (suggesting that the heinous nature of piracy 
offenses, which involve violence and depredation, and the fact that piracy is directed 
against ships of all nations, provide the most accurate rationale for allowing the 
exercise of universal jurisdiction over piracy). In United States v. Cargo of Brig Malek 
Adhel, 43 U.S. (2 How.) 210 (1844), the U.S. Supreme Court recognized the pirate as an 
enemy of all mankind over whom states could exercise universal jurisdiction because 
the pirate “commits hostilities upon the subjects and property of any or all nations, 
without any regard to right or duty, or any pretence of public authority.” Id. at 232. 
  191.  See Anthony J. Colangelo, The Legal Limits of Universal Jurisdiction, 47 
VA. J. INT’L L. 149, 150–51 (2006) (highlighting the fact that universal jurisdiction 
attaches to crimes of piracy); see also 4 WILLIAM BLACKSTONE, COMMENTARIES 72 (9th 
ed. 1783) (describing actions that have been historically deemed “piracy”); M. Cherif 
Bassiouni, Universal Jurisdiction for International Crimes: Historical Perspectives and 
 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1321 
  Universal  jurisdiction  over  piracy  offenses  is  codified  in  an 
international  treaty—the  UNCLOS192—to  which  most  states 
belong.193 Pursuant to Article 105 of UNCLOS, any state may seize 
pirate ships and arrest and prosecute pirates.194 Article 101 lists the 
acts  which  constitute  piracy  and  over  which  states  may  exercise 
universal jurisdiction as follows: 
(a)  any  illegal  acts  of  violence  or  detention,  or  any  act  of 
depredation, committed for private ends by the crew or the 
passengers of a private ship or a private aircraft, and directed: 
(i)  on the high seas, against another ship or aircraft, or 
against  persons  or  property  on  board  such  ship  or 
aircraft; 
(ii)  against a ship, aircraft, persons or property in a place 
outside the jurisdiction of any State; 
(b)  any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of 
an aircraft with knowledge of facts making it a pirate ship or 
aircraft; 
(c)  any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described 
in subparagraph (a) or (b).195 
  In addition, under Article 103, a ship is a pirate ship “if it is 
intended  by  the  persons  in  dominant  control  to  be  used  for  the 
purpose of committing one of the acts referred to in Article 101.”196 
  In sum, UNCLOS essentially defines piracy as (1) an illegal act 
of violence or detention, (2) committed for private ends, (3) on the 
high seas, and (4) directed against another ship.197 In addition, under 
Article 100, states are actually required to cooperate in the repression 
                                                                                                                       
Contemporary Practice, 42 VA. J. INT’L L. 81, 110–11 (2001) (“Positive international law 
in the twentieth century has clearly established universal jurisdiction for piracy.”). 
  192.  UNCLOS, supra note 10, arts. 100–108, 110. 
  193.  See supra note 10 and accompanying text. 
  194.  UNCLOS, supra note 10, art. 105. 
  195.  Id. art. 101. 
  196.  Id. art. 103. 
  197.  Although UNCLOS broadly defines piracy, it includes only those attacks 
that occur on the high seas or outside the territory of any state. Id. art. 101(a). Thus, 
UNCLOS is not applicable to attacks that occur in territorial waters and ports. In such 
cases, only the nation in whose territory the attacks occurred will have jurisdiction to 
prosecute using UNCLOS. See id. art. 2(2) (“The sovereignty of a coastal State 
extends . . . to an adjacent belt of sea, described as the territorial sea.”). Otherwise, 
states would have to use other legal tools—such as the Convention for the Suppression 
of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (SUA Convention)—to 
prosecute acts of piracy that occurred in the territorial waters of another state. See 
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime 
Navigation arts. 3, 6, Mar. 10, 1988, 1678 U.N.T.S. 221 [hereinafter SUA Convention] 
(defining piracy and the signatory states’ jurisdictions). 1322   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
of piracy to the fullest possible extent,198 a mandate which in theory 
suggests they should assist in the arrest and prosecution of pirates.  
  The Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against 
the Safety of Maritime Navigation (SUA Convention)199 addresses 
some additional acts of maritime violence not covered by UNCLOS.200 
Drafted in response to the Achille Lauro incident when Palestinian 
terrorists hijacked an Italian cruise liner,201 the SUA Convention 
prohibits both completed attacks on ships and attempts to do the 
same.202 Under Article 3 of the SUA Convention, a prohibited offense 
is committed by anyone who (1) “seizes or exercises control over a 
ship by force or threat thereof or any other form of intimidation,”203 
(2) “performs an act of violence against a person on board a ship if 
that act is likely to endanger the safe navigation of that ship,”204 or 
(3) attempts to do any of the above.205 Unlike UNCLOS, the SUA 
Convention extends the definition of piracy to include attacks within 
territorial or archipelagic waters or in port,206 as long as the ship is 
scheduled for international navigation.207  
                                                                                                                       
  198.  UNCLOS, supra note 10, art. 100 (“All States shall cooperate to the fullest 
possible extent in the repression of piracy on the high seas or in any other place outside 
the jurisdiction of any State.”). 
  199.  SUA Convention, supra note 197. 
  200.  See, e.g., Rapporteurs of the Defence Committee, The Role of the European 
Union  in  Combating  Piracy,  12,  21,  European  Security  and  Defence  Assembly, 
Assembly of Western European Union, ESDA Doc. A/2037 (June 4, 2009) (“The SUA 
Convention aims at suppressing unlawful acts against maritime safety . . . not covered 
by  [UNCLOS] . . . .”);  Joseph  M.  Isanga,  Countering  Persistent  Contemporary  Sea 
Piracy: Expanding Jurisdictional Regimes, 59 AM. U. L. REV. 1267, 1292 (2010) (“The 
SUA [Convention] attempts to address forms of maritime violence that are not included 
in the UNCLOS definition.”). 
  201.  Rosario Domínguez-Matés, From the Achille Lauro to the Present Day: An 
Assessment of the International Response to Preventing and Suppressing Terrorism at 
Sea,  in  INTERNATIONAL  LEGAL  DIMENSION  OF  TERRORISM  231  (Pablo  Antonio 
Fernández-Sánchez ed., 2009); see also, e.g., Malvina Halberstam, Terrorism on the 
High Seas: The Achille Lauro, Piracy and the IMO Convention on Maritime Safety, 82 
AM. J. INT’L L. 269, 269–72 (1988) (describing the Achille Lauro hijacking and the 
incident’s impact on maritime terrorism law). 
  202.  See SUA Convention, supra note 197, art. 3 (establishing a number of 
offenses that involve the endangerment of ships, including attempts to commit any of 
the listed offenses). 
  203.  Id. art. 3(1)(a). 
  204.  Id. art. 3(1)(b). 
  205.  Id. art. 3(2)(a). 
  206.  Cf. id. art. 4 (extending the Convention’s application to all ships scheduled 
to navigate beyond the territorial seas of a single state). 
  207.  Id. Nevertheless, although the SUA Convention theoretically covers acts of 
violence against persons on a ship while in port, those acts must also be “likely to 
endanger the safe navigation of that ship.” Id. art. 3(1)(b). Because of this language, 
using the SUA Convention to prosecute attacks while a ship is docked may be difficult. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1323 
  On the other hand, in contrast to UNCLOS, the SUA Convention 
does not provide for the exercise of universal jurisdiction.208 Only 
signatory states may prosecute violations of the SUA Convention, and 
they need some nexus to the offense in order to do so. States may only 
prosecute using the SUA Convention when (1) the offense was against 
a ship flying its flag, (2) the offense occurred in its territory, (3) the 
offense was committed by a national of the state, or (4) a national of 
the state was a victim of the offense.209 Accordingly, if a signatory 
state with the required nexus to the offense refuses to prosecute, or if 
the states with a nexus to the offense have not ratified the SUA 
Convention,  pirates  and  maritime  terrorists  will  go  unpunished 
notwithstanding  the  SUA  Convention’s  increased  territorial 
coverage.210  
C. The Tendency to Release, Rather than Prosecute, Captured Pirates 
  Despite this international legal framework authorizing states—
and,  indeed,  encouraging  them—to  prosecute  maritime  piracy 
offenses, states are more inclined to release the pirates they capture 
than to try them in their own domestic courts. Since 2008, numerous 
states have provided ships, crew, money, and technology to support a 
variety of naval forces that conduct counter-piracy operations in the 
Gulf of Aden and the Indian Sea. The multinational naval force CTF-
150 was the first to conduct counter-piracy operations in late 2008. In 
January 2009, it was replaced by another multinational naval force, 
CTF-151.211 In 2008, the European Union launched its own combined 
naval force (Operation Atalanta) aimed at “deterr[ing], prevent[ing], 
and repress[ing] acts of piracy and armed robbery” in the seas off the 
coast  of  Somalia.212  Since  2008,  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty 
Organization has sent ships to the Horn of Africa to conduct counter-
piracy operations.213 Other countries have independently sent their 
                                                                                                                       
  208.  See, e.g., Isanga, supra note 200, at 1292 (“The SUA [Convention] . . . did 
not extend the scope of universal jurisdiction.”); Eugene Kontorovich, Recent Case, 
United States v. Shi, 525 F.3d 709 (2008), 103 AM. J. INT’L L. 734, 738 (2009) (“[T]he 
SUA Convention does not create universal crimes.”). 
  209.  SUA Convention, supra note 197, art. 6. 
  210.  See George D. Gabel, Jr., Smoother Seas Ahead: The Draft Guidelines as an 
International Solution to Modern-Day Piracy, 81 TUL. L. REV. 1433, 1445 (2007) 
(discussing limits of jurisdiction granted by the SUA Convention). 
  211.  LAUREN PLOCH ET AL., CONG. RESEARCH SERV., R40528, PIRACY OFF THE 
HORN OF AFRICA 22 (2010), available at http://www.scribd.com/doc/47456778/Piracy-off-
the-Horn-of-Africa-Apr-2010-CRS-R40528. 
  212.  Council Decision 2008/918/CFSP, 2008 O.J. (L 330) 19–20 (EU), available at 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:330:0019:0020:EN:PDF 
(approving Operation Atalanta). 
  213.  See PLOCH ET AL., supra note 211, at 23 (summarizing the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) Operation Ocean Shield). 1324   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
own naval forces to the region to provide escorts to ships and to 
engage  in  antipiracy  operations.214  According  to  a  recent  report, 
during 2011, “over 30 countries contributed military forces to counter-
piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden and Indian Ocean,” and the 
likely number of naval ships patrolling those areas on any given day 
has been between ten and sixteen.215  
  To their credit, the naval forces deployed by states have had 
some success in both repressing pirate attacks and capturing pirates. 
According to the report by Jack Lang, the UN Secretary-General’s 
Special Advisor on Legal Issues Relating to Piracy off the Coast of 
Somalia, naval forces “thwarted 126 attacks in 2008, 176 in 2009 and 
127 in 2010.”216 As for 2011, the IMB reports that although Somali 
pirates  apparently  staged  237  attacks,  the  number  of  successful 
hijackings  decreased  due,  at  least  in  part,  to  the  naval  forces’ 
antipiracy patrols.217 Furthermore, the navies have captured many of 
the  pirates  who  attacked  vessels  at  sea.  Reports  indicate  that 
between January and August 2009 alone, naval patrols captured 517 
pirates and killed ten.218  
  Yet, while the navies have contributed to a decrease in the rate 
of  successful  hijackings,  they  have  not  been  able  to  “contain  the 
growth in the overall number of attacks and the area in which pirates 
can operate.”219 Many blame the prevalence of the navies’ “catch and 
release” policies to help explain why pirate attacks are not becoming 
less frequent despite the antipiracy efforts of the world’s navies.220 
For example, in 2008, the Danish navy released ten suspected Somali 
                                                                                                                       
  214.  See id. (discussing the naval forces of India, China, and Russia). 
  215.  Bowden & Basnet, supra note 185, at 24–25. 
  216.  Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 39. 
  217.  ICC–IMB 2011 Report, supra note 11, at 20. 
  218.  PLOCH ET AL., supra note 211, at 22. 
  219.  FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at 3; see also 
Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 39 (noting that the number of pirate attacks from 2007–2010 
has continued to grow despite the presence of naval forces). 
  220.  See S.C. Res. 1918, ¶ 1, U.N. Doc. S/RES/1918 (Apr. 27, 2010) (stating that 
“the failure to prosecute persons responsible for piracy and armed robbery at sea” was 
undermining  the  international  community’s  antipiracy  efforts);  U.N.  Secretary-
General, Report of the Secretary-General on Possible Options To Further the Aim of 
Prosecuting  and  Imprisoning  Persons  Responsible  for  Acts  of  Piracy  and  Armed 
Robbery at Sea off the Coast of Somalia, Including, in Particular, Options for Creating 
Special  Domestic  Chambers  Possibly  with  International  Components,  a  Regional 
Tribunal  or  an  International  Tribunal  and  Corresponding  Imprisonment 
Arrangements, Taking into Account the Work of the Contact Group on Piracy off the 
Coast of Somalia, the Existing Practice in  Establishing International and Mixed 
Tribunals, and the Time and Resources Necessary To Achieve and Sustain Substantive 
Results, ¶ 9, U.N. Doc. S/2010/394 (July 26, 2010) [hereinafter S/2010/394 Report] (“In 
order  to  be  effective,  naval  operations  apprehending  suspects  should  result  in 
prosecutions. The risk otherwise is that suspects are released at sea, or repatriated, 
and return to commit further acts of piracy or armed robbery at sea.”). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1325 
pirates, even though they were armed and had notes on them stating 
how they would split their piracy proceeds.221 The United Kingdom’s 
and  Canada’s  naval  forces  have  both  been  accused  of  releasing 
suspected pirates.222 In fact, within a one-month period in 2010, the 
United Kingdom’s Royal Navy vessels found suspected pirates on 
board  three  different  motherships  with  hostages,  but  thereafter 
released not only the hostages, but also the suspected pirates.223 
From mid-August to mid-December 2010, the European Union’s naval 
forces,  Operation  Atalanta,  captured  fifty-one  suspected  pirates 
whom  it  immediately  freed.224  In  May  2010,  the  United  States 
released ten pirates it had been holding for weeks after concluding 
that no nation was willing to undertake the burden of prosecuting 
them.225 In fact, according to the Lang Report, only about one-third of 
the pirates captured between 2008 and 2010 were prosecuted.226 As 
dismal as that number may seem, the numbers only get worse. Mr. 
Lang explained that at the beginning of 2011, the rate of prosecution 
had dropped to about 10 percent of captured pirates with “more than 
90 per cent of the pirates apprehended by States patrolling the seas 
[being] released without being prosecuted.”227 He emphasized that 
                                                                                                                       
  221.  Paula Prada & Alex Roth, On the Lawless Sea, It’s Not Easy Putting Somali 
Pirates  in  the  Dock,  WALL  ST.  J.  (Dec.  12,  2008),  http://online.wsj.com/article/ 
SB122903542171799663.html; see also Oliver Hawkins, What To Do with a Captured 
Pirate, BBC NEWS (Mar. 10, 2009, 10:49 AM), http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/7932205.stm 
(discussing the 2008 capture and release of the ten pirates). 
  222.  See  Canadian  Warship  Helps  U.S.-Flagged  Vessel  Evade  Pirates  off 
Somalian Coast, GUELPH MERCURY, May 22, 2009, available at 2009 WLNR 9831454 
(discussing Canada’s lack of jurisdiction over suspected pirates); Jason Groves, Navy 
Gives  Somali  Pirates  Food  and  Water . . . Then  Lets  Them  Sail  off  Scot  Free, 
MAILONLINE  (Jan.  27,  2010,  7:46  PM),  http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-
1246300/Navy-gives-pirates-food-water--lets-sail-scot-free.html  (describing  several 
incidents when suspected pirates were released). 
  223.  See FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at Ev 43–
44 (questioning of Mr. Henry Bellingham, Minister of Parliament) (explaining why the 
United  Kingdom  has  not  brought  any  pirates  back  to  the  United  Kingdom  for 
prosecution). 
  224.  Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 43. 
  225.  Craig Whitlock, Navy Releases Accused Somali Pirates Held on Warship for 
Six Weeks, WASH. POST (May 28, 2010, 6:18 PM), http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2010/05/28/AR2010052804108.html. 
  226.  Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 43. 
  227.  Id.  at  ¶ 14.  In  his  testimony  before  the  UK  Parliament,  Minister 
Bellingham suggested that the 90 percent release rate is somewhat misleading since 
not all cases in which suspected pirates are captured would be worthy of prosecution 
due to insufficient evidence that a crime has been committed. Captain David Reindorp 
noted the difficulty of producing evidence of piracy in cases where suspected pirates are 
caught near shore with AK47s, but no other evidence to prove they are pirates, as 
opposed to simple fisherman carrying arms for protection. See FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at Ev 43–44 (discussing the challenges of 
distinguishing  between  pirates,  hostages,  and  fishermen).  The  United  Kingdom’s 
 1326   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
the “catch and release” policy has become the rule, rather than the 
exception.228  
  Thus,  although  the  evidence  indicates  the  naval  fleets  have 
contributed to counter-piracy efforts, the full deterrent effect of those 
resources likely cannot be realized absent a significant increase in 
prosecution  rates.229  Consider,  for  example,  how  the  10  percent 
prosecution  rate  might  affect  the  cost-benefit  calculations  of  an 
ordinary Somali male making the decision of whether to become a 
pirate. Some economists estimate that “the average pirate could earn 
between  $33,726  and  $78,840  a  year,  depending  on  the  ransom 
paid”—an amount of money which far exceeds the $500 annual per 
capita  GDP  of  Somalia.230  While  the  remuneration  to  pirates  is 
obviously higher than what a Somali male could otherwise earn, 
being a pirate also includes some risks of death or imprisonment. But, 
if the risks of imprisonment are as low as they are presently, the 
decision to choose piracy necessarily becomes easier.231 Indeed, the 
“catch and release” policies send the message that “crime can pay,” 
and the evidence shows that some pirates get that message inasmuch 
as  they  return  to  the  crime  of  piracy  after  they  have  been 
apprehended  and  released.232  The  2012  UK  House  of  Commons 
Foreign Affairs Committee Report makes the point well: 
                                                                                                                       
Foreign Affairs Committee, however, responded to the Minister’s testimony by pointing 
out: 
[N]ot all claims made by the Government about the difficulty in securing 
evidence were wholly convincing: when pirates are observed in boats with guns, 
ladders and even hostages, it beggars belief that they cannot be prosecuted, 
assuming that states have the necessary laws in place and the will to do so. 
Id. at 45. 
  228.  See Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 43–44 (discussing the frequency at which 
suspected pirates are released without prosecution). 
  229.  Deterrence and the prevention of future criminal activity are primary goals 
of criminal prosecutions. See Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S. 957, 1007–08 (1991) 
(Kennedy, J., concurring) (noting that deterrence is one of the “first purposes of 
criminal law”); M. Cherif Bassiouni, Combating Impunity for International Crimes, 71 
U. COLO. L. REV. 409, 410 (2000) (noting that one of the purposes of pursuing justice 
and accountability is that doing so “contributes to the prevention and deterrence of 
future conflicts”). 
  230.  GEOPOLICITY, THE ECONOMICS OF PIRACY: PIRATE RANSOMS & LIVELIHOODS 
OFF THE COAST OF SOMALIA 12 tbl.1 (2011), available at http://www.geopolicity.com/ 
upload/content/pub_1305229189_regular.pdf. 
  231.  See FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at 3 
(“[T]he risk to pirates of serious consequences is still too low to outweigh the lucrative 
rewards from piracy.”). 
  232.  See Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 14 (stating that some of the very pirates who 
were previously apprehended and released have thereafter been identified as repeat 
offenders).  2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1327 
[S]imply returning suspected pirates to their boats or to land . . . may 
temporarily disrupt their activities, [but it] provides little long term 
deterrence and has demonstrably failed to prevent an annual increases 
[sic] in both the number of pirates going to sea and in the number of 
attacks.233 
D. The Need to Encourage More Piracy Prosecutions  
by Improving Access to Witness Testimony  
  Increasing  the  present  ratio  of  prosecutions  as  compared  to 
releases can help guarantee that more suspected pirates are brought 
to justice. It should also help to deter future acts of piracy because 
increasing prosecution rates will also increase the potential costs of 
engaging  in  piracy. As discussed  above,  the  current policy which 
allows  the  world’s  navies  to  catch  and  release  suspected  pirates 
appears insufficient to stem the threat modern maritime piracy poses 
to innocent seafarers.  
  Of  course,  there  are  many  reasons  states  may  not  want  to 
assume the burden of prosecuting piracy cases, some of which have 
been examined by the author in previous projects. States may fear 
that if they prosecute pirates in their own territory, any convicted 
pirates may thereafter seek asylum.234 States have also claimed that 
they do not have the necessary national laws to prosecute acts of 
piracy.235  However,  as  demonstrated  above,  international  law 
authorizes states to prosecute acts of piracy even when the state has 
no particular nexus to the offense.236 Accordingly, while the author’s 
own research confirms that some states do not in fact have sufficient 
national laws enabling them to exercise universal jurisdiction over 
piracy, the author also concludes there is no particular reason—other 
than a lack of political will—to explain why states do not, or cannot, 
have such laws.237  
  This  Article  addresses  the  other  frequently  cited  reason  to 
explain why states are not inclined to undertake piracy prosecutions: 
                                                                                                                       
  233.  FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at 40. 
  234.  See Yvonne M. Dutton, Pirates and Impunity: Is the Threat of Asylum 
Claims a Reason To Allow Pirates To Escape Justice?, 34 FORDHAM INT’L L.J. 236, 292–
95  (2011)  (analyzing  the  texts  of  several  treaties  governing  asylum  and  non-
refoulement and concluding that even if there is some small risk that some pirates will 
be able to claim asylum or other benefits, the problem of maritime piracy is so great 
that developed nations should assume the risk of those additional asylum claims and 
hold pirates accountable for their crimes). 
  235.  See Yvonne M. Dutton, Maritime Piracy and the Impunity Gap: Insufficient 
National Laws or a Lack of Political Will?, 86 TUL. L. REV. 1111, 1133–39 (discussing 
states’ reluctance to prosecute pirates and their failure to implement international 
piracy conventions). 
  236.  See supra Part IV.B. 
  237.  Dutton, supra note 235, at 1159–62. 1328   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
the difficulty and cost of trying cases of an international character 
that require the state to collect evidence and produce witnesses from 
different parts of the globe.238 As noted in Part IV.A. above, a single 
pirate attack can involve victims (such as ship owners, cargo owners, 
and seafarers) from a number of different countries. For countries 
that  require  or  prefer  live  witness  testimony,  undertaking piracy 
prosecutions is more costly and difficult than it would be if witnesses 
could,  for  example,  provide  their  testimony  in  writing.239  And, 
because  states  can  prosecute—and  are  encouraged  to  prosecute—
piracy crimes using universal jurisdiction even when they have no 
direct nexus to the attack, states could find that few, if any, witnesses 
whose evidence they need for a trial will be state nationals. Even if 
those witnesses were to agree to travel from their home state and 
testify at the trial in person, the prosecuting state would still have to 
incur the burden of paying the travel costs of those witnesses.  
  Paying travel costs, however, may be a moot issue in many cases 
because states ordinarily cannot actually compel foreign witnesses to 
appear  at  trials.  As  seasoned  federal  prosecutor  Lynn  Helland 
explains, prosecutors in the United States can only subpoena U.S. 
citizens or residents to testify live at criminal trials.240 But U.S. 
courts have no subpoena powers over citizens of foreign countries 
when they are outside the United States.241 Prosecutors may still be 
able to require some foreign witnesses to provide necessary evidence 
if the United States has entered into a treaty or other agreement with 
the witness’s country by which the foreign country will help obtain 
that  evidence.  Even  with  a  treaty,  however,  the  foreign  witness 
cannot be compelled to travel to testify in person; the evidence would 
be provided in writing, or by some other means.242 Likewise, the 
United  Kingdom  cannot  compel  foreign  witnesses  to  testify  at 
                                                                                                                       
  238.  See supra Part IV.C. 
  239.  According to the Lang Report, most countries where maritime piracy cases 
have been brought follow a common-law legal tradition and generally require or prefer 
in-person witness testimony. See Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 61 (discussing the challenges 
presented by live testimony requirements). 
  240.  See Helland, supra note 2, at 724 & n.20 (noting that pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1783(a), U.S. citizens or residents are subject to a court’s subpoena power even if they 
are located outside the country). However, citizens of a foreign country may be served 
with a subpoena while on U.S. soil. Id. 
  241.  Martin  Davies,  Bypassing  the  Hague  Evidence  Convention:  Private 
International Law Implications of the Use of Video and Audio Conferencing Technology 
in Transnational Litigation, 55 AM. J. COMP. L. 205, 232 (2007); see also Helland, supra 
note 2, at 724 (stating that citizens of foreign countries can only be compelled to testify 
in U.S. courts if they can be served with a subpoena while in U.S. territory or if an 
applicable international agreement exists). 
  242.  See Helland, supra note 2, at 724 (describing the limitations of U.S. 
authorities’ ability to compel witness testimony). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1329 
trials.243 In short, in the context of maritime piracy cases, courts 
could find that many witnesses are beyond their subpoena power, 
meaning that valuable evidence will be lost unless there is some other 
way to secure the testimony of those witnesses.  
  Moreover, there are many reasons why foreign witnesses may 
not be willing to actually travel to the prosecuting state to give their 
testimony in person. Some witnesses may be more fearful of reprisals 
should they be seen testifying in person against suspected pirates.244 
Some  witnesses,  such  as  crew  members  and  naval  officers,  may 
conclude  that  taking  leave  from  work  to  travel  to  testify  would 
unnecessarily risk the security of their employment—even if some 
laws may supposedly require their employers to make them available 
to testify and to pay their wages while doing so.245 Other witnesses 
may be too ill to travel.246 In all of these cases, the state can only 
hope to persuade the foreign witness to travel to testify since it likely 
has no power to subpoena a trial appearance. In fact, one of the 
United  Kingdom’s  naval  officers  pointed  to  the  unwillingness  of 
witnesses to travel to testify live at trials in an effort to explain, in 
part, why the United Kingdom had yet to bring any of the pirates it 
captured back to be prosecuted.247 He testified that victims of pirate 
attacks often claim they do not want to go anywhere to testify against 
the pirates and that the United Kingdom could not compel foreign 
nationals to travel from their home countries to testify.248  
  States may be able to persuade some foreign witnesses to attend 
a trial to testify so that justice may be done. Some foreign witnesses, 
in fact, must have committed to making themselves available in the 
various piracy cases that states have prosecuted.249 Nevertheless, it 
                                                                                                                       
  243.  See FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at Ev 44–
45 (testimony of Captain David Reindorp) (explaining that the United Kingdom cannot 
compel noncitizen hostages to travel to the United Kingdom to testify against the 
pirates who held them captive). 
  244.  See Lang, supra note 12, ¶62 (stating that many victims sometimes fear 
giving live testimony). 
  245.  See id. ¶¶ 61–62 (suggesting that Security Council resolution 1950 provides 
that seafarers must be given an opportunity to give evidence in piracy trials and that 
employers should enshrine that right in the contracts of seafarers). 
  246.  See, e.g., Harrell v. State, 709 So. 2d 1364, 1370 n.6 (Fla. 1998) (positing 
that a witness may be too ill to appear away from home in person but may be able to 
testify via teleconference). 
  247.  See, FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at Ev 44–
45 (testimony of Captain David Reindorp) (discussing the difficulties of identifying and 
prosecuting suspected pirates). 
  248.  Id. 
  249.  For example, data from 2011 indicates that approximately twenty countries 
have prosecuted, or are in the process of prosecuting, at least one piracy case, and it 
seems reasonable to assume that not all potential witnesses are nationals of the 
prosecuting state. See Bowden & Basnet, supra note 185, at 23 (listing countries 
holding piracy trials). 1330   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
remains true that states exercising universal jurisdiction over piracy 
cases will likely find that they cannot compel foreign witnesses to 
attend a trial in the prosecuting state—again, meaning that some 
evidence will be lost, and some pirates may escape justice as a result. 
Even  in  cases  where  the  foreign  witnesses  voluntarily  agree  to 
appear, they may not make themselves available in a timely fashion. 
Thus,  trial  delays  can  be  common  while  courts  await  witness 
testimony, a fact that can prejudice the suspected pirates awaiting 
their day in court. Indeed, Mr. Lang notes in his report that as of 
early 2011, about 100 suspected pirates were in temporary detention 
for  as  many  as  two  years  while  awaiting  sentencing  or  witness 
testimony.250  
  The  costs  and  the  difficulties  associated  with  obtaining  the 
necessary  evidence  to  prosecute  maritime  piracy  cases  can  be 
mitigated if courts in those countries requiring or preferring live 
witness  testimony  adopt  a  more  flexible  rule  that  allows  some 
witnesses to testify remotely under certain circumstances. Although 
foreign witnesses could still not be compelled to testify, states should 
find  it  easier  to  persuade  them  to  testify  remotely.  After  all,  by 
testifying  remotely,  the  witness  could  avoid  the  risks  and 
inconveniences that accompany travel and live, in-person testimony 
in a foreign locale. In addition, states would save the costs of funding 
witness travel. For all of these reasons, states should also be more 
willing to assume the burden of prosecuting piracy cases that do not 
involve their own nationals as direct victims of the attack, thereby 
reducing the catch-and-release tendency that currently prevails. In 
fact, Mr. Lang and the House of Commons of the United Kingdom 
have both encouraged the potential use of two-way, live VCT as a way 
to alleviate the difficulties associated with obtaining the necessary 
evidence to successfully prosecute maritime piracy cases.  
  Part V describes and discusses the author’s proposed rule to 
allow two-way, live VCT witness testimony in maritime piracy trials 
under certain circumstances.  
V. A PROPOSAL TO ALLOW TWO-WAY, LIVE VCT WITNESS  
TESTIMONY IN MARITIME PIRACY TRAILS 
  Courts should allow witnesses to testify by two-way, live VCT in 
maritime piracy trials on a case-by-case basis in the interests of 
justice, upon proof by the requesting party that (1) the testimony is 
necessary to the fair and just resolution of the case, (2) the witness is 
unable or unwilling for good reason to travel to the court to testify in 
                                                                                                                       
  250.  Lang, supra note 12, ¶61. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1331 
person, and (3) the transmission will use appropriate safeguards to 
protect the defendant’s rights to a fair trial and to ensure the witness 
understands his obligation to give truthful testimony. The test is not 
meant to replace any preference for live testimony, but it should 
facilitate obtaining evidence in piracy cases in particular instances in 
which live testimony is simply not a real alternative. Furthermore, 
the test seeks to ensure that remote testimony is only admitted where 
it would be in the interests of justice to proceed remotely and when 
the technology and the circumstances at the remote location replicate 
as much as possible the courtroom experience, so as to protect the 
public’s  and  the  defendant’s  interests  in  a  fair  trial.  The  rule 
addresses only two-way, live VCT—a mode of technology that will 
permit all parties in the courtroom and in any remote location to see 
and hear one another at all times. As a result, although the witness is 
at a remote location, the defendant will still be able to cross-examine 
the witness contemporaneously during the trial proceedings and in 
view of the judge and jury.  
  The proposed test is designed so that remote witness testimony 
will be permitted only when the court deems it necessary and proper. 
It requires a case-specific determination and balances the interests of 
the various parties to the proceeding in deciding whether allowing a 
particular prosecution witness to testify by remote VCT is in the 
interests of justice.251 It considers the public’s interest in ensuring 
that  trials  of  serious  international  crimes  can  proceed  with  the 
evidence  necessary  to  a  fair  and  just  resolution  of  the  case.  It 
considers  the  need  to  protect  witnesses  against  risks  or 
inconveniences associated with having to attend a trial in person. 
Finally, it considers the defendant’s rights to a fair trial, including 
the right to hear and cross-examine contemporaneously the witnesses 
against him—witnesses who are also aware of their obligation to 
speak truthfully. Each prong of the proposed test is discussed in more 
detail below.  
                                                                                                                       
  251.  See,  e.g.,  supra  Part  III.A  (describing  the  various  tests  used  by  the 
international criminal courts, all of which permit remote VCT testimony only when in 
the interests of justice and where the court determines, for example, that the witness is 
unable or unwilling to attend the trial, the testimony is important, and the accused is 
not prejudiced in his right to cross-examine or confront the witness); supra Part 
III.B.1.b. (describing the Craig test, which requires a showing of an important public 
policy, unavailability of the witness, and that the procedure ensures the evidence is 
reliable—including that cross-examination is permitted); supra Part III.B.2 (describing 
the Gigante test, which permitted remote VCT testimony in the interests of justice in 
light of exceptional circumstances—namely, whether the testimony was material, the 
witness was unavailable, and the defendant’s confrontation rights were still protected). 1332   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
A. Testimony Necessary to the Fair and Just Resolution of the Case 
  The first prong of the proposed test is designed to protect the 
interest of the court and the public in ensuring that trials can proceed 
with the evidence necessary to a fair and just resolution of the case. 
To  be  able  to  testify  remotely,  the  witness’s  testimony  must  be 
sufficiently important to proving or disproving the defendant’s guilt. 
At the same time, however, the proposed test provides a method for 
courts to  obtain  that  necessary  evidence  so  that  maritime  piracy 
trials can go forward and also be resolved. The ICTY and ICTR both 
expressly  consider  the  importance  of  the  witness’s  testimony  in 
determining whether to permit remote prosecution testimony.252 The 
Gigante court similarly considered whether the witness’s testimony 
was material in applying its “exceptional circumstances” test to the 
question  of  remote  adult  prosecution-witness  testimony.253  Courts 
applying  the  Craig  test  likewise  indicated  that  obtaining  crucial 
evidence  necessary  to  justly  and  expeditiously  resolving  criminal 
matters can satisfy the “public policy” prong of that test. For example, 
in  Harrell  v.  State,  the  Florida  Supreme  Court  found  that  two 
Argentinean witnesses possessed necessary evidence and that their 
testimony was essential to the important state interests in resolving 
criminal  matters.254  Notwithstanding  that  it  concluded  that 
permitting the remote witness testimony in Yates was improper, even 
the  Eleventh  Circuit  agreed  that  the  “[g]overnment’s  interest  in 
presenting  the  fact-finder  with  crucial  evidence  is,  of  course,  an 
important public policy.”255 Indeed, as the Yates dissent pointed out, 
“providing the fact-finder with reliable testimony and justly resolving 
the  case  are  the  same  public  policies  that were  found important 
enough to warrant the one-way procedure approved in Craig.”256  
  The international community as a whole should have an interest 
in making certain that states have the necessary evidence to mount 
maritime piracy trials. As discussed above, piracy poses an ever-
increasing threat to individuals, as well as to the safety and security 
of the world’s shared sea lanes and the important resources that 
travel through those seas.257 In fact, in an executive order dated April 
12, 2010, President Barack Obama stated that acts of piracy and 
                                                                                                                       
  252.  See supra Part III.A.1–2 (outlining the ICTY’s and ICTR’s criteria for 
allowing remote testimony). 
  253.  See supra notes 131–36 and accompanying text (discussing the application 
of the “exceptional circumstances” test). 
  254.  See supra note 156 (discussing the Harrell case). 
  255.  United States v. Yates, 438 F.3d 1307, 1316 (11th Cir. 2006) (en banc). 
  256.  Id. at 1322 (Tjoflat, Marcus, & Birch, JJ., dissenting). 
  257.  See supra Part IV.A. 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1333 
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia posed an “extraordinary threat 
to the national security and foreign policy of the United States.”258 
The UK House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee recently made 
a  similar  point,  explaining  that  piracy  threatens  the  United 
Kingdom’s economy and security; it affects the country’s “banking, 
insurance and shipping industries, and threatens the large volume of 
goods which are transported to the [country] by sea.”259 There is little 
hope  that  the  threat  posed  by  maritime  piracy  can  be  halted  or 
pirates deterred unless states can obtain the evidence necessary to 
prosecute pirates who attack innocent seafarers and hold them and 
the world’s goods hostage.  
B. Witness Unable or Unwilling for Good Reason to Testify in Person 
  The second prong of the proposed test considers the interests of 
the  witness  and  witness  availability.  As  discussed  in  Part  IV.D, 
because maritime piracy is a universal-jurisdiction crime that any 
state can prosecute without any nexus to the offense, piracy trials can 
necessarily involve witnesses who are not state nationals. Therefore, 
the  possibility  of  remote  testimony  in  maritime  piracy  trials  is 
important because many witnesses will likely be beyond the state’s 
subpoena power or otherwise unwilling to travel great distances at 
great potential cost to their health, safety, or job security to testify 
live at a trial in a foreign country.  
  Furthermore, given the nature of piracy trials and the types of 
witnesses who may have necessary evidence, this prong’s “unable or 
unwilling for good reason” language should be broadly interpreted. 
The case law in the international criminal courts and in the United 
States  establishes  that  a  witness’s  poor  health  or  other  health 
condition,  such  as  pregnancy,  is  a  well-established  reason  for 
granting a request to testify by video.260 Case law also shows that 
courts frequently conclude that safety or other concerns that make 
witnesses extremely vulnerable should they have to testify live in 
front of the defendant constitute valid reasons to grant a request to 
                                                                                                                       
  258.  Exec. Order No. 13,536, 75 Fed. Reg. 19,869 (Apr. 12, 2010); Exec. Notice, 
76 Fed. Reg. 19,897 (Apr. 7, 2011) (continuing Executive Order 13,536). See generally 
U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime, Testimony to the U.S. H.R. Foreign Affairs Subcomm. 
on  Int’l  Orgs.,  Human  Rights  and  Oversight  (May  14,  2009),  available  at 
http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/about-unodc/speeches/2009-14-05.html  (discussing  the 
threat of Somali piracy to the stability of the region, and the commercial and security 
interest of UN Member States). 
  259.  FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at 5. 
  260.  See, e.g., supra notes 39, 54, 68, 126 and accompanying text (discussing 
pertinent case law). 1334   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
testify remotely.261 Like the ICC, however, courts should decline to be 
constrained regarding the circumstances under which they may find 
a witness has good reasons for being unwilling to attend a trial in 
person.262 Indeed, some courts have found that job-related difficulties 
are sufficient to establish witness unavailability when considering a 
request to allow remote testimony.263 In the piracy context, it is quite 
conceivable that concerns relating to job security will prompt some 
witnesses to conclude that testifying in a foreign country is too risky. 
As  the  Lang  Report  notes,  some  victims  and  witnesses  of  piracy 
attacks  have  refused  to  testify  because  they  are  afraid  their 
employers would not give them time off.264 Naval personnel may also 
have some difficulty leaving their tours of duty for the time it might 
take to travel from sea to a foreign location to testify in person at a 
trial.265  
  Witnesses should also be deemed unable or unwilling for good 
reason to testify at trial in person when they are beyond the subpoena 
power of the foreign court and cannot be persuaded to travel. While it 
is true that some nations may have procedures like the Rule 15 
deposition procedure sometimes used in the United States to preserve 
the evidence of witnesses who may be unavailable at trial, these 
procedures  are  cumbersome  and  costly.  Moreover,  despite  the 
Eleventh Circuit’s comments in Yates, there is reason to believe that 
a Rule 15 deposition procedure is not as protective of a defendant’s 
rights as the two-way, live VCT procedure. After all, the Rule 15 
procedure  allows  some  depositions  to  go  forward  without  the 
defendant’s  in-person  participation  and  does  not  permit 
contemporaneous cross-examination at trial. This Article discusses 
these points in more detail below. 
  First, even if a nation has procedures similar to Rule 15’s, those 
procedures can be cumbersome. As the dissent in Yates pointed out, 
arranging Rule 15 depositions is difficult because one has to deal with 
travel  to  a  foreign  state.  Those  arrangements,  even  if  ultimately 
                                                                                                                       
  261.  See, e.g., supra notes 55, 81 and accompanying text (discussing pertinent 
case law). 
  262.  See supra note 81 and accompanying text (discussing the ICC’s willingness 
to allow video testimony when the witnesses’ personal circumstances encourage it). 
  263.  See, e.g., supra notes 58, 86 and accompanying text (discussing pertinent 
case law). 
  264.  See Lang, supra note 12, ¶ 61 (discussing the impediments to in-person 
testimony). 
  265.  See, e.g., Standards of Military Commissions and Tribunals: Testimony 
Before the H. Armed Servs. Comm., 106th Cong. (2006) (statement of Gerald Gahima, 
Senior  Fellow,  U.S.  Inst.  of  Peace),  available  at  http://www.usip.org/publications/ 
practice-international-criminal-tribunals-and-their-relevance-military-commissions-
light-h (noting that substitutes for requiring the live trial testimony of military 
commanders, for example, can help in the situation where those persons need to 
remain in the field working).  2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1335 
successful, can take time and will likely result in trial delays to the 
prejudice of all parties to the proceeding.266 When the suspect is in 
custody, those arrangements become even more burdensome. Foreign 
countries do not need to permit suspects who are accused of violent 
crimes and in custody onto their soil and into their own temporary 
custody.267 And, in the piracy context, it would not be unusual for 
suspects to be in state custody while awaiting trial given the nature 
of the violent crimes pirates commit and the fact that the pirates will 
often not be nationals of the prosecuting state. Accordingly, while 
taking a deposition of the witness in his home country may be an 
alternative in some cases, when the defendant cannot attend the 
deposition, the procedure seems particularly inferior to permitting 
the witness to testify remotely at the trial.  
  Second, a deposition that occurs some years, months, or weeks 
before  the  actual  trial  does  not  provide  the  same  rights  of 
contemporaneous cross-examination, or even confrontation, as does 
the opportunity to question a witness who appears at the trial by two-
way, live VCT. This Part discusses in greater detail below the various 
ways in which two-way, live VCT mirrors the trial experience when 
witnesses testify in person. One benefit two-way, live VCT has over 
procedures  allowing  for  the  introduction  of  previously  recorded 
deposition  testimony  is  that  the  defense  can  tailor  its  cross-
examination of prosecution witnesses to what it has learned about the 
prosecution’s case from all of the other evidence produced at trial.268  
  Finally, Rule 15 deposition procedures can be costly for the state. 
In the maritime piracy context, those costs could be quite substantial 
since many witnesses with relevant and necessary evidence will likely 
live in foreign jurisdictions. Not all states will have the resources to 
fund foreign travel for depositions, and even states with sufficient 
resources are unlikely to want to fund such travel. States are not 
embracing  their  duty  to  prosecute  piracy  cases  using  universal 
jurisdiction.  They  are  unlikely  to  change  their  current  behavior 
unless mounting such prosecutions becomes less—rather than more—
burdensome.  
  It is true that states may not be able to persuade all witnesses 
who are beyond their court’s subpoena powers to testify remotely by 
two-way,  live  VCT.  Nevertheless,  there  can  be  no  question  that 
remote testimony is less of a burden on the witness than traveling to 
a foreign state to testify in person. Thus, it should be the case, as the 
                                                                                                                       
  266.  United States v. Yates, 438 F.3d 1307, 1323 (11th Cir. 2006) (en banc) 
(Tjoflat, Marcus & Birch, JJ., dissenting). 
  267.  See United States v. McKeeve, 131 F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 1997) (discussing the 
difficulties involved in arranging the testimony of a foreign defendant). 
  268.  See id. at 8. (noting that a court would want to consider the importance of 
having testimony given in the context of the trial, rather than at some earlier date).  1336   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
international criminal courts and courts in the United States have 
found, that many witnesses will agree to suffer the inconvenience of 
testifying remotely in order help bring pirates to justice.  
C. Transmission and Other Safeguards to Protect  
Defendant’s Fair-Trial Rights 
  The third and final part of the proposed test focuses on the 
interest in ensuring that the trial is fair from the perspective of the 
defendant—and, indeed, the public. It addresses concerns relating to 
protecting the defendant’s right to be confronted by and be able to 
cross-examine witnesses who testify against him. It also addresses 
the need to have other safeguards in place at the remote site so that 
the  witness  can  testify  freely,  but  with  the  understanding  that 
testimony must be given truthfully.  
  First, because the proposed rule contemplates only two-way, live 
VCT, it already guarantees that the remote testimony will replicate 
in-person  testimony  at  trial  better  than  one-way  modes  of 
transmitting testimony. The two-way, live VCT technology allows 
testifying witnesses to see and respond to questioning by courtroom 
participants.  The  courtroom  participants  can  also  see,  hear,  and 
respond to the witness. Indeed, the international criminal courts have 
concluded  that  defendants’  cross-examination  rights  are  not 
compromised when witnesses testify remotely by two-way, live VCT 
because the technology permits the defense to examine the witness 
contemporaneously during the witness’s remote testimony at trial.269 
Moreover, even in the United States, the Supreme Court has stated 
that the Confrontation Clause does not guarantee defendants “the 
absolute right to a face-to-face meeting with witnesses against them 
at trial.”270 Two-way, live VCT ensures that the defendant can still 
cross-examine the witnesses against him, thus satisfying what the 
Supreme Court has stated to be the most fundamental right protected 
by the Confrontation Clause.271  
                                                                                                                       
  269.  See, e.g., supra note 44 and accompanying text (quoting the ICTY as stating 
that videoconferencing “respects the right of the accused to cross-examine and directly 
confront  witnesses  while  observing  their  reactions”);  supra  notes  85–86  and 
accompanying text (explaining that the ICC has concluded that a defendant’s rights to 
cross-examine witnesses would not be compromised where a witness was subject to 
contemporaneous cross-examination during remote testimony). 
  270.  Maryland v. Craig, 497 U.S. 836, 844 (1990); see also Kweku Vanderpuye, 
Traditions in Conflict: The Internationalization of Confrontation, 43 CORNELL INT’L 
L.J. 513, 536 (2010) (suggesting that the United States is virtually alone in viewing 
confrontation as something of a categorical imperative even where there are other 
competing factors that show the overall fairness of the trial proceedings). 
  271.  See discussion supra Part III.B.3 (explaining Crawford v. Washington, 541 
U.S. 36, 61–62 (2006)). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1337 
  It is true that not all courts appear to agree that remote witness 
testimony sufficiently replicates the experience of live testimony in 
the courtroom. The Yates majority stated the “simple truth” that 
“confrontation through a video monitor is not the same as physical 
face-to-face confrontation.”272 Although that statement is necessarily 
true since the two methods of testifying are not “identical,” the other 
“simple  truth”  is  that  the  Supreme  Court  has  stated  that  the 
Confrontation  Clause  does  not  absolutely  guarantee  face-to-face 
confrontation.273 Indeed, the Craig Court found that permitting a 
child witness to testify by one-way, closed-circuit television did not 
violate the defendant’s confrontation rights. Here, the two-way, live 
VCT  procedure  more  closely  simulates  the  experience  of  live 
courtroom  testimony  than  the  one-way  procedure  does  since  the 
witness  and  courtroom  participants  can  see  each  other.274  As 
previously  noted,  Professor  Lederer  has  suggested  that  with 
improvements in technology, one may have difficulty observing that a 
remote witness is not actually physically present at the trial.275  
  In  addition  to  the  question  of  the  defendant’s  ability  to 
adequately cross-examine or confront a remote witness, some courts 
have  questioned  whether  courtroom  participants  can  adequately 
assess the demeanor of a remote witness. For example, one chamber 
of  the  ICTR  refused  to  permit  an  important  witness  to  testify 
remotely,  citing  concerns  that  it  would  be  unable  to  sufficiently 
observe the witness’s demeanor—and thus determine credibility.276 
The chamber’s comment, however, should be considered alongside the 
decisions of many other courts admitting two-way, live VCT after 
concluding  that  allowing  such  testimony  would  still  protect  the 
defendant’s rights to a fair trial. Although remote testimony is used 
less frequently in criminal cases, its more regular use in civil cases 
suggests  that  courts  are  comfortable  that  the  technology  can 
sufficiently convey the image and voice of witnesses to the trier of 
fact.277 In any event, there is little reason to believe that judges and 
juries cannot assess a witness’s demeanor equally well on video as in 
                                                                                                                       
  272.  See supra text accompanying note 142. 
  273.  Craig, 497 U.S. at 844. 
  274.  See United States v. Yates, 438 F.3d 1307, 1335 (11th Cir. 2006) (en banc) 
(Marcus, Tjoflat & Birch, JJ., dissenting) (discussing the benefits of the two-way 
procedure); see also United States v. Abu Ali, 528 F.3d 210, 242 (4th Cir. 2008) (stating, 
in a case where witnesses were deposed from Saudi Arabia with defendant in the 
United States, that the two-way, live deposition procedures used were in some ways 
more protective of the defendant’s confrontation rights than the procedures used in 
Craig). 
  275.  See supra note 28 and accompanying text. 
  276.  See supra note 62 and accompanying text. 
  277.  See, e.g., supra notes 30–32 and accompanying text (discussing the various 
uses of VCT in foreign and domestic courts). 1338   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
person.  In  fact,  the  videoconference  procedure  may  offer  the  fact 
finder a better view of the witness depending on the size of the video 
screen and its placement.278 Moreover, some studies have shown that 
jurors tend to perceive remote witnesses very much like they perceive 
witnesses who testify live in the courtroom.279 Because people around 
the world are increasingly using video technology to communicate 
with each other for personal and other reasons, one may expect that 
judges and jurors will only become increasingly comfortable viewing 
witnesses remotely.  
  Finally, the proposed rule only authorizes the use of two-way, 
live VCT in the interests of justice when steps are taken to make sure 
the witness at the remote location understands the obligation to give 
truthful testimony. Accordingly, just as the international criminal 
tribunals  required  that  witnesses  testify  in  locations  such  as 
courtrooms  or  embassies,  so  too  should  courts  require  remote 
witnesses in maritime piracy trials to appear at a location that will 
convey the seriousness of the proceeding.280 To guarantee that the 
witness is not coached at the remote location, courtroom officials or 
some  other  neutral  officer  should  oversee  remote  proceedings.  In 
addition, courts could allow the parties to send a representative to the 
remote location to act as observers should they wish to do so.281 
Implementing these procedures in a foreign location will require the 
assistance of foreign governments. However, because maritime piracy 
is harming the international community as a whole, and because the 
foreign  state  should  be  grateful  another  state  has  assumed  the 
burden  of  prosecution,  one  should  expect  some  cooperation  from 
states.  Moreover,  most  states  are  parties  to  UNCLOS  and  have 
agreed to cooperate to the fullest extent possible in the repression of 
piracy.282 Even though the treaty contains no mechanism to enforce 
this obligation, the prosecuting state could reference this obligation in 
an  effort  to  obtain  the  cooperation  of  other  states  to  assist  in 
facilitating remote witness testimony.  
  Finally, so that the remote witness understands the obligation to 
testify truthfully, the trial court and the courtroom official or other 
neutral officer should place the witness under oath and inform him 
                                                                                                                       
  278.  See Yates, 438 F.3d at 1334 (Marcus, Tjoflat & Birch, JJ., dissenting) 
(noting that the videoconference procedure may make the witness’s image easier for 
the fact finder to observe than had the witness testified in person). 
  279.  See supra note 27 and accompanying text. 
  280.  See supra text accompanying note 47 (discussing ICTY guidelines for the 
orderly conduct of VCT); supra text accompanying notes 73–76 (discussing SCSL 
safeguards for remote witness testimony). 
  281.  See  supra  text  accompanying  notes  73–76  (allowing  for  a  court 
representative to be present in a remote courtroom). 
  282.  See supra text accompanying note 198 (discussing states’ obligations under 
UNCLOS). 2012]    virtual witness confrontation in criminal cases  1339 
that failure to tell the truth could result in a prosecution for perjury 
or other criminal punishment.283 Of course, each state’s perjury laws 
may differ, but many should be sufficient to subject the witness to a 
perjury prosecution. It bears noting that the Yates and Harrell trial 
courts administered oaths to the foreign witnesses in Australia and 
Argentina, respectively.284 Furthermore, like the extradition treaty 
between the United States and Argentina discussed in Harrell, other 
countries likely have extradition treaties that provide for extradition 
for the crime of perjury.  
VI.  CONCLUSION 
  Allowing  the  use  of  two-way,  live  remote  witness  VCT  in 
maritime piracy cases on a case-by-case basis when the proposed rule 
is satisfied should help to facilitate the prosecution of these cases and 
help end the impunity gap that currently prevails. States would not 
have  to  be  worried  that  they  could  never  obtain  the  evidence 
necessary to successfully mount a piracy case because they could offer 
witnesses the possibility of testifying remotely. The rule ensures that 
courts  permit  remote  prosecution-witness  testimony  only  when  it 
would further the interests of justice and also protect the defendant’s 
rights to a fair trial. The witness’s evidence has to be sufficiently 
important, so that it is necessary to the fair and just resolution of the 
case. The witness has to be unable or unwilling to attend the trial for 
good reason—such as a foreign witness beyond the subpoena power of 
the state or a witness who would suffer health or job-related risks 
should he be required to attend a trial in person. Furthermore, even 
though the witness would not be in the courtroom, the two-way, live 
VCT technology enables all parties—whether in the courtroom or the 
remote location—to see and hear one another so that defense counsel 
can subject the witness to real-time cross-examination and so that the 
courtroom  participants  can  assess  the  witness’s  demeanor  at  the 
same time.  
  The technology necessary to permit two-way, live VCT remote 
witness testimony is not without cost. However, as noted above, the 
international  criminal  courts  and  the  courts  in  many  developed 
nations are already using the technology.285 To the extent that less-
                                                                                                                       
  283.  See Maryland v. Craig, 497 U.S. 836, 845–46 (1990) (discussing the rights 
guaranteed by the Confrontation Clause). 
  284.  United States v. Yates, 438 F.3d 1307, 1310 (11th Cir. 2006) (en banc); 
Harrell v. State, 709 So. 2d 1364, 1371 (Fla. 1998). 
  285.  See supra note 30 and accompanying text (providing examples of courts 
that use VCT); see also Heru Andriyanto, Court To Allow Video Link Testimony in 
Bashir  Trial,  JAKARTA  GLOBE  (Mar.  11,  2011),  http://www.thejakartaglobe.com/ 
 1340   vanderbilt journal of transnational law  [vol. 45:1283 
developed nations do not have the technology or the necessary funds 
to  obtain  it,  wealthier  nations  could  assist.  After  all,  the  world 
community is spending more than $1 billion each year to support the 
antipiracy efforts of the various patrolling navies.286 Nations are also 
providing funds to assist Kenya and the Seychelles in developing 
their courts and prisons so that they can aid in prosecuting pirates.287 
There seems little reason not to spend some funds on helping nations 
obtain the technology to allow witnesses to testify remotely using 
VCT if doing so would also encourage those nations to share the 
burden of prosecuting piracy cases.  
  The  international  community  must  seek  solutions,  and 
sometimes novel solutions, if it hopes to put an end to the current 
situation in which pirate attacks are ever-increasing in number, in 
violence, and in payoffs to pirates. International law permits even 
those states with no nexus to the offense to prosecute pirates, but 
states are releasing the pirates they capture instead of prosecuting 
them. They are doing so in part because of the difficulties associated 
with  obtaining  evidence  from  witnesses  who  are  often  foreigners 
beyond the state’s subpoena power. The proposed rule offers at least a 
partial solution to the culture of impunity that currently surrounds 
piracy. It suggests a less burdensome and less costly way to ensure 
that states can obtain the necessary evidence to prosecute maritime 
piracy cases, while at the same time protecting the public’s and the 
defendant’s interests in ensuring that trials are conducted in a fair 
and just manner.  
                                                                                                                       
home/court-to-allow-video-link-testimony-in-bashir-trial/427957 (noting that a court in 
India approved a request to permit sixteen witnesses to testify from a remote location 
in a trial against cleric Abu Bakar Bahsir by way of video link because of security 
concerns). 
  286.  David Gauvey Herbert, Piracy Is Down, and Moving Farther Out, NAT’L J., 
(Apr. 21, 2010, 4:49 PM), http://burnafterreading.nationaljournal.com/2010/ 04/piracy-
is-down-and-why-thats-b.php (suggesting that the EU, NATO, and U.S. antipiracy 
operations cost slightly less than $1.9 billion per year to support). 
  287.  Kenya  and  the  Seychelles  have  both  made  agreements  with  various 
countries to accept some arrested pirates for trial. See Denmark, Seychelles in Deal To 
Prosecute Pirates, REUTERS (May 25, 2011, 3:52 PM), http://af.reuters.com/article/ 
somaliaNews/idAFLDE74O1RI20110525. The UN Office on Drugs and Crime, with the 
support from the United Kingdom and others, for example, provides funds to support 
court and prison facilities in both countries. See, e.g., FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 
2012 REPORT, supra note 174, at Ev 69; Lang, supra note 12, ¶¶ 65–66 & n.37. Kenya, 
however, has indicated that it will not continue to accept a great number of captured 
pirates for trial. See, e.g., Jeff Davis, Kenya Cancels Piracy Trial Deals, SUNDAY 
NATION  (Sept..  30,  2010,  9:48  PM),  http://www.nation.co.ke/News/Kenya+cancels+ 
piracy+trial+deals/-/1056/1021740/-/yfbkamz/-/index.html  (reporting  that  Kenya  had 
terminated agreements committing to try captured  pirates in its courts); Lillian 
Leposo, Kenya Ends Agreement with EU to Prosecute Suspected Somali Pirates, CNN 
WORLD  (Oct.  4,  2010),  http://articles.cnn.com/2010-10-04/world/kenya.eu.pirates_1_ 
somali-pirates-kenyan-authorities-kenya-s-ministry?_s=PM:WORLD (same). 