Cornell Journal of Law and Public Policy
Volume 12
Article 3
Issue 3Summer 2003
When Inter-Branch Norms Break Down: Of Arms-
for-Hostages, Orderly Shutdowns, Presidential
Impeachments, and Judicial Coups
Peter M. Shane
Follow this and additional works at:http://scholarship.law.cornell.edu/cjlpp
Part of theLaw Commons
Recommended Citation
Shane, Peter M. (2003) "When Inter-Branch Norms Break Down: Of Arms-for-Hostages, Orderly Shutdowns, Presidential
Impeachments, and Judicial Coups,"Cornell Journal of Law and Public Policy: Vol. 12: Iss. 3, Article 3.
Available at:http://scholarship.law.cornell.edu/cjlpp/vol12/iss3/3
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journals at Scholarship@Cornell Law: A Digital Repository. It has been accepted for
inclusion in Cornell Journal of Law and Public Policy by an authorized administrator of Scholarship@Cornell Law: A Digital Repository. For more
information, please contactjmp8@cornell.edu.WHEN INTER-BRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN:
OF ARMS-FOR-HOSTAGES,  "ORDERLY
SHUTDOWNS,"  PRESIDENTIAL
IMPEACHMENTS,  AND
JUDICIAL "COUPS"
Peter M. Shanet
INTRODUCTION  .............................................  503
I.  CHECKS AND  BALANCES,  DEMOCRATIC
LEGITIMACY,  AND  INTER-BRANCH
COOPERATION .......................................  505
II.  ATTACKING  CHECKS  AND  BALANCES:  FOUR
EPISO D ES  ............................................  514
A.  ELIMATING  CONGRESS'S FOREIGN  POLICY ROLE:  THE
IRAN-CONTRA  SCANDAL .............................  514
B.  SHUTTING  DOWN THE EXECUTIVE  ESTABLISHMENT:
THE  1995 BUDGET  SHOWDOWN  .....................  516
C.  SUBJUGATING  THE PRESIDENT TO CONGRESSIONAL
CONTROL:  THE CLINTON IMPEACHMENT ..............  521
D.  USURPING  THE APPOINTMENTS  POWER:  THE
STONEWALLING  OF CLINTON JUDGES .................  526
III.  THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST  DELIBERATIVE
LEGITIMACY AND  ITS CAUSES  .....................  533
IV.  W HAT NEXT?  ........................................  540
INTRODUCTION
Future historians of American government surely will take note of a
remarkable  series  of domestic  political  events  around the  turn  of the
Twenty-First Century.  Congress impeached a President for lying about a
t  Joseph S. Platt-Porter, Wright, Morris and Arthur Professor of Law, Moritz College of
Law, The Ohio State University  and Distinguished Service Professor Adjunct  of Law and
Public Policy, H. J. Heinz III School of Public Policy  and Management,  Carnegie Mellon
University.
I am grateful to Cynthia Farina and Saikrishna Prakash for their comments on an earlier draft,
and for reactions from Reed Hundt, Bill Keech, and Bert Rockman.  I benefited also from the
research assistance of Jennifer Ray, University of Pittsburgh College of Law '04.  None of the
above is responsible for blunders that remain uncorrected. © 2003 Peter M. Shane.  All  ights
reserved.504  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND  PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
sexual  liaison.'  The Supreme  Court rendered judgment  in a case  that
effectively  decided  a presidential  election.2  A  President of the United
States  asserted  inherent  constitutional  power  to  deploy  U.S.  military
forces "[t]o forestall or prevent ...  hostile acts by our adversaries' 3 even
if "uncertainty remains as to the time and place of [an] enemy's attack;"'4
to provide for the potentially  indefinite peacetime detention of U.S. citi-
zens in military custody;5 and-in a less celebrated, but wholly unprece-
dented  move-to  authorize  the private  trustees of former Presidents  to
claim  executive  privilege  with  regard  to  historical  records  of  the
6
presidency.
Right or wrong, all of this is certainly different. Some of these epi-
sodes have no historical antecedents;  others have precedents, but only in
vastly  different historical contexts.  Moreover, each of these moves,  di-
rectly  or  indirectly,  bodes  potentially  significant  consequences  for all
branches of the national government, not just the branch taking the initia-
tive in  question.  Congress's  impeachment  of President Clinton  weak-
ened  the  executive  branch,  at  least  temporarily.  The  Supreme  Court
implicated itself to an unprecedented  degree in the political fortunes of
the federal executive,  and deprived Congress of what presumably would
have been its authority to judge the validity of electoral votes in the 2000
election.7  The  presidential positions  I have  mentioned would  derogate
seriously  from  Congress's role  in  regulating  the use of military force;
limit  the role  of the judiciary  in  enforcing  civil  liberties,  and  prevent
members  of Congress (and the public  more  generally)  from  obtaining
key  information  about  the  historic  operation  of the  executive  branch.
These are but the most dramatic examples of a long series of institutional
behaviors  among our three branches  of government that seem to break
from what would appear, from at least World War II onward, to be the
customary ways of doing business.8
I Three  of the  more  important  accounts,  told from  different  perspectives  are  JOE
CONASON  &  GENE LYONS,  THE HUNTING  OF THE PRESIDENT:  THE 10-YEAR CAMPAIGN  TO
DESTROY BILL AND HILLARY CLINTON  (2000); RICHARD A. POSNER,  AN  AFFAIR OF STATE:
THE INVESTIGATION,  IMPEACHMENT,  AND TRIAL OF PRESIDENT CLINTON (1999); and JEFFREY
TOOBIN,  A VAST CONSPIRACY (1999).
2 See Bush v. Gore, 531 U.S. 98 (2000).
3 National Security Strategy of the United States, http://www.whitehouse.gov/nsc/nss5.
html (Sept. 2002).
4 Id.
5 See Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 316 F.3d 450 (4th Cir. 2003).
6 Exec.  Order No.  13,233, 66 Fed. Reg. 56,025, 56,028 (Nov.  1, 2001).
7 See 3 U.S.C. § 15 (2002).
8 In his response to this article, Professor Saikrishna Prakash makes the point that norm
change, in and of itself, ought not be troubling; we should be troubled only if less sound norms
replace more sound norms.  Saikrishna Prakash, Branches Behaving Badly: The Predictable
and Often Desirable Consequences of the Separation of Powers, 12 CORNELL J. L. AND PUB.
POL. 543, 544 (2003).  1 do not disagree.  It is not norm change per se that I am critiquing.  I20031 WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK  DOWN
The reason this matters is complex.  We have a national  system of
government whose orderly and effective operation depends to an excep-
tional  degree  upon certain  norms  of cooperation  among  its competing
branches.  The strength  of those norms is essential to securing the pri-
mary  political  asset that  our government  design was  intended  to help
realize:  an  especially  robust  form  of democratic  legitimacy.  If recent
norm-bending initiatives constitute a trend, rather than a series of coinci-
dental,  but unlinked  episodes, then  the capacity  of our government  to
manifest this particular form  of legitimacy may be endangered.  Such a
development  should not proceed unnoticed.
Part I briefly reviews the constitutional  theory of checks and bal-
ances  in  its  American  form,  pinpointing  the  system's  implicit  depen-
dence  on  norms  of  inter-branch  cooperation  within  the  national
government.  Part II recounts four recent episodes that illustrate  the in-
creasing  fragility  of those  norms that had  characterized  modem  inter-
branch cooperation until the mid-1980s.  Part III analyzes  the causes of
current inter-branch tensions, and Part IV suggests how matters might be
improved.  Improvement is important because,  in terms  of inter-branch
norms, we may otherwise be headed towards a new equilibrium that does
considerable  violence  to  America's  modem  practice  of  democratic
legitimacy.
I.  CHECKS  AND BALANCES,  DEMOCRATIC  LEGITIMACY,
AND INTER-BRANCH  COOPERATION
At the heart at our founders'  design for a new republican form of
government is a web of political institutions structured to hold each other
to  account  through  what is  called  "checks  and  balances."  As  James
Madison explained,  it is not enough  for the security  of liberty that the
constitutional  text provide for three separate and distinct branches of the
national government.9  Nor is it sufficient that legislative, executive, and
judicial powers should each, in the main, be concentrated chiefly in just
one of those branches.  Power, he wrote, "is  of an encroaching nature"'10
am critiquing the substitution of norms that support inter-branch consensus building and demo-
cratic  deliberation  with norms  that  favor winner-take-all-politics  and  unproductive  inter-
branch tension.  Professor Prakash also notes that norms change all the time, and implicitly
suggests that it is arbitrary for me to refer to World War 11 as a baseline. I mention World War
II only because I am supposing that norms of governance reflect larger social norms, and,
therefore, it is not especially instructive to compare the norms of modern American society
with the norms of, for example, slaveholding American society.  Having said that, Professor
Prakash is correct to the extent that I might have chosen the enactment of the Voting Rights
Act of 1965 or the end of the Vietnam War as the most recent social upheavals of sufficient
significance to be regarded as epoch-marking.  For purposes of the present paper, however, I
do not think it matters.
9 THE FEDERALIST No. 48, at 308-09 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed., 1961).
10 Id.506  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW  AND PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
and must "be effectually restrained  from passing the limits assigned to
it."'I  The separation of powers, in other words, is essential to liberty, but
cannot, without sound institutional design, preserve itself.
In the Framers'  hands, the key institutional imperative was to struc-
ture the national government so that each branch, acting under the influ-
ence of foreseeable ambitions and incentives, would keep both itself and
its coordinate branches  within their respective  constitutionally-assigned
roles.  In Madison's famous words, protection against tyranny "must be
supplied, by so contriving the interior structure of the government as that
its several constituent parts may, by their mutual relations, be the means
of keeping  each  other in  their  proper places." 12  In  operation, this  re-
quired  some  complex  calculations.  The  Framers  had  to  position  the
branches  of the new government to achieve  a careful  balance of auton-
omy  and interdependence.  If each  branch was  to be able  to keep  the
others in check, then each branch  had to be vested with  some effective
powers of review that the other branches could not easily impede.  Most
obvious  among  the Framers'  choices in this regard are the presidential
veto and pardon powers, Congress's power to impeach and remove, and
the courts'  power to review both executive and legislative acts.  In gen-
eral,  the manner in which each branch deploys these checking powers  is
entirely within its discretion.
At the same time, in  order that the branches  not use their autono-
mous powers  with  undue disregard  for the prerogatives of their coordi-
nate  branches,  each  branch  had  to  be  put  in  a  position  of  partial
institutional dependency.  For the most part, each branch needs the for-
bearance, if not actually the agreement of, the other two branches  in or-
der to  work  its  will.  Thus,  Congress  cannot  easily  legislate  without
presidential agreement,  and cannot execute the laws once passed.  The
President is dependent for most of his initiatives on key officials whom
the Senate must confirm, and on appropriations  that Congress must en-
act.  The judiciary does not execute  its own judgments, and depends on
Congress for both appropriations  and the delimitation of its jurisdiction.
Through this combination of what might be called "autonomous  powers"
and "collaborative powers,"  the branches were  thus given both positive
incentives to cooperate  and weapons  to retaliate  against uncooperative
conduct.
In addition  to  the prophylactic  virtue of constraining  power,  this
system promised also an affirmative virtue-fostering deliberation.  The
multiplicity of institutions, each with different constituencies,  organiza-
tional  structures,  modes  of  selection,  and  internal  decision-making
processes,  would insure that the nation would embark on no program of
I d.
12 THE FEDERALIST  No. 51,  at 320 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed.,  1961).2003] WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK  DOWN
public policy without the examination of that policy from a wide array of
perspectives.  This was critical  to the Framers not only  on  the general
ground that, all things being equal,  it is better to make important deci-
sions through careful  consideration,  rather than rashly and without dis-
cussion.  It was  also  critical to insure that, in  the process  of deciding
upon national affairs,  all affected interests would have a genuine oppor-
tunity to be heard and to have their interests accounted for in a collective
determination of the public interest.  In Hamilton's words:
The oftener  [a]  measure is  brought  under examination,
the greater the diversity  in  the situations of those who
are  to examine  it, the less must be the danger of those
errors which flow from want of due deliberation,  or of
those  missteps  which proceed from  the  contagion of
some common passion or interest.13
Deliberation among numerous parties embodying  a diversity of in-
terests  was thus  essential to decisionmaking  consistent  with justice. In
contrast, decisionmaking based on "some common impulse of passion, or
of interest,"' 4 would be tainted by what Madison called the spirit of "fac-
tion."'15  The web of new governmental  structures was designed,  in sum,
to help insure that policy outcomes represented something other than "an
unjust combination  of the majority of the whole."'16
The Framers called their theory of legitimate government "republi-
canism," but, in modem parlance, we recognize their republicanism as an
extraordinary  advance in both the theory  and practice of what we call
democratic legitimacy.  Governments rule legitimately when the relative
few who exercise the power of the state are morally entitled to rule.17  It
is the implicit claim of democratic systems that democratic governments
are morally entitled to govern because, to the maximum extent possible,
democracy insures that the interests of all citizens are entitled to and will
receive full and fair consideration in the making of public policy.' 8  The
genius of the American constitution lies in the realization of its framers
that such full and fair consideration  of all citizens'  interests  requires  a
multiplicity  of legitimating  mechanisms.' 9  That is, the Framers  might
13 THE FEDERALIST  No. 73, at 443 (Alexander Hamilton)  (Clinton Rossiter ed.,  1961)
(emphasis added).
14 THE FEDERALIST  No.  10, at 78 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed., 1961).
15 Id.
16  THE FEDERALIST No. 51, at 324 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed., 1961) (empha-
sis supplied).
17  See generally Allen Buchanan, Political Legitimacy and Democracy, 112 ETHICS 689
(2002).
18  See id. at 704.  See also ROBERT A.  DAHL, ON DEMOCRACY  62-80 (1998).
19  See generally Peter M. Shane, Reflections in Three Mirrors: Complexities of Repre-
sentation in a Constitutional Democracy, 60 OHIo ST. L. J. 693 (1999).508  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
have provided for a system that relied for legitimacy entirely on the elec-
toral accountability of government officials.  Plainly, they did not.  Alter-
natively,  they might have provided for a  system that relied entirely  on
wise and public-minded  deliberation,  without recourse to popular senti-
ment.  They did not do that either.  Instead, they combined elements of
what we would now call both representative democracy and deliberative
democracy into a unique set of "republican" institutions.  These checking
and balancing  components combine elements of both representative and
deliberative  legitimacy, while preventing one another from overstepping
their constitutionally  assigned bounds.
Of course, neither fair deliberation,  nor even the more general hob-
bling of government's tyrannical impulses, was the Framers'  sole objec-
tive.  First and foremost, they wanted a government that would work and
would effectively  advance the "permanent and aggregate interests of the
community"20  in  both  domestic  and  international  affairs.  From  that
standpoint, any government of separated powers poses obvious difficul-
ties.  Such a government revolves around no one source of authority that
so embodies the sovereign power of the state-or, in the American ex-
ample,  of the people-that it can act quickly in the public interest.  The
Framers thus designed a form  of institutional  interdependence  that ori-
ents the system towards consensus, but at a price. Their system inevita-
bly entails delay in decisionmaking and a bias in favor of gradualism.
Norms of institutional cooperation are therefore essential to enable a
government of separated powers to achieve its multiple potential virtues.
It  is  not  merely  foreseeable,  but  intended,  that  the  three  coordinate
branches of government experience tension and competition.  Friction, to
some extent, is a sign of the system at work.  But life cannot be all fric-
tion.  As  British  Prime  Minister  Lord  John  Russell  famously  put the
point:  "Every  political  constitution  in which different bodies  share the
supreme  power  is  only  enabled  to  exist  by  the forbearance  of those
among whom this power is distributed."'2'  A system of separated pow-
ers, in other words, works only if every branch is committed to effective
governance and is willing to forbear from the deployment of its powers
to their extreme theoretical  limits.  In a separation of powers  system de-
signed to embody checks  and balances,  where powers are  allocated  to
each branch precisely with the purpose of rendering each branch vulnera-
ble to the discretion of the others, forbearance  is imperative.
Ordinarily, at least four factors in the American system coincide to
produce the "forbearance"  that averts any serious breakdown of govern-
ment.  One is the internalization within each institution of norms of def-
20  THE FEDERALIST No.  10, at 78 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed.,  1961).
21  Letter of Lord John Russell to Poulett Thomson (October 14. 1839), available at http:/
/www.constitution.org/sech/sech_133.txt  (last visited Apr. 14. 2003).20031 WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
erence for the core capacities of the other two branches.  The history of
Article III jurisdiction provides a powerful case in point.  The past two
centuries are replete with examples of the federal judiciary rendering de-
cisions antagonistic to the views and interests of the elected branches of
government.  It  seems  impossible  to  explain  the  forbearance  of  the
elected branches from substantially curtailing federal jurisdiction in clas-
ses of controversial cases unless we regard that forbearance as a sign of
our elected officials'  allegiance  to the near inviolability  of the judicial
22
function.
A second factor is a common belief in the legitimacy and necessity
of active government.  Frequently, even amid deep policy disagreement
between  the  executive  and  legislative  branches,  public  policy  com-
promises emerge in the solution of public problems because both elected
branches  are  committed  to demonstrating  their capacity  to respond  in
some constructive  way  to public challenges.  Federal campaign  finance
reform legislation resulted, in part, from this joint impulse.23
Third, each branch-but each of the elected branches especially-
has historically been motivated to represent a broad range of public opin-
ion on critical issues.  Thus, again, even when the elected branches disa-
gree  significantly  on public policy, each is typically  motivated to  seek
the approval of a wide spectrum of American voters.
Finally, each branch of the government is structured internally so as
to  promote  deliberation,  thus  increasing  the  likelihood  that  multiple
points of view  will  be heard  and  given time  to help  shape  long-term
policy  outcomes.  Congress,  for example,  is divided  into  two Houses,
which must concur in a legislative proposal in order that it be enacted.
The length of term and geographical basis of representation  is different
in  the two  Houses,  which,  originally,  were  also  selected  by different
methods.24  The judiciary consists of a Supreme Court and lower courts
through which legal interpretation evolves  in a highly formal, multi-vo-
cal way.  The fact that Article III judges have lifetime tenure also insures
that, at any given  moment, the judiciary is  populated by judges whose
pre-judicial careers exhibited a variety of ideological and political predis-
positions.  Even the constitutional  text describing the executive branch,
22 GERALD  GUNTHER &  KATHLEEN M..SULLIVAN,  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW 81  (14th  ed.
2001).
23  See Karen Foerstel, Campaign Finance Passage Ends a Political Odyssey, 60 CONG.
Q. WKLY. REP. 799 (Mar. 23, 2002) (discussing the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002,
Pub.L. No. 107-155,  116 Stat. 81).
24  As originally  drafted, the Constitution  provided  that the House of Representatives
should be elected by those voters in the states qualified to vote for the larger houses of their
respective state legislatures, U.S. CONST. art. I, § 2, cl. 2, but that the Senators from each state
should be chosen by the respective state legislatures.  U.S. CONST. art. I, § 3, cl. 1, repealed by
U.S. CONST. amend. XVII.510  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
the most unitary  of the three  branches, contemplates  that the President
may seek advice from the heads of departments.25  Deliberation  was an
intended feature  of the new government through and through.
Unfortunately,  significant  evidence  has  mounted  over  the  last
twenty  years that all these  restraining  factors  are eroding.  Each  of the
branches has been deploying its powers with increasing disrespect for its
co-equal branches.  One can see this trend, for example, in the increasing
aggressiveness of the United States Supreme Court in reviewing the con-
stitutionality of federal statutes.  Of the 151  federal statutes declared un-
constitutional  in whole or in part by the Court between  1789 and June
2000,  40-over  26  per  cent-were  declared  unconstitutional  since
1981.26  This number might be misleading, of course, because it is diffi-
cult  to come  up with  a  baseline  figure  of the  total  volume  of federal
legislation  enacted since  1981.  However, a  significant  number  of the
recent cases of invalidation result from wholly new doctrine or standards
of review.27  It  is hard  to escape  the impression  that the Court  is not
approaching  its  review  functions  modestly,  but instead  actually  is  in-
venting new reasons for invalidating  legislation.
Even more  threatening to government's  capacity  to function, how-
ever, has been the escalating institutional conflict between the President
and Congress.  A variety of episodes between the 1980s and the present
demonstrate  a  level  of mutual  disregard between  the elected branches
that would  have been  essentially  unthinkable  at  any  prior moment  in
modern times.
It is important to be clear on what is  new about this.  It is not un-
precedented for one branch of government to chafe against restraints im-
posed by others or even to undertake initiatives pressing the edges of its
constitutional  prerogatives.  The  overall  system  has  some  capacity  to
self-correct  for  such  tensions.  If, however,  one  looks  at  the  historic
points of greatest tension among the branches-Andrew Jackson's battle
against the National  Bank, the impeachment of Andrew Johnson, or the
attempted  court-packing  of  President  Franklin  Roosevelt-they  have
generally  been characterized  by an impulse that is absent from the cur-
rent trend.  In opposing the Bank, Jackson was standing fast against an
25 See U.S. CONST. art. II, § 2, cl.  1.
26 U.S.  SENATE, THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: ANALYSIS AND
INTERPRETATION,  S. Doc. No. 103-6, at 2001-31 (1st Sess. 1992); U.S. SENATE, THE CONSTI-
TUTION OF THE UNITED  STATES OF AMERICA:  ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION,  2000 SUPPLE-
MENT, S. Doc. No. 106-27, at 151-158 (2d Sess. 2000).
27  See, e.g., Ruth Colker and James J. Brudney, Dissing Congress, 100 MICH. L. REV. 80
(2001); Robert C. Post and Reva B. Siegel, Equal Protection by Law: Federal Antidiscrimina-
tion Legislation After Morrison and Kimel, 110 YALE L.J. 441  (2000); Peter M. Shane, Feder-
alism's "Old Deal": What's Right and Wrong with Conservative Judicial Activism, 45 VILL.
L. REV.  201 (2000).2003] WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK  DOWN
institution widely regarded as supporting the interests of creditors against
the interests of the less monied classes.  Andrew Johnson was impeached
for opposing Reconstruction,  which was intended to end white caste rule
in the South.  Roosevelt proposed court-packing  in response to what he
regarded as the Court's unwillingness to legitimate legislative and execu-
tive  measures  designed  to  relieve  the  Depression  and  for which  the
elected branches enjoyed a popular mandate.  Thus, each of these earlier
assaults on conventional ways of doing business was arguably in the at-
tempted service of more democracy.  The desire  to broaden representa-
tion  is  consistent  with  the  political  motivations  behind  institutional
norms  that favor checks  and balances,  which have frequently been im-
pulses  towards the inclusion  of more voices, not fewer, in democratic
decisionmaking.  Thus, even though checks and balances were compro-
mised by such earlier inter-branch battles, the challenges to business as
usual tended to be supportive of the very aspirations for democratic legit-
imacy that checks and balances  are supposed to advance.
The impulses behind recent breaches  of inter-branch  accommoda-
tion, however, are decidedly antidemocratic.  Their aim has been to insu-
late  government  decisionmaking  from  popular  accountability  and  to
place government  authority  yet more firmly in the hands of those who
represent  fewer  interests,  not more.  Thus,  recent  breaches  have  done
more  than threaten the normal operation  of checks and balances  in  the
short  term;  they  have  sought  to  defeat  the  very  purposes  for  which
checks and  balances  were  constitutionalized.  This is exceedingly  dan-
gerous,  and it is not coincidental.  The  "thought  leaders"  of the revolt
against  what might be considered  the post-World War  II  conventional
wisdom regarding inter-branch  interaction  are also jurisprudentially an-
tagonistic to a view of the Constitution that revolves around checks  and
balances.28  Our recent political  history  demonstrates just what such  a
view puts at risk.
28 The Federalist Society for Law and Public Policy has been the intellectual home for
the key figures in the academy, government, and legal practice, who have both elaborated in
principle and implemented  in  practice the  modem constitutional  theory  of presidentialism.
Key figures include the current National Chairman and co-founder, Professor Steven G. Cala-
bresi, and co-founder Lee Liberman, both of whom worked in the Bush I White House, and
current Board of Visitors members Edwin Meese III, former counselor to President Reagan
and Attorney General during the second Reagan Administration, and C. Boyden Gray, White
House counsel under President George  H.W. Bush.  Current Solicitor General Theodore B.
Olson, who was assistant attorney general in charge of the U. S. Justice Department Office of
Legal Counsel during the first Reagan Administration, is also a former member of that Board.
Examples of Professor Calabresi's seminal scholarship in this area include Steven  G. Cala-
bresi, Some Normative Arguments for the Unitary Executive, 48 ARK. L. REV. 23 (1995)  [here-
inafter  Unitary Executive];  Steven G. Calabresi  & Saikrishna  B.  Prakash, The President's
Power To Execute the Laws, 104 YALE  L.J. 541  (1994);  Steven G. Calabresi & Kevin H.
Rhodes, The Structural Constitution: Unitary Executive, PluralJ udiciary, 105 HARV. L. REV.
1153 (1992).  To be sure, there are legal academics decidedly not of the Federalist Society's512  CORNELL JOURNAL  OF LAW AND  PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
What  counts as  significant  norms  of inter-branch  behavior is,  of
course, a matter of debate.  Norms are nowhere  written down, and dis-
cerning the significance  of events that arguably reinforce or undermine
norms is  at least as uncertain  a venture as, for example, discerning  the
significance  of constitutional text.  My point will be made, however,  if
we focus on just three general normative propositions that seem to follow
more  or  less  ineluctably  from  the  most  rudimentary  assumptions  of
American constitutional theory.
The first norm derives the Framers'  unambiguous intention, embod-
ied fully in the constitutional text, to create and authorize three different
branches of the national government.  We do not need any specific the-
ory of what each branch would do or how precisely the branches  would
interrelate to draw the confident inference that each branch was intended
to serve some core function that would not be identical to the core func-
tions of the other two branches.  Otherwise, having three branches would
be  nonsensical.  From this, it follows, as a constitutional  norm, that no
branch should use its autonomous powers  to usurp the core powers of a
coordinate branch or to undermine a coordinate branch's capacity to ex-
ercise  its  core  powers  at  all.  Such  inter-branch  aggression  would
threaten the Constitution's  most self-evident structural premise.
The second  norm  follows  from the  Madisonian  design  by  which
powers were allocated  to the three branches.  As explained  above, that
design was to assure that the respective branches would keep "each other
in their proper places" by their "mutual relations," which would depend
upon a combination  of autonomy and interdependence.29  If interdepen-
dence is  as critical to the Framers'  system as autonomy, then it follows
that no branch should seek to eliminate  longstanding forms of interde-
pendency  between the branches.  This norm may sound all but identical
to the first, but it really is  not.  Although one  way by which a  branch
might be tempted to eliminate its interdependency  with another branch
would be to usurp the other branch's powers, it is possible to attack the
powers of another branch without attacking interdependency.  For exam-
ple, if Congress were to try categorically to outlaw all executive privilege
claims in judicial proceedings-a move I would think unconstitutional,
at least as applied to many such claims-it would be disabling the execu-
tive, but not eliminating its own dependency on the executive.  Thus, the
norm against the usurpation of power and the norm against undermining
interdependency, however reinforcing, are logically  distinct.
political  persuasion who support  some aspects of presidentialism.  See, e.g., Elena Kagan,
Presidential Administration,  114 HARV.  L. REV.  2245  (2001); Lawrence  Lessig & Cass R.
Sunstein, The President and the Administration, 94 COLUM. L. REV.  1 (1994).  Their analyses,
however, stop short of Professor Calabresi's categorical views on the scope of the President's
unreviewable discretionary powers.
29 THE FEDERALIST No. 51, at 320 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed., 1961)2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
The third norm is arguably less self-evident, but is as compelled by
the Framers'  theory of representation as the other two norms were com-
pelled by their structural design.  That theory held that the proper repre-
sentation  of  contending  interests  depended  upon  making  every
government  decisionmaker accountable  to a sufficiently  wide  range of
parties that no official would be tempted to elevate the parochial interests
of the few consistently over the public interest of the many.30
In  short, one  does  not need to  dig  too  deeply  into  constitutional
theory to identify three important norms that strengthen the capacity of a
checks  and  balances  government  to manifest  robust democratic  legiti-
macy through  responsiveness  to  the  widest range  of salient interests,
while still permitting  significant political and  institutional  competition.
They are:
CI: No branch of government should use its autonomous
powers to usurp the core powers of a coordinate branch
or to undermine a coordinate branch's capacity to exer-
cise its core powers at all.
C : No branch of government  should seek to eliminate
2
longstanding  forms  of  interdependency  between  the
branches.3'
PI: Elected officials ought to govern with the aim of re-
sponding  to the agenda  of a  public  broader than  even
their own most fervent electoral  supporters.
With regard to the two constitutional norms, C, and C , it is hard to
2
believe  that any federal office holder would deny their existence or im-
portance.  The third  norm is  a  staple  of what counts for conventional
wisdom in political science.  All specify forms of behavior that are desir-
able from a separation-of-powers  standpoint in that they directly support
the democratic  purposes of checks and balances  in government.  To lay
the groundwork  for my analysis  of how  these norms are faring,  I will
focus  first on four recent  episodes that  reveal behavior by the elected
branches  of government  determinedly  at  odds  with these  rudimentary
propositions  and the form of democratic  legitimacy they are intended to
further.
30  THE FEDERALIST No. 10, at 82-84 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed.,  1961).
31  See discussion supra p. 512.514  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
II.  ATTACKING CHECKS AND BALANCES:  FOUR EPISODES
A.  ELIMINATING  CONGRESS'S  FOREIGN  POLICY ROLE:  THE IRAN-
CONTRA  SCANDAL
In general terms, Congress's status as a co-equal branch is centrally
dependent on  three sets  of authorities:  its control over "the  purse,"  its
powers of substantive  legislation, and its authority to investigate.  Con-
gress would hardly be a serious counterweight to its coordinate branches
without these powers.  Any attempt by another branch to circumvent this
triumvirate  of  powers  entirely  in  an  area  of  shared,  constitutionally
vested authority would obviously breach an implicit norm of inter-branch
comity.
Despite the President's pivotal role on the international  stage, Con-
gress's combined arsenal of fiscal, legislative,  and investigative  powers
is no less important in foreign than in domestic affairs.  Congress has the
express power to regulate foreign commerce.32  It regulates immigration
and defines  offenses under international  law.33  The ratification of trea-
ties and  the appointment  of ambassadors  require  the Senate's assent.34
Congress has the power to provide for the support of our military and to
declare war.35  And, of course, there may be foreign policy ramifications,
both direct and indirect, to Congress's exercise of legislative powers in
the domestic  arena, as well as in its exercise of its fiscal authorities.
Between  1984 and  1986,  the Reagan  Administration  committed  a
significant assault on all of these powers-legislative, fiscal, and investi-
gative-in an attempt to oust Congress from foreign policymaking influ-
ence  with  regard  to  Nicaragua.  Congress,  in  line  with  clear  public
sentiment, had  proscribed the use of military  or  intelligence appropria-
tions to aid military forces (the "Contras") seeking to overthrow the gov-
ernment  of  Nicaragua.36  In  a  stunning  three-pronged  attack  on
Congress's authority in this area, the executive sought to raise money for
the  Contras independently of Congress (in evasion  of Congress's  fiscal
powers), facilitate that fundraising through arms sales that flouted appli-
cable federal law (in evasion of Congress's legislative powers), and to lie
about it, even under oath (in evasion of Congress's investigative powers).
32 U.S. CONST. art. 1, § 8, cl. 3.
33 U.S. CONST. art. 1, § 8, cls. 4,  10.
34 U.S. CONST. art. 1I, § 2, cl. 2.
35 U.S. CONsT. art. I, § 8, cls. 11-16.
36 REPORT OF THE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES  INVESTIGATING  THE IRAN-CONTRA AF-
FAIR, H. REP. No. 100-433, at 395-99, 404-05 (1st Sess. 1987)  [hereinafter Iran-Contra Re-
port].  On the lack of public support for Contra funding, see PUBLIC OPINION IN U.S. FOREIGN
POLICY:  THE CONTROVERSY  OVER  CONTRA AID 64-65 (Richard  Sobel ed.,  1993); Richard
Sobel, Public Opition About United States Intervention in El Salvador and Nicaragua, 53
PUB.  OP. Q. 114,  124 (1989).2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
In November, 1986, while denying that the deals represented a trade
of  "arms  for  hostages"-American  hostages  held  by  radical  Islamic
groups in Lebanon with ties to Iran-President Reagan confirmed reports
that the United States over the previous two years had facilitated six sales
of anti-tank  missiles,  anti-aircraft  missiles,  and  spare  parts  for missile
systems to Iran37-sales  that were unlawful  under various statutes regu-
lating the international sale of arms.38 National Security Council (NSC)
staff facilitated the diversion of profits from the arms sales to the support
the Contras.  In  brief, Oliver North  helped  set  up a  nominally  private
company  through which to funnel proceeds  from the arms  sales to the
Contras39-funds  that belonged to the United States and could lawfully
be spent pursuant only to an appropriation or other legal authority.40  No
such authority  had been enacted.  When  the web  of operations  became
public,  North and a host of other officials,  including  National Security
Adviser John  Poindexter and former National  Security Adviser  Robert
McFarlane,  lied to Congress,  destroyed  evidence,  and unlawfully with-
held information from investigators.4 Seven officials were convicted of
1 
these crimes, although the convictions of North and Poindexter were set
aside on the ground that the cases against them were tainted by evidence
that they had supplied  voluntarily to Congress under a grant of immu-
nity.42  A prolonged independent counsel investigation came to an end in
1993,  after President George H. W. Bush, following his loss in the 1992
elections,  pardoned six high officials who had either been convicted of
Iran-Contra offenses  or were under continuing  investigation.43
All of this might be dismissed as an isolated scandal without lasting
political  implications  except  that  executive  branch  Republicans  have
been all but unrepentant about it.  President Reagan's vice-president and
successor, George H. W. Bush, adopted a remorseless view of the events,
signaling a clear lack of understanding as to their constitutional  signifi-
cance.  Specifically, he embraced the view of former NSC official Oliver
North that attempts to bring legal accountability to those involved in the
scandal  were  merely  attempting  to  "criminalize  policy  differences."44
For its part, the George W. Bush Administration has appointed two of the
officials who admitted to misleading Congress in this affair to significant
37 THE TOWER COMMISSION REPORT: THE FULL TEXT OF THE PRESIDENT'S  SPECIAL RE-
VIEW BOARD 502-03 (N.Y. Times ed., 1987).
38 See Iran-Contra Report, supra note 30, at 414-16, 418-19.
39 See id. at 413.
40 See id. at 411-14.
41 See Peter M. Shane, Presidents, Pardons, and Prosecutors: Legal Accountability and
the Separation of Powers, 11  YALE L. & POL'Y REV.  361,  398-99 nn. 156-66 (1993).
42 United States v. Poindexter, 951  F.2d 369 (D.C. Cir. 1991); United States v. North,
910 F.2d 843 (D.C. Cir. 1990); United States v. North, 920 F.2d 940 (D.C. Cir. 1990).
43 See Shane, supra note 41,  at 401-02.
44 See id. at 401, n. 179.516  CORNELL  JOURNAL  OF LAW  AND  PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
policy positions.45 It is clear that those currently in power do not regard
Iran-Contra as having been a serious constitutional  threat.
B.  SHUTTING  DOWN THE EXECUTIVE ESTABLISHMENT:  THE  1995
BUDGET SHOWDOWN
Among Congress's  powers, the Framers  may have considered the
"power of the purse" most important.  It encompasses  the authority both
to raise revenues  and to determine the purposes for which public  reve-
nues would be spent.  Lest there be any doubt about Congress's pivotal
role on this score,  the Constitution  not only explicitly  confers on Con-
gress  the authority  to  tax and  to spend,46 but it separately  forbids  the
executive branch to extract funds from the treasury except as pursuant to
properly enacted appropriations.47  Moreover, so that the relationship of
this function to the legitimacy of government would not be obscured, the
Framers insisted that revenue bills begin in the House of Representatives,
giving ultimate control of the public fisc to what was then the sole insti-
tution of government  directly  accountable  to the  people.48  Madison's
analysis underscores the importance of these decisions:
The  House  of Representatives  cannot  only  refuse,  but
they alone can propose the supplies requisite for the sup-
port of government.  They, in a word, hold the purse -
that powerful instrument by which we behold, in the his-
tory  of the  British Constitution,  an  infant and  humble
representation  of  the  people  gradually  enlarging  the
sphere of its activity  and importance,  and finally reduc-
ing, as far as it seems to have wished,  all the overgrown
prerogatives  of the other  branches  of the  government.
This power over the purse may, in fact, be regarded  as
45  President George W. Bush appointed Elliott Abrams, who pleaded guilty to withhold-
ing information from Congress, to be senior director of the National Security Council's Office
for Democracy,  Human Rights and International Operaations.  He likewise appointed John
Poindexter to lead the Information Assurance Office at the Department of Defense's Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).  It is perhaps noteworthy that, in this capacity,
Admiral Poindexter was in charge of what was originally called the Total Information Aware-
ness program, whose aim is to "imagine, develop, apply, integrate, demonstrate, and transition
information  technologies,  components,  and prototype closed-loop information  systems that
will  counter asymmetric  threats by achieving total information awareness  that is useful for
preemption, national security warning, and national security decision making."  See Roy Mark,
Senate Kills Funding for Pentagon Data Mining, internetnews.com,  at http://www.internet
news.com/bus-news/article.php/1574021  (Jan.  24, 2003).  Quite wonderfully, given Admiral
Poindexter's record, DARPA's capacities include technologies for "[s]tory telling, change de-
tection, and truth maintenance."  DARPA Information Awareness Office website, http://www.
darpa.mil/iao/  (last visited on Aug. 28, 2003).
46 U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8, cl.  1.
47  U.S. CONST. art. I, § 9, cl. 7.
48  U.S. CONST. art. I, § 7, cl 1.2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
the most complete and effectual weapon with which any
constitution  can  arm  the  immediate  representatives  of
the people, for obtaining  a redress  of every  grievance,
and  for  carrying  into  effect  every  just  and  salutary
49
measure.
Of necessity, however, the very premise of three co-equal branches
implies a normative limitation on the plenary scope of the appropriations
power.  That is, it is presumably imperative  that Congress not to use its
fiscal authority-however free of express textual limits in the Constitu-
tion-simply to eliminate or shut down  a coordinate branch.
Notwithstanding that indispensable norm, Republicans in control of
Congress  in  1995  threatened  to  withhold  funding  from  the  executive
branch  entirely  unless  President Clinton relented  on a series  of budget
priorities that had been the core of his successful 1992 campaign for the
Presidency.50  On every issue drawn between them in this debate-fund-
ing  for education,  environmental  protection, Medicare  and Medicaid-
public opinion favored the President's position.51 Nonetheless, congres-
sional  Republicans did not relent until the nation  sustained two across-
the-board shutdowns of government agencies, in November and Decem-
ber,  1995,  of seven and twenty-one  days, respectively.52  Congress and
the President finally  agreed in April  1996 on appropriations  for Fiscal
Year 1996, which had begun on October 1, 1995.53 Even with the shut-
downs, Congress ultimately enacted a record fourteen so-called "continu-
ing resolutions"  to keep the government running  in the interim.54
49 THE FEDERALIST No. 58, at 359 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed.,  1961).
50 The events of 1995  are recounted  in detail in ELIZABETH  DREW,  SHOWDOWN:  THE
STRUGGLE BETWEEN THE GINGRICH  CONGRESS AND THE CLINTON WHITE  HOUSE (1996),  on
which the following summary is substantially based.
51 For example, a Los Angeles Times Poll National Survey,  conducted January  19-22,
1995,  asked  1,353 adults nationwide  if they  would favor cuts in spending  for a variety of
purposes.  By the margins indicated,  respondents opposed cuts  in the following:  Medicare
(88-9), Social Security  (86-12), Medicaid  (73-20), and the environment  (67-27).  Public
Opinion  on The  Contract,  at http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/psl02/tutorial/congress/opinion.
html#Polll (last  visited Sept. 6,  2003).  A November,  1995  CNN/USA Today/Gallup Poll
found that Americans, by a 48  to 38 percent margin, thought it more important  to protect
Medicare funding than to balance the budget. CNN, Americans blame GOPfor budget mess,
Nov.  15,  1995, at http://www.cnn.coin/US/951 i/debtlimit/ 1-15/poll/poll-txt.html  (last vis-
ited Sept. 6, 2003) [hereinafter CNN].
52 George Hager, Day by Day: Talks Wax and Wane...  as Anger, Miscues Punctuate
Week, 53 CONG. Q. WKLY. REP. 3876 (Dec. 23, 1995); George Hager, A Battered GOP Calls
Workers Back to Job, 54 CONG. Q. WKLY. REP. 53 (Jan. 6, 1996).
53 George Hager, Congress, Clinton Yield Enough to Close the Book on Fiscal '96, 54
CONG. Q. WKLY. REP. 1155 (Apr. 27,  1996).
54 Id.518  CORNELL  JOURNAL  OF LAW AND  PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
The  government  shutdowns  were  required  by  the  Antideficiency
Act,55  a statute enacted after the Civil War to enforce Congress's appro-
priations role. The Act provides that, with a few exceptions, government
agencies  may  not  incur  any  obligation  to  spend  government  money
before that money is appropriated.56 Following a series of disputes over
Federal  Trade  Commission  authorization  in  the  late  1970s,  President
Carter's  second Attorney  General, Benjamin Civiletti,  attributed to the
Antideficiency  Act its obvious implication:  should Congress fail to ap-
propriate  any funds  for an agency,  or should  an existing  appropriation
lapse  altogether,  the Antideficiency  Act requires  the agency to shut its
57
doors.
Typically,  this  is  not  a serious  threat.  Although  Congress  hardly
ever completes its appropriations  work on time for the start of the next
fiscal  year,  it routinely  prevents  intervening  lapses  in  appropriations
through "continuing resolutions," appropriations bills that usually extend
an agency's existing level of spending  until a final  appropriation  is en-
acted.58  Given the contentiousness of budget policy  and the persistence
of divided government  during most of the post-Vietnam  Era, Congress
did experience  shutdowns  prior  to  1995,  but none  of any  real conse-
quence.  There  were a total of seven brief shutdowns  from  1985-1995,
but five  occurred wholly over weekends  and none involved layoffs for
more than a single weekday.59
The  1994 elections, however, resulted in a Republican  takeover of
both  houses  of  Congress  for the  first  time  in  40  years.  Republican
Speaker-Designate  Newt  Gingrich  announced  that House  Republicans
would offer a plan to balance the federal  budget  within seven years.60
Clinton countered  with a target of ten years.61  Gingrich pressed  ahead
despite  strong  popular  support  for  key  programs  that  Republicans
planned to target for cuts to achieve a balanced budget within their more
55  31 U.S.C. §§ 1341,  1342, 1349-1351,  1511-1519 (2002) (originally enacted as Anti-
Deficiency Act of July 12, 1870, ch. 251,  § 7, 16 Stat. 251).
56  Id. § 1341(a)(1).
57  See Applicability of the Antideficiency Act Upon a Lapse in an Agency's Appropria-
tion, 4A Op. Off. Legal Counsel 16 (1980).  Civiletti later determined that the Antideficiency
Act permits departments and agencies to terminate operations in an orderly way upon a lapse
in  appropriations.  A  second  Civiletti  opinion provided  more  detailed  guidance  on  An-
tideficiency Act implementation.  See Authority for the Continuance of Government Functions
During a Temporary Lapse in Appropriations, 43 Op. Att'y Gen. 293 (1981), construed in 5
Op. Off. Legal Counsel 1, 10 n. 12 (1981).  See also Continuation of Federal Prisoner Deten-
tion Efforts in the Face of a USMS Appropriation Deficiency, Op. Off. Legal Counsel (Apr. 5,
2000) (preliminary print), available at 2000 WL 33155726.
58  PETER M.  SHANE & HAROLD H. BRUFF,  SEPARATION  OF POWERS  LAW:  CASES  AND
MATERIALS  185 (1996).
59  DREW, supra note 50, at 301,  324.
60 Id. at 128.
61  Id. at 225.2003] WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
ambitious time frame.62  Against the certainty of these cutbacks, the pub-
lic apparently was not persuaded  that a stand on seven versus ten years
implicated any important issue of principle.63  Moreover, because the fi-
nal GOP proposal included $270 billion in Medicare  cuts and $245 bil-
lion in tax cuts, Republicans created the impression that they were less
interested  in a  balanced  budget than  in  reducing  funding to  programs
with which the Democrats had long been identified.64  House Republi-
cans  aggravated  their public  relations problems by trying  to graft onto
appropriations bills a variety of right-wing riders on environmental pol-
icy.65  Enough  Republican  moderates  felt compelled  to abandon  these
riders to enable the Democrats to prevail,  at least temporarily,  on these
environmental  policy issues in a closely divided House.66
The Republicans'  maladroitness  in  handling  their impasse  with  a
Democratic President-and  the aggressiveness  of Speaker Gingrich,  in
particular-exacerbated  the public perception  that the House was  look-
ing to pick a fight, rather than to reach a reasonable  resolution on fiscal
policy.  Although Fiscal  Year  1995  would  not end until September 30,
1995, Gingrich was threatening as early as May,  1995 to shut down the
executive branch if Clinton did not back down.67
As it happens, this was not the first occasion in recent decades when
a house of Congress threatened to cut off appropriations across the board
in order to force Presidential  agreement on a contested matter of policy.
But the  comparison  between  this  and the  prior occasion  only  demon-
strates how dramatically the  1995 budget shutdown departed from con-
ventional inter-branch  practice.  In June,  1973,  the  Democratic  Senate
Majority  Leader Mike  Mansfield  told President Nixon he would block
passage of any major appropriations bill for the next fiscal year-which,
at the time, would begin the following July 1-unless Nixon agreed to a
ban on any further funding for military operations  in  Southeast Asia.68
Nixon  relented.69  Mansfield  had  substantial  bipartisan  backing for his
62  See supra note 51.
63  In  November, 1995,  a national poll indicated that Americans believed, by a 52-37
percent margin, that the budget debate was mostly an attempt by both sides to gain political
advantage before the 1996 election, rather than an important battle over principles. That Clin-
ton had a better political sense of Americans'  priorities is suggested by the further finding that,
by a 49-26 percent vote, Americans  also put more of the blame on Republican leaders in
Congress than on Clinton for the shutdown of the federal government. See CNN, supra note
51.
64  See DREW, supra note 50, at 242.
65  Id. at 256-57, 260-66.
66 See id. at 264-267.
67 See id. at 214.
68 WILLIAM BUNDY,  A TANGLED WEB: THE MAKING OF FOREIGN POLICY IN THE NIXON
PRESIDENCY  389-90 (1998).
69 Id.520  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW  AND PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
stance.70  Public  support for rapid troop withdrawals from Vietnam had
been growing since the late 1960s.71 Nixon's approval rating during the
second quarter of 1973 stood at 44 percent, and was heading downward
as  a result of the unfolding  Watergate  investigation.72  Thus, although
Mansfield's  threat  was  a  portentous  exercise  of checks  and  balances
brinksmanship, he could plausibly assert the necessity of that strategy to
achieve the democratic  aims that underlie checks and balances.73
A threat not to appropriate  any money for the executive branch is,
under any circumstances, the equivalent of nuclear blackmail in a checks
and balances  system.74  The  1973 Senate was ready  to throw down the
gauntlet on behalf of a  growing  bipartisan consensus  against  a largely
discredited President.  The  1995  Republicans tried the same tactic on a
strictly  party-lines  basis,  against  the  weight  of public  sentiment.  For
structural  reasons,  however,  democratic  electoral  remedies  for  an-
tidemocratic  assaults  on checks  and balances  of the kind attempted  in
1995 can easily prove unavailing.75  Thus, while it is always problematic
for any branch to threaten the core functioning of a coordinate branch,
70 Id.
71  BENJAMIN I. PAGE &  ROBERT Y. SHAPIRO, THE RATIONAL PUBLIC: FIFrY YEARS OF
TRENDS  IN AMERICANS'  POLICY PREFERENCES  234-237 (1992).
72  USAToday,  Approval Ratings from Ike through  Clinton (Jan.  14,  1996), at http://
www.usatoday.com/elect/eq/eqleg.062.htm (last visited Oct. 1, 2002) (on file with author).
73  Professor Prakash argues that to ascribe any legitimacy to Mansfield's move "eviscer-
ates" the idea that there is a genuine anti-defunding norm because "[m]eaningful  norms exist
only if they are strong enough to withstand temptations to dog-pile on a politically unpopular
branch."  Prakash,  supra note 8, at 550.  1 disagree.  A norm  is no  less a norm  for being
situational. In the Mansfield case, the salient point is not just that the President was unpopular,
but that the Senate's threat to withhold appropriations was bipartisan; a majority of Republi-
cans, as well as Democrats, supported cutting off appropriations to support military activity in
Cambodia.  BUNDY,  supra note 68, at 389.  A norm that says, in effect, "Neither House of
Congress shall threaten to withhold all appropriations from the executive branch except in
circumstances where  (a) a bipartisan majority  in that House supports an initiative that the
President is resisting; (b)  the American people support Congress; and (c) the President has
undermined his own legitimacy by attempting to forestall an investigation whether the White
House was complicit in a felonious effort to undermine the integrity of the prior presidential
election," strikes me as a fairly robust and useful norm.
74 Professor Prakash suggests  that the Republicans'  budgetary brinksmanship of 1995
was no different from the Democrats'  use of omnibus appropriations bills in the 1980s to force
President Reagan to swallow appropriations measures he would not otherwise have supported.
Prakash, supra note 8, at 550.  I disagree.  Presumably, the absence of a line-item veto has
meant that Congress has forced every President to accede to some of the legislative branch's
spending priorities rather than his own, and the use of omnibus appropriations bills made
matters worse.  In no other recent case, however, did Congressional leaders stake out the posi-
tion that a government shutdown would be a worthwhile price to pay for the failure of the
branches to reach acceptable compromise.  Congressional Democrats did not make that threat
against President Reagan.  As for whether the 1995 shutdowns were caused by the Republi-
cans'  insistence on their position or Clinton's refusal to acquiesce, I think the overwhelming
public ascription of responsibility to the Republicans for this fiasco provides the historically
accurate and politically relevant answer.
75 See discussion infra pp. 533-540.2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK  DOWN
inter-branch aggression for political goals that lack popular support pose
a special threat to democratic  legitimacy.
C.  SUBJUGATING  THE PRESIDENT TO CONGRESSIONAL  CONTROL:  THE
CLINTON  IMPEACHMENT
The impeachment and trial of President William Jefferson Clinton
will rank throughout history as one of our most bizarre political episodes.
Before briefly  summarizing the key events-and no short summary can
do justice to such an outlandish  tale-I will state the bottom line: This
episode, a genuinely dangerous drain on the time and energy of the fed-
eral executive, was a wholly unjustified, and thoroughly partisan, use of
one of Congress's most extreme potential powers against the executive.76
Whatever  its proximate  causes-and these  include  President Clinton's
now-admitted lying to a federal grand jury-the episode marked most of
all the sputtering end of an unrelenting campaign to undermine the Clin-
ton Presidency.  That effort arguably began the moment elections returns
from November,  1992 were announced.
By December,  1998,  when the House  of Representatives  voted in
favor of Articles of Impeachment against President Clinton, two key sub-
plots designed to terminate the Clinton Presidency had developed.77  One
was the Whitewater Investigation, a prolonged special prosecutor investi-
gation into a nearly impenetrable series of allegations regarding the pe-
ripheral involvement of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham
Clinton, in a series of Arkansas business dealings dating back to the late
1970s.78  Twelve  people  ultimately  were  convicted  of a  variety  of of-
fenses in connection with the Whitewater real estate venture and the re-
lated failure of the Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan Association.79
In  January,  1994,  notwithstanding  a  lapse  in  the  federal  independent
counsel  statute,80  Attorney  General  Janet  Reno  appointed  Republican
Robert Fiske to investigate the Whitewater events  as a special prosecu-
76 The only comparably threatening power is the power to withhold appropriations, dis-
cussed supra in Section II-B.
77 My summary relies largely on TOOBIN, supra note 1, and his immensely helpful chro-
nology compiled at xvii-xxii.
78  ToomN, supra note 1, at 61-81.
79 Bill Miller, Ray: Clintons Will Not Face Charges From Whitewater, at www.washing-
tonpost.com (Sept. 20, 2000) (on file with author).  See also Jonathan Karl, Starr Hits Four-
Year Anniversary (Aug. 5, 1998), at http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/998/O8/O5/starr.an-
niversary/index.html  (last visited April  17, 2003).
80 The Ethics in Government Act of 1978, Pub. L. 95-521, 92 Stat. 1824 (1978),  which
created the statutory office of special prosecutor (later changed to "independent counsel") ,
was reauthorized for an additional five years in  1983, Pub. L. 97-409, 96 Stat. 2039 (1983),
and then, again, for another five years in 1987, Pub. L. 100-191,  101 Stat. 1293 (1987).  Given
President George H.W. Bush's opposition to the law, it was allowed to lapse in 1992, but was
then reauthorized by the Independent Counsel Reauthorization Act of 1994, Pub. L. 103-270,
108 Stat. 732 (1994).522  CORNELL  JOURNAL  OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
tor.81 Following the June, 1994 reauthorization of that statute, a special
division of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit replaced Fiske
with Kenneth Starr as independent counsel.82  After an investigation that
lasted more than six years, Starr's successor, Robert W. Ray, announced
that neither of the Clintons would face any charges relating to the White-
83
water  matter.
It is worth  noting, especially in  light of the Clintons'  exoneration,
that, as early as January,  1994, Representative  Richard Armey of Texas,
then chairman of the House Republican Conference, was quoted as say-
ing  that  impeachment  was  "not  outside  the  realm  of  possibility  or
probability"  because  of the Whitewater affair.84  By March,  1994, Phil
Gramm,  a Republican  Senator from Texas,  was comparing  Whitewater
to  Watergate,85 and a  Republican  Senator from  New  York,  Alphonse
D'Amato, said the Whitewater matter had "the potential of being as great
if not greater than Watergate. '86  In retrospect, such early speculation as
to the magnitude of the Whitewater matter and its possible implications
for the presidency  seems to presage  the congressional  Republicans'  ea-
gerness to use the impeachment process for political ends.
The  second subplot  (or combination  of subplots)  involved  allega-
tions against  Clinton for sexual misconduct.87  In May,  1994, a former
Arkansas  state employee, Paula Jones, sued President Clinton for alleg-
edly sexually harassing her in  1991,  when Clinton was still governor of
Arkansas.88  In  May,  1997,  the U.S.  Supreme  Court rejected  President
Clinton's claim that Presidents ought to be immune, while in office, from
civil lawsuits arising from alleged misconduct that occurred prior to tak-
ing office  as President.89  As the suit proceeded,  Jones's  lawyers were
tipped that, from 1995 to 1997, President Clinton had engaged in an ex-
tramarital  sexual  relationship  with  Monica  Lewinsky,  a  former  White
House intern.90  In January,  1998, both Lewinsky and President Clinton
denied the affair, and the Special Division of the D.C. Circuit responsible
81  TOOBIN,  supra note 1,a t xvii.
82  Id. at xvii-xviii.
83  ROBERT  W. RAY,  FINAL REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT  COUNSEL  IN RE:  MADISON
GUARANTY SAVINGS & LOAN ASSOCIATION REGARDING MONICA LEWINSKY AND OTHERS, filed
with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, Division for the
Purpose of Appointing Independent Counsels, Division No. 94-1  (2001), available at http://
icreport.access.gpo.gov/lewinsky.html  (last visited April 17, 2003).
84  Lars-Erik Nelson, Whitewater Is Clinton's Blind Alley, NEWSDAY, Jan. 9, 1994, at 34,
available at 1994 WL 7426686.
85  Paul West, Whitewater: Shades of Watergate?, BALTIMORE SUN, Mar. 13, 1994, at IE,
available at 1994 WL 6914195.
86 Id.
87 This account is based on the chronology in TOOBIN, supra note 1,a t xvii-xxii.
88 TOOBIN, supra note 1, at xvii.
89 Clinton v. Jones, 520 U.S. 681  (1997).
90 TOOBIN, supra note 1,a t  163-66.2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
for appointing and overseeing counsel extended Kenneth Starr's jurisdic-
tion to consider whether Lewinsky and others had perjured themselves or
suborned perjury in connection with the Jones case.91 A day later, Presi-
dent  Clinton  denied  his  relationship  with  Lewinsky  in  a  videotaped
92
deposition.
Following the dismissal of Jones v. Clinton93 on a motion for sum-
mary judgment, Starr subpoenaed President Clinton to testify in front of
a federal grand jury.94  During that testimony, Clinton acknowledged his
affair, but denied that he had lied or withheld evidence, or urged others
to do so.95  Less than a month later, Starr submitted an extensive report,
widely  noted  for some of its more prurient details,  to Congress.96  On
September  11,  the House voted to release the report, and on October 8,
voted  258-176 for an  impeachment  investigation.97  That  investigation
ultimately resulted in the House Judiciary Committee's  approval of four
Articles  of Impeachment  all by  straight party-line  vote, except for the
article alleging perjury  in the Paula Jones deposition, which Republican
Representative  Lindsey  Graham,  a  former  criminal  prosecutor,  voted
against.98  On December  19,  the lame-duck House passed the article al-
leging  grand jury perjury  by a  vote  of 228-206,  with five  Democrats
supporting the article and five Republicans opposing it.99  An obstruction
of justice article passed 221 to 212, but likely would have been defeated
if the  vote had  been  held  upon the  seating of the  106th Congress,  in
which  the Democrats held  five  more  seats.'00  The two  other articles,
alleging perjury in the Jones  deposition  and misstatements in Clinton's
written  responses  to  Judiciary  Committee  questions,  were  both  re-
jected.10  On February 12,  1999, the Republican-controlled Senate voted
to acquit Clinton by votes of 55-45 on the perjury  count, and 50-50 on
the obstruction of justice count.0 2  The Republicans,  who would  have
needed 67 votes to prevail,103 could not achieve a clear majority on either
article, even in a Senate in which they held 55 seats.
Substantial legal arguments exist that the House of Representatives
exceeded its constitutional  authority  in impeaching Clinton because  the
91  Id. at xx.
92 Id.
93  990 F.Supp. 657 (E.D. Ark.  1998).
94 TOOBIN, supra note 1, at xxi.
95  Id.
96 Id.
97  Id.
98  Id. at 360.
99  Id. at 367.
100  Id.
101  Id. at 367.
102  Id. at 390.
M03 See U.S. CONST. art. I, § 3, cl. 6.524  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND  PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
acts alleged  did  not amount  to "high  crimes  and misdemeanours,"  the
constitutional standard for impeachable  offenses.'°4  The argument here,
however, does not turn on that legal question.  After all, what made Con-
gress's behavior in the 1995 budget battle improper was not that it trans-
gressed  any  express  legal  limitation  on  the appropriations  power,  but
rather that Congress was pushing its arguably lawful authority to a point
at which it was threatening  to undermine  the system of checks and bal-
ances contemplated by the Constitution.  In a similar way, by impeaching
Clinton, the Republican Congress was risking, perhaps even seeking, the
destabilization of a coordinate branch of government, although Clinton's
alleged misconduct obviously had not put at risk the welfare of the nation
or the strength of our constitutional system.  From a constitutional stand-
point,  comparisons  between  Whitewater or Monica-gate,  on one  hand,
and Watergate,  on the other, are frivolous.  The conduct involved in the
Watergate  conspiracy threatened  the integrity of a presidential  election.
At most, Clinton's misconduct threatened  the integrity of a federal pro-
ceeding, the chief appeal of which to many of its funders and supporters
was the hope of delegitimating  the Clinton presidency.'05  Accordingly,
the Republicans never managed to arouse anything close to majority pub-
lic support for the impeachment, 06 and President Clinton's approval rat-
ings rose to astonishing peacetime levels as the proceedings  against him
intensified. 107
Indeed, the Clinton impeachment does not compare favorably  even
to the one  other impeachment  effort  that resulted in a vote of the full
House of Representatives,  the long-discredited impeachment of Andrew
Johnson.  As  in the Clinton impeachment, the House had irresponsibly
raised the specter of converting the Presidency into an office to be held at
the political pleasure of the legislative branch-in other words, an "'im-
peachment-alization'  of political differences."  The charges were no less
dubious and the political motivation no less conspicuous.  On the other
hand,  the Radical  Republicans  of 1868 might at least  have argued that
they were fighting to preserve the meaning of the Civil War, to prevent
104  Susan Low Bloch, A Report Card on the Inpeachment: Judging the Institutions That
Judged President Clinton, 63 LAW & CONTEMP. PROBS.  143,  148-54,  150 n. 36
1o5  See generally TOOBIN, supra note 1, at 3-167.
106  See Linda Feldmann, Democrats Hope for a Boost from Impeachment Fallout, CHRIS-
TIAN SCIENCE MONITOR, Dec. 29, 1998, at I, available at 1998 WL 2372928 ("[T]he GOP has
handed the Democrats a campaign issue they believe could tip some seats their way in 2000:
the impeachment of President Clinton, a move the majority of the public opposed.").
107  President Clinton's approval  ratings hovered in the "in  the high 50s and low 60s"
throughout  1997, but jumped to 69 percent after news first broke of the Monica Lewinsky
investigation. It remained in the 60s throughout the year and spiked to 73 percent after the
House voted for impeachment.  USA TODA Y/CNN/Gallup Poll Results: A Year-By-Breakdown
of President Clilton's Job Approval Ratings in the CNN/USA  Today/Gallup  Poll, at http://
www.usatoday.com/news/poll020.htm (Jan. 21,  2000).2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS BREAK  DOWN
an unpopular, unelected President from undoing the pro-democracy work
of Reconstruction.  Like  Mike  Mansfield,  they  might have claimed  to
have democracy (if not bipartisanship) on their side. 08 The Republicans
1
of the  106th Congress could make no such claim.
One  reason  the Republican  effort failed  was the prevalent  public
understanding  that the  Republicans  had  been trying  to undermine  the
Clinton  Presidency on virtually any available  ground since  January 20,
1993.  Contemporaneous  expressions  of the  Republicans'  attitudes  to-
wards  Clinton  substantiate  the  point.  Less  than  three  weeks  into  the
Clinton presidency, a former Justice Department official, later to become
a law school dean, Douglas Kmiec, declared that Clinton would be com-
mitting  an  impeachable  offense  if, without a  change  in federal  family
planning law, he were to adopt administrative regulations providing fed-
eral  aid  to  clinics  that  conducted  abortion  counseling. 09  Of course,
under  this reasoning,  presidents  would  be  impeachable  whenever  any
federal agency is found by a court of law to have overstepped its statu-
tory jurisdiction in the implementation of any federal statute-an absurd
suggestion.  Given Dean  Kmiec's credentials-he had been an assistant
attorney general in charge of the Office of Legal Counsel under President
Bush-these statements can be understood only as a triumph of ideology
over good sense,  and  as  testimony  to the Republicans'  early  hopes  of
ousting Clinton.
At least it can be said of Dean Kmiec's eagerness to threaten  Clin-
ton  with  removal  that  he  waited  for  the Clinton  Presidency  to  begin
before  attacking its legitimacy.  In contrast,  following President Bush's
concession  to Clinton  on election night, Robert Dole,  the leader of the
Republican  minority in the Senate, immediately  attacked  the legitimacy
of Clinton's claim  to governance authority:  'Fifty-seven  percent of...
Americans  ...  voted against Bill Clinton, and I intend  to represent that
majority on the floor of the U.S. Senate.""l0  The impeachment and trial
of President Clinton should be seen  as the culmination  of the Republi-
cans'  longstanding desire not merely to oppose Clinton politically, but to
undermine  his presidency more fundamentally.  Although the impeach-
ment failed, it still stands as a dangerous institutional precedent for seek-
ing  to  remove  a  President  based  on  partisan  animus,  rather  than  the
welfare of the constitutional  system.  The diversion of the President's
time, energy, and attention in defending against such an effort amounted
to an inexcusable  assault on inter-branch norms.
108  See infra text accompanying notes 68-73.
109  Harry  Stainer,  Clinton Risks  Breaking Law,  Professor Says,  CLEVELAND  PLAIN
DEALER, Feb. 5,  1993, at 7C, available at 1993 WL 4271247.
1 10  For the Record, WASH. POST, Nov. 6, 1992, at A26, available at 1992 WL 2157990.
This an interesting remark to recall when we are governed by a Republican President who did
not even gamer a plurality popular vote.526  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
D.  USURPING THE  APPOINTMENTS  POWER:  THE STONEWALLING  OF
CLINTON JUDGES
Although  Iran-Contra, the 1995 budget showdown, and the Clinton
impeachment  provide  ominous  signals  for  inter-branch "forbearance,"
there is no evidence that these particular forms of inter-branch aggression
will re-occur or, with one possible exception, I''   that they have initiated
a cycle of counterattack  by the Democrats.  The last episode I wish to
cite-the Republican Senate's attempt to hijack Clinton's power of judi-
cial appointments-is of a different order.  It has triggered an escalation
of defensive  measures that are  breaking down a series of longstanding
norms of cooperation between the majority and  minority parties in the
United States Senate, and there appears to be no hope of return to these
norms.
In a time of divided government, Americans would normally expect
some inter-branch accommodation in the process of judicial nominations.
For instance, one would expect  the President to nominate judges of a
more centrist background, whose confirmation would pose less political
difficulty for the opposition party than nominees more representative  of
the President's own activist base.  President  Clinton followed this  pat-
tern.  One  nonpartisan study after another has confirmed the "modera-
tion" of his appointees, who, for example, in criminal justice cases, were
more likely than President George Bush's appointees to rule for the de-
fendant, but notably less likely to do so than President Carter's  appoin-
tees.' 12  Conservative  legal commentator  and  Supreme  Court  scholar
Bruce Fein has candidly characterized Clinton's nominees as being "as
centrist as can be."' 13
Senate Republicans, however, did not respond to Clinton's modera-
tion with their own. The Clinton Administration extended to the chair-
man of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Utah's Orrin Hatch, a virtually
II I  It is arguable that the then singular aggressiveness of Senate Democrats'  opposition to
President Reagan's 1987 nomination of Robert Bork of the Supreme Court is best understood,
at least in part, as a counter-attack in response to the Reagan Administration's overreaching in
the Iran-Contra Affair.
112  See, e.g., Ronald Stidham et al., The Voting Behavior of President Clinton's Judicial
Appointees, 80 JUDICATURE  16,  17, 19 (1996).  In civil rights and civil liberties cases, Presi-
dent Clinton's  first-term district court appointees voted for the  "liberal"  position at a rate
identical to President Ford's appointees.  Id. at  19.  See also Nancy Scherer, Are  Clinton's
Judges  "Old"  Democrats  or  "New"  Democrats?,  84  JUDICATURE  150  (2000);  Sheldon
Goldman & Elliot Slotnick, Clinton's Second Term Judiciary: Picking Judges Under Fire, 82
JUDICATURE 265 (1999)  [hereinafter Second Term); Sheldon Goldman & Elliot Slotnick, Clin-
ton's First Term Judiciary: Many Bridges to Cross, 80 JUDICATURE  254 (1997)  [hereinafter
First Term].
113 David Byrd, Clinton's Untilting Federal Bench, NAT'L J., Feb. 19, 2000, at 555, avail-
able at 2000 WL 6436835.2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK  DOWN
unprecedented  consultative role in the nomination  process., 14  Nonethe-
less, Republican  Senators  subjected  Clinton  nominees to  "an  unprece-
dented  slowdown  of the confirmation  process," 115 and,  during  the last
two years of the Clinton Administration, tried to hold open as many va-
cancies as  possible, often arguing  that no  new judges were  needed for
particular courts.116
The Republicans'  obstructionism is dramatic whether one  looks at
the number of nominees blocked, delays in securing Judiciary Committee
hearings,  or delays in  securing floor votes following recommendations
by the Judiciary Committee.  For example, during the final year of Presi-
dent Clinton's first term, Senate Republicans confirmed only 17 Clinton
nominees,  compared  to  66 nominees  of President  George  H.W.  Bush
who were confirmed by  Senate Democrats in  1992.117  Democrats sub-
jected George H.W. Bush's federal district court nominees to an average
of  92  days'  delay  after  their  nomination  before  granting  them  hear-
ings.118  In  contrast,  during  the  first  half  of  Clinton's  second  term,
Republicans  delayed  hearings  for Clinton's  district court  nominees  an
average of 161 days.' 19. These averages do not include nominees denied
a hearing altogether.'20  At the end of the 106th Congress, 40 nominees
remained stalled  in the Senate  Judiciary  Committee,  36 of whom  had
never been granted a hearing.12'
114  See First Term, supra note 112, at 254, 256.
115  See Second Term, supra note 112, at 267.
116  Elizabeth A. Palmer, Longstanding Judicial Vacancies Revive 'Smaller is Better' Cru-
sade, 58 CONG. Q. WKLY.  REP. 521,  523  (Mar. 11,  2000) (reporting on refusal  by Senator
Helms to consent to a hearing for African-American judicial candidates for the Fourth Circuit,
or a hearing on any candidate for a North Carolina vacancy).  President G. W. Bush ultimately
re-submitted the nomination of Judge Roger L. Gregory, an African-American jurist first nom-
inated by President Clinton to a Virginia vacancy on the Fourth Circuit, and to whom Clinton
gave a recess appointment when the Senate refused to move forward on the Gregory nomina-
tion.  Also among President G. W. Bush's first nominees to the federal appellate courts was
U.S. District Court Judge Terrence Boyle, to fill the North Carolina vacancy.
President G.W. Bush also moved quickly to nominate candidates to two vacant seats on the
D.C. Circuit, which Senate Republicans had held open since 1995.  Republican Sen. Charles E.
Grassley (R-lowa), who presided over a series of hearings in the 1990s to demonstrate why the
federal judiciary should be smaller, had said of these seats: "Filling either of these ...  would
be a waste of taxpayer money."  Amy Goldstein & Neely Tucker, Bush Plans to Add 2 Judges
to Key Court; Senate GOP for Years Blocked Filling All Seats, WASH. POST, Dec. 15, 2002, at
A01, available at 2002 WL 104306468.
117  Sheldon Goldman et al., Clinton's Judges: Summing Up the Legacy, 84 JUDICATURE
228, 233 (2001)  [hereinafter Legacy].
118  Id. at 234.
119  Id.  ("During the last two years of Clinton's presidency, the average time to confirma-
tion dropped to 97 days, a marked improvement on the surface but these figures are for nomi-
nees confirmed and, consequently, they do not take account of the large number of Clinton
nominees who did not have Judiciary Committee hearings").
120 Id.
121  Id. at 233-34.528  CORNELL  JOURNAL  OF LAW AND  PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
The  same  discrepancy  appears  for  floor  votes.  Democrats  con-
firmed former President George Bush's appellate nominees an average of
14 days after a recommendation from the Senate Judiciary Committee. 122
In the three Republican Congresses between  1995 and 2000, the average
floor delay for Court of Appeals confirmations was 40 days, 42 days, and
68  days,  respectively. 123  A  similar  pattern  holds  for  district  court
24
judges.'
Perhaps  the  starkest episode  of the Republicans'  determination  to
prevent  the Clinton Administration  from filling judicial  vacancies  was
the  1999 defeat on the floor of the Senate of Missouri Supreme Court
Justice Ronnie White, who had been nominated to a U.S. District Court
seat in Missouri. 25  The vote marked the first time since  the defeat of
Judge Robert Bork's nomination for the U.S. Supreme Court in 1987 that
any judicial candidate had lost a vote on the floor of the Senate, and was
the first floor defeat of a candidate for a district court judgeship in recent
memory.  Notwithstanding a clearly centrist record in criminal procedure
cases,  Justice  White  had  been  labeled  "pro-criminal  and  activist"  by
then-Missouri Senator John Ashcroft.126 White was defeated on a party-
lines 55-45  vote. 127
In January, 2001, the parties found themselves in control of institu-
tions at different ends of Pennsylvania Avenue.  It might have been ex-
pected for Republican  President  George  W.  Bush-who  had  not won
even a plurality of the popular vote-to emulate President Clinton's cen-
trism and accommodate  the Democrats'  Senate majority by withholding
nominations of conspicuously right-wing activists in favor of more mod-
erate  Republicans.  However, he  did  he waste any  time in nominating
conservative  Republican  judicial  candidates  for  slots  that,  during  the
Clinton  Administration,  Republican  Senators  and  other  conservative
judges insisted there was no need to fill.128
122  Id. at 235-36.
123  Id. at 236.
124  Id. at 235.
125  Stuart Taylor, Jr., The Shame of the Ronnie White Vote, NAT'L J., Oct. 16,  1999, at
2949.
126  Id.
127  Id.
128  On May 9, 2001, President Bush nominated U.S. District Court Judge Terrence Boyle
to fill a North  Carolina vacancy on the Fourth Circuit  despite the earlier  refusal of North
Carolina Senator Jesse  Helms  to allow a hearing on any such  nominee during the  second
Clinton Administration.  Boyle had served as Legislative Assistant to Senator Helms before his
appointment to the District Court.  Biography of Terrence W. Boyle, at http://www.justice.
gov/olp/boylebio.htm (last visited Sept. 2, 2003).  On the same date, President Bush nominated
attorneys John Roberts and Miguel Estrada to vacancies on the District of Columbia Circuit
that Republican Senator Charles S. Grassley had insisted it would be a waste of money to fill.
See Goldstein and Neely, supra note 116.  Among his prior legal positions, Mr. Roberts had
been an Associate Counsel to the President under President Reagan and Principal Deputy So-2003] WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
The Democrats responded by tying up some of these nominations in
the Judiciary Committee.  Texas judge Priscilla Owen was voted down in
committee.129  Washington, D.C. lawyer Miguel Estrada was not given a
committee vote because of the Administration's  unwillingness to share
legal memoranda  he prepared on constitutional  issues while  serving  in
the Office  of the  Solicitor  General.130  Yet, on the whole,  Democrats
were not as rigid in the 107th Congress towards Bush's nominees as the
Republicans had been towards Clinton's in the  106th.131
licitor General under President George H.W. Bush. Biography of John G. Roberts, at http://
www.justice.gov/olp/robertsbio.htm  (last visited Sept. 2, 2003).  Although he has not held a
political appointment in government, opponents of Mr. Estrada's nomination have character-
ized him as a conservative based  on the organizations  and cases with which  he has been
associated.  ALLIANCE  FOR JUSTICE,  REPORT  ON  MIGUEL  ESTRADA,  NOMINEE  TO  THE US
COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE DC CIRCUIT (2002), available at http://www.allianceforjustice.
org/judicial/research-publications/researchdocuments/estrada-full-report.pdf  (Sept. 26,
2002).  Senate Republicans did not grant hearings to President Clinton's nominees to these two
vacancies, Elana Kagan and Allen R. Snyder, who were nominated on June 17 and September
22, 1999, respectively.  Press Release, White House Office of the Press Secretary,  President
Clinton Nominates Three to the Federal Bench 6/17/99 (June 18,  1999), available at 1999 WL
402708; Press Release, White House Office of the Press Secretary, Members Named to the
Federal Bench 09/22/99 (Sept. 22,  1999), available at 1999 WL 740762.
129  David G. Savage, Bush Court Nominee Is Voted Down, L.A. TIMES, Sept. 6, 2002, at
A17, available at 2002 WL 2501667.
130  Charles Lane, Lawmakers Press Nominee; Democrats Seek Justice Memos, Challenge
Estrada's Credibility, WASH. POST, Sept. 27, 2002, at A05, available at 2002 WL 101064029.
131  Higher percentages  of Bush's district court nominees got committee  hearings, they
waited shorter periods on average to have their hearings and to have their nominations reported
to the floor, and they were confirmed at a greater rate.  The same is true for the appellate court
nominees, except that their average wait from nomination to hearing was 3 days longer.  In
almost all respects, the Democrats also treated Bush nominees better on the Senate floor in
terms of the time between when nominees were reported out of committee and confirmed by
the Senate.  Sheldon Goldman, Assessing the Senate Judicial Confirmation Process: The Index
of Obstruction and Delay, 86 JUDICATURE 251,  253-56  (2003) [hereinafter Obstruction and
Delay].
It is a sign of the escalating  erosion of inter-branch comity, however, that the Democratic
Senate treated President George W. Bush far less favorably in his first two years of office as
compared to the initial two years of other Presidents'  service.  Thus, for example, during the
first two years served by Presidents Reagan, George H.W. Bush, and Clinton, the Senate re-
turned 4, 4, and 14 judicial nominations, respectively.  The Senate returned 36 nominations
under the current Administration.  Judicial Nominations Returned During the First Two Years
of Recent Congresses, at http://www.usdoj.gov/olp/retumednoms.pdf  (last  visited  Sept. 6,
2003).  Likewise, although President George W. Bush saw a larger number of his judicial
nominees (100) confirmed than did Presidents Carter, Reagan, or George H.W. Bush, his rates
for confirmation  were considerably  lower. Circuit and District Court Judicial Nominations,
First Two Years of Recent Administrations, at http://www.usdoj.gov/olp/2yearcomparison.pdf
(last visited April  18, 2003).  Bush's confirmation rates resemble more closely the Senate's
performance during the first two years of Clinton's second term. That is, his rates of confirma-
tion for district and appellate judges were 84 and 53 percent, respectively, id., as compared to
Clinton's 84 and 68 percent. Legacy, supra note 117, at 231. This strongly suggests that inter-
party relations had so deteriorated during the second Clinton Administration that Senate Dem-
ocrats viewed the  107th Congress as a continuation of an ongoing struggle, rather than the
beginning of a new era.530  CORNELL  JOURNAL OF LAW  AND  PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
Consider the following case in point.  On February  9, 2000, Presi-
dent Clinton nominated Robert Cindrich, a well-regarded moderate Pitts-
burgh federal trial judge, to a seat on the Third Circuit Court of Appeals,
which had become vacant on June 30, 1999.132  With nearly a full year
left in the Clinton  Administration,  Republicans in charge  of the Senate
Judiciary  Committee  refused  to  grant  the  uncontroversial  Cindrich  a
hearing.' 33
On  September  10,  2001,  President  George  W.  Bush  nominated
Johnstown  federal  trial judge D. Brooks  Smith  to the same  seat.134  It
took the Democratic-led Judiciary Committee over eight months to vote
on  the  nomination,  in large  part because  of questions  whether  Judge
Smith held mainstream views  on constitutional  federalism  and whether
he broke a  1989 promise to the Judiciary Committee to resign from or
reform  a sex-discriminatory  private club  upon  his confirmation  to  the
district court.135  The point is, however, that Senate Democrats did grant
Judge  Smith  both  a  hearing  and  a  committee  vote,  and  he  was
36
confirmed. 
The restoration  of Republican  control in the Senate in 2003, how-
ever, both intensified  the campaign  by the Bush Administration and by
Senate Republicans to appoint conservative activists to judicial vacancies
and prompted  a corresponding  strengthening  of Democratic  resistance.
The Democrats began pushing to new lengths one of the few clear pow-
ers a  Senate  minority  can  use  to force  compromise-the  filibuster.137
The Republicans,  for their part, are disregarding norms of comity upon
which they had successfully  relied to get leverage over judicial appoint-
ments  in  the Clinton Administration.  For example,  while  chairman of
the Senate  Judiciary Committee  under President Clinton, Senator Orrin
Hatch refused to hold a hearing on any candidate  unless he received a
"blue  slip"  from both  of the judicial candidate's  home-state  Senators,
132  Press  Release, White House Office of the Press Secretary, President Clinton Nomi-
nates Robert J. Cindrich, Kent R. Markus, John Antoon It,  and Phyllis J. Hamilton to the
Federal  Bench,  at  http://clinton6.nara.gov/2000/02/2000-02-09-president-clinton-nominates-
four-to-the-federal-bench.html  (Feb. 9, 2000).
133  Sen. Patrick Leahy, Statement on the Nomination of Judge D. Brooks Smith to be a
Judge on the United States Court Of Appeals for the Third Circuit, at http://leahy.senate.gov/
press/200205/052302.html  (May 23, 2003).
134 See U.S. Dept. of Justice Office of Legal Policy, Nominations During the 107th Con-
gress, at http://www.usdoj.gov/olp/nominations]07.htm  (last visited April 22, 2003).
135  David G. Savage,  Panel Backs Bush's Judicial Nominee, L.A. TIMES, May 24, 2002,
at A20, available at 2002 WL 2477920.
136 See Confirmed Nominees During the 107th Congress, at http://www.justice.gov/olp/
confirmedl07.htm (last visited Sept. 2, 2003).
137  Jennifer A. Dlouhy, More Judicial Nominee Battles Likely as Wins Fuel Both Parties'
Resolve, 61 CONG. Q. WKLY REP. 1034 (May 3, 2003).2003] WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
indicating  that  each  Senator had agreed  to  the hearing.138  During  the
George W. Bush Presidency, Hatch has abandoned this requirement, ex-
pressing  a  willingness  to  proceed  based  on  a  single  Senator's
139
approval. 
The phenomenon  of retaliatory  norm erosion  is well illustrated by
the case of Miguel  Estrada, nominated by President George W. Bush to
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, which is widely regarded
as the nation's second most powerful court.  A 1986 graduate of Harvard
Law  School,  Estrada  served  as  a  law  clerk  to  the Judge  Amalya  L.
Kearse of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and then for
Supreme Court Justice Anthony M. Kennedy.140  Following a year with a
New York law firm, he spent two years in the U.S. Attorney's Office for
the Southern District of New York, before joining the Justice Department
in  1992 as an Assistant to the Solicitor General. 141  He served there until
1997,  when  he joined  the Appellate  and  Constitutional  Law  Practice
Group of the Washington, D.C. office of Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, then
headed by longtime conservative legal activist and now Solicitor General
Theodore B. Olson. 142
The  problem  this  nomination  posed  for  Democrats  is  that  the
Republicans,  having  blocked President Clinton's efforts to fill  the seat
Estrada  sought,  nominated  an  apparently  talented  lawyer  with  a wide
reputation  for aggressively  conservative  legal  views,  but  virtually  no
public record of his jurisprudential thinking.  Apparently not wanting ei-
ther to confirm a young and ardently right-wing judge to the closely di-
vided  and immensely  powerful D.C. Circuit or to confront  the issue of
judicial ideology head on, the Democrats instead took the position, while
in control of the Senate, that they would not vote on Estrada's nomina-
tion in committee unless the Justice Department released memoranda he
prepared  in  the Solicitor General's  office.143 The  hope was  that these
memoranda would reveal his legal orientation.144  This breached a norm
of inter-branch comity; deliberative memoranda within the Solicitor Gen-
eral's office are usually held  closely because,  as argued by  a group of
Democratic and Republic  Solicitors General,  their confidentiality  is es-
sential to maintaining full and frank deliberation within an office that is
138  Jennifer A.  Dlouhy, Senate Traditions a Casualty in Judicial Nominations Spat, 61
CONG. Q. WKLY REP.  1735,  1736 (July 12, 2003).
139  Sen. Patrick Leahy, Opening Statement, Judicial Nominations Hearing, at http:/leahy.
senate.gov/press/200304/040103.html  (Apr.  I, 2003).
140  U.S. Department  of Justice Office of Legal  Policy, Miguel Estrada:  Biography, at
http://www.usdoj.gov/olp/estradabiohtm  (last visited Apr. 22, 2003).
141  Id.
142  Id.
143  See Lane, supra note 130, at A05.
144  Id.532  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND  PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
supposed to be conscientiously above partisan politics.145  Although it is
not unprecedented  for  the executive  to  share memoranda  revealing the
content of legal  deliberations internal to the executive branch, it is unu-
sual to make their disclosure a precondition for a committee vote.146
When the Republicans  regained power in 2003, the Judiciary Com-
mittee voted to recommend Estrada's confirmation to the Senate.147  The
Democrats  took the unusual  step  of filibustering  to block the nomina-
tion. 148  At this point, even the staunchly conservative former Republican
Majority Leader Trent Lott urged his party to compromise and share the
Estrada memos.149  Instead, the Republicans tried to break the filibuster
through an unprecedented series of cloture votes, both of which resulted
in a losing 55-45  margin for the Republicans.150
Of course,  this  is  not  the first  era of ideological  contentiousness
over judicial nominees.  Nor, with regard to the Clinton Administration,
was it unprecedented during periods of divided government for the party
in charge of Congress to review the judicial nominees of the sitting Presi-
dent with extra care.  The last decade is nonetheless distinctive because
of three factors: (1) efforts by Senate Republicans  to hold open unprece-
dented numbers of lower court seats with the primary objective of under-
mining  the  sitting  President's  power  of judicial  appointment;  (2)  the
unwillingness  of a sitting  President to compromise in any  serious way
with  the opposition party  in Congress in  agreeing  to nominate judicial
candidates outside  the President's political base; and (3) the breakdown
of  inter-party  comity  within  the  Senate.  Democrats  are  retaliating
145 See Letter from Seth P. Waxman et al., to the Hon. Patrick J. Leahy, Chairman, Com-
mittee on the Judiciary,  United States Senate (June 24, 2002),  at http://www.usdoj.gov/olpl
solicitorsletter.pdf  (last visited Apr.  18, 2003).
146  Vermont Senator and former Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy
issued a statement recounting prior instances when the executive branch shared with the Sen-
ate,  in a variety of contexts, internal deliberative  memoranda  indicating the legal views of
various members of the executive branch.  Sen. Patrick Leahy, Statement On The Cloture Vote
On The Nomination Of Miguel Estrada, March 18, 2003, at http://leahy.senate.gov/press/2003
03/031803.html (Mar.  18, 2003). Given the limited number of such instances, however, most
of which did not involve judicial nominations, it is inferable that the Senate Democrats' de-
mand in the Estrada case is an unusual  one.  See also Letter of Assistant Attorney  General
Daniel J. Bryant, U.S. Department of Justice Office of Legislative Affairs, to Senator Patrick
Leahy, at http://www.usdoj.gov/olp/aagbryant.pdf  (Oct. 8, 2002).
147  Jan Crawford Greenburg,  Bush Judicial Pick Clears Panel for Full Senate Vote, Es-
trada OKd 10-9 in Testy Hearing, CHI.  TRIB., Jan.  31,  2003,  at 13,  available at 2003 WL
11548178.
148  David Montgomery, A Man  on Hold;  While the Senate Debates, Judicial Nominee
Miguel Estrada Waits. And Waits, WASH. POST, Mar. 14, 2003, at COI, available at 2003 WL
15466208.
149  Frist Brushes Off Lott Criticism on Moving Estrada Nomination, CONG. DAILY  A.M.,
Mar. 14,  2003, available at 2003 WL 8362754.
150  Jennifer A. Dlouhy, Third Vote Can't Charm Lawmakers, 61  CONG. Q. WKLY. REP.
697, 697 (Mar. 22, 2003).2003] WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK  DOWN
against the abuses of Clinton-era Republican  control and against Bush's
ideological fervor, while Republicans undercut the very norms and prac-
tices on which they relied to gain some leverage over judicial  appoint-
ments during the Clinton Administration.' 51
III.  THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST  DELIBERATIVE  LEGITIMACY
AND ITS  CAUSES
One may question whether the events described above are aspects of
a  common  phenomenon;  whether  that  phenomenon,  if genuine,  is  a
troubling one; and whether, if troubling, it requires any unconventional
political  response.  Before  answering  each  of these questions  affirma-
tively,  it may help to clarify what this phenomenon  is not.
As it happens, each of these critical episodes has involved a destabi-
lizing  and antidemocratic  initiative by a branch of the national  govern-
ment while in the control of the current, very conservative generation of
151  Although I obviously disagree with Professor Prakash's perspective on who has vio-
lated which norms with regard to judicial nominations,  Prakash, supra note  8,  at 549, his
discussion makes three fair points.  The first is that it is difficult from any selective use of
numbers to make an air-tight case that one party or another is more clearly to blame for the
growing crisis over judicial nominations.  The second is that, because multiple norms may be
operating in the same domain, it is possible to mistake the observance of one for the breach of
another. For example, were the Senate Republicans of 1997-98 breaching the norm of reason-
able deference to presidential judicial nominations, or were they observing an emerging norm
of diminished receptivity to a President's judicial nominees during a Congress that culminates
in a presidential election year?  The third is that, in telling this particular tale, it's hard to know
where to begin.  Did Republicans start the train rolling with their obstructionism during the
Clinton Administration, or did Democrats start it in motion with their handling of Supreme
Court nominee Robert Bork and their significant increase in resistance to Reagan's judicial
nominees in 1987 and 1988? For that matter, why start there?  Did Reagan breach traditional
norms for judicial nominations by applying stiffer ideological litmus tests than had been im-
posed by any prior President?  Was the successful Republican filibuster of Abe Fortas'  1968
nomination to the position of Chief Justice the beginning of the fall from grace?
With regard to normative constraints, however, the real issue is not who "pushes the envelope"
first.  Presumably, both sides do.  The question is, are there perceptible limits beyond which
each side recognizes that partisan and institutional competition has become counterproductive
in terms of governance?  In this connection, a recent study of judicial nominations from 1977
to 2002 well captures what went wrong during the years of Republican resistance to President
Clinton's judicial nominations:
[T]he Republican's [sic] charge that the Democrats  [in 1987-88 and in  1991-92]
were responsible for initiating the obstruction  and delay phenomenon is supported
by the objective evidence.  But with the situation reversed with a Democrat in the
White House and  the Republicans  in control  of the Senate,  the evidence clearly
shows that the Republicans ratcheted up obstruction and delay, with all-time records
for the district and appeals courts, including the then unprecedented [obstruction and
delay] for appeals court nominees by the 106th Congress.
Obstruction and Delay, supra note  131, at 256-57.  It is the "ratcheting up" phenomenon-
with regard to Congress's appropriations powers in 1995, its investigative powers during the
Clinton Administration, and its resistance to judicial nominations-that is moving the political
branches to a new and less salutary equilibrium in terms of the competing values of consensus
and political combat.534  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND  PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
Republican party leadership.  In two respects, which will be described in
detail later, this is not a coincidence, but there are also two ways to mis-
interpret the pattern.  First, there is no intention to suggest that there is
any  necessary  link  between  political  conservatism  per  se  and assaults
against inter-branch norms.  In principle, it is no more or less likely that a
political party opposed to the animating impulses of checks and balances
will be for  or against reproductive  rights,  affirmative  action,  tax cuts,
environmental  regulation, or anything else.  And, if the behavior at issue
is indeed  troublesome,  it would not be any  less so if the driving party
were left-wing,  rather than right-wing.  Second, it is not true that only
Republican  Presidents, Republican  majorities in Congress, and Republi-
can Justices are "pushers of the envelope" with regard to stepping on the
toes of coordinate branches.  A certain amount of shoving and pushing is
part of the normal way of doing business, and Democrats, like Republi-
cans, have sharp elbows from time to time.'52
These  particular  episodes  are  distinctive,  however.  They  are  all
consistent with the explicit constitutional outlook of the Republican right
wing, which,  since the Reagan  Administration, has been notably  hostile
to checks and balances. 53  The Republicans'  chief theoretical alternative
to robust checks and balances has been a vigorous form of what might be
called "presidentialism"-a view of the Constitution that takes the Presi-
dent as the key policy driver and that would grant him an extraordinary
range of discretion both unreviewable by the courts and largely uncheck-
able  by Congress.  In  practice, however,  the Republicans'  hostility to-
ward  checks  and  balances  is  less  about  the  aggrandizement  of  the
Presidency than contempt for democratic pluralism 54-a  pluralism that,
for historical reasons, is conspicuously embodied in the very make-up of
the Democratic  Party.  This helps to explain why, for example, in addi-
tion to simply wanting power, Congressional  Republicans felt comforta-
ble attacking the presidency as an institution while the sitting  President
152  It is thus not my  point that, over any particular period of years, Republicans have
committed more breaches of inter-branch etiquette than Democrats.  My point is that Republi-
can breaches fit a particular pattern that seems to transcend the substance of any particular
political issue and which, given the current polarization of the parties, portends ill for fulfilling
the consensus-building potential of our checks and balances system.
Likewise, it is not my argument that the current Republican Party is hostile to checks and
balances (not "separation of powers," as Professor Prakash says) because of its demographics,
but rather that its demographics make the full scope of its hostility to checks and balances
politically sustainable.  I will not refute  Professor Prakash's arguments that I have failed to
substantiate characterizations of the Republican Party, which simply do not appear in my pa-
per, even by implication.
153 Peter M. Shane, Political Accountability in a System  of Checks and Balances: The
Case of Presidential Review of Rulemaking, 48 ARK. L. REV.  161,  161-65 (1995).
154  A good example appears in the contrasting portraits Professor Steven Calabresi draws
in Unitary Executive, supra note 28, between a Congress rife with regional bias and special
interest pandering and the Executive, who is solely accountable to a national electorate.20031 WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
was a Democrat, while making extraordinary claims for presidential au-
thority when Republican Presidents have held the White House.155 What
congressional Republicans seem not to have noticed, now that both ends
of Pennsylvania  Avenue  are  Republican-controlled,  is that the primary
institutional victim in the assault on checks and balances is Congress.156
It  is, however, the judicial branch of the national government  that
has provided the most striking expression of contemporary contempt for
modern democratic  norms, namely, in the Supreme Court's decision in
Bush v. Gore. 157 Thus far, no one has proffered a legally persuasive case
for shortcutting  the statewide  recount ordered by  the Florida  Supreme
Court.158  Even if that judicial body, which, unlike the United States Su-
preme Court, is accountable to the electorate, had been unduly creative in
its own reasoning-a point I do not concede-the United States Supreme
Court did not offer any convincing federal  ground for interfering with a
statewide recount.159  Judge Richard Posner, without defending the rea-
soning of Bush v. Gore, has argued that Bush v. Gore was defensible as a
prudential measure to avoid the political disaster that might have befallen
the nation had Congress been left to sort things out.160  If, however, the
Constitution  vests  in  Congress  the  function  of  refereeing  presidential
elections, then divesting Congress of that power would hardly seem to be
a legitimate decision for the Supreme Court to make.  Moreover, if any
"extralegal"  factor  should  have  governed  the Court's exercise  of  pru-
dence,  it should  have been that Vice President  Al  Gore had decisively
won the popular vote.  That is, if the unelected Supreme Court were in-
tent on  doing  the nation  an institutional  favor,  surely the presumption
155 Professor Prakash thinks it odd to call Republicans presidentialists when Republican
Congresses,  faced  with a Democratic  president,  worked  so hard to curtail  the executive.
Prakash, supra note 8, at 552. I did not say, however, that the Republican Party as a party was
presidentialist, but that its leading theoreticians (including Professor Prakash) are.
156  Kirk Victor, Congress in Eclipse, NAT'L J.,  Apr. 5, 2003, at 1066, available at 2003
WL 5140907
157  531  U.S. 98 (2000).
158 The literature commenting on Bush v.  Gore is immense.  See, e.g., BUSH v. GORE:
THE COURT CASES  AND THE COMMENTARY  (EJ. Dionne, Jr. & William Kristol eds., 2001);
THE NEW  YORK  TIMES,  36 DAYS:  THE COMPLETE  CHRONICLE  OF THE 2000  PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION CRISIS (2001); ALAN M. DERSHOWITZ, SUPREME INJUSTICE: How THE HIGH COURT
HIJACKED ELECTION 2000 (2001); HOWARD GILLMAN,  THE VOTES THAT COUNTED: HOW THE
COURT DECIDED THE 2000 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION (2001); RICHARD A. POSNER,  BREAKING
THE DEADLOCK: THE 2000 ELECTION, THE CONSTITUTION, AND THE COURTS (2001); David A.
Strauss, Bush v Gore:  What Were They Thinking?, in THE VOTE: BUSH,  GORE, AND THE SU-
PREME COURT 184, 199 (Cass R. Sunstein & Richard A. Epstein eds., 2001); Symposium, The
Law of PresidentialE lections: Issues in the Wake of Florida2 000, 29 FLA. ST. U. L. REV. 325
(2001).  My own views appear at Peter M. Shane,  DisappearingD  emocracy: How Bush v.
Gore Undermined the FederalR ight to Vote for Presidential Electors, 29 FLA. ST. U. L. REV.
535-585 (2001).
159  See Shane, supra note  158.
160  Richard A. Posner, Bush v.  Gore: A  Reply to Friedman, 29 FLA. ST. L.  REV.  871
(2001).536  CORNELL  JOURNAL  OF LAW AND  PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
should have been in favor of deciding the case in a way most likely to
enable the American people to be governed by the presidential candidate
they had actually preferred.  It is among the more remarkable features of
Bush v. Gore that the word "democracy"  does not appear in the opinion.
History will not treat it as mere coincidence that the United States found
itself with a right-wing  Republican  President in January  2001  because
the five most conservative members of the United States Supreme Court
effectively  short-circuited  the election count in November, 2000.161
Bush v. Gore corresponds with the other episodes described because
it stands as an astonishing departure from institutional norms with regard
to inter-branch  relations.  Never before has the Supreme  Court directly
implicated itself in the political selection of the authorities  in charge of
another branch of government.  It has invoked the political question doc-
trine as a ground for staying out of the political arena in cases in which
judicial intervention would have seemed far more legitimate than the res-
olution of a presidential election. '62  Most disturbing of all, a Court that,
on  such insubstantial  ground,  would decide  a presidential  election can
hardly be counted on to exercise institutional prudence in any future case
that might counsel for deference to the decisions of the elected branches
of the national government.  Indeed, recent developments in judicial re-
view reveal an increasingly conspicuous pattern of disrespect for the co-
ordinate branches  in implementing  constitutional values.
The repeated willingness of the Republican  Party's most conserva-
tive elements  to engage in destabilizing  and antidemocratic  initiatives,
however, is supported by more than the proffered constitutional views of
its leading theorists.  It also reflects the changing  social and ideological
character  of the party.  Political  scientists have documented  that, since
the 1970s, the diversity of each major political party's base has declined,
"reducing internal conflicts  and making more unified party voting more
likely."163  Each political party, especially in the House of Representa-
tives,  has  moved  closer  to  the  voting  preferences  of its  ideological
base-so much so that there is little overlap in voting behavior between
"moderate Republicans" and "conservative Democrats," especially in the
House. 164
161  The most fervent contemporary expression of this judgment presumably belongs to
Bruce Ackerman.  Bruce Ackerman, Anatomy of a Constitutional Coup, 23 LONDON REV.  OF
BooKs 5 (Feb. 8, 2001).
162 See, e.g., Nixon v. U.S., 506 U.S. 224 (1993)  (holding that the constitutional  suffi-
ciency of Senate procedures for judicial impeachment trials presents a nonjusticiable political
question).
163 See JEFFREY M. STONECASH  ET AL.,  DIVERGING PARTIES: SOCIAL CHANGE,  REALIGN-
MENT,  AND PARTY POLARIZATION 20-21 (2003).
164 See Vote Ratings, NAT'L J., Feb. 1, 2003, at 349, available at 2003 WL 5140638 ("In
the House, Jim Leach of Iowa and Constance A. Morella of Maryland were the only Republi-
cans whose scores ranked them deeply within the liberal side, while Ralph M. Hall of Texas,2003]
WHEN INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK  DOWN
Yet, the phenomenon  has not been  identical for both parties.  The
Republican  shift to a base of support that is more rural, more affluent,
and more disproportionately  white has given that party an  activist base
that  is  far less  likely  than the Democratic  base  to embody  substantial
divergences  of economic,  social,  and cultural interests.  Thus,  although
the general drift of the Democratic Party has been decidedly liberal, the
dynamics  of those  areas  in  which  the  Democratic  Party  holds  domi-
nance-New  York or Chicago, for example-pose  significantly greater
challenges for the party in mediating differences among its core constitu-
ents.  The party has even tried, while  moving leftward, to hold on to its
well-organized  pro-business  constituencies,165 and has  been more  suc-
cessful than the Republican Party at attracting the involvement of minori-
ties  or  the  poor.  As  a  result,  norms  of  deliberation  and  consensus-
building  are inescapable  elements  of Democratic  political strategy;  the
party  cannot afford any of its contentious  constituencies to regard itself
as utterly neglected.  Republicans, by contrast, have prospered by insist-
ing on a level of party discipline that simply would be impossible with-
out a far more homogeneous party base.
The  Republicans Party's increasingly  narrow ideological base and
homogeneous  constituency  reinforce  the attractiveness  of its conserva-
tive thought leaders' opposition to constitutional views that embrace dis-
sent,  deliberation,  pluralism,  and  accommodation.  The  current
leadership of the House of Representatives shows little flexibility in deal-
ing even with intra-party  dissent,  and has abrogated much  of the  1994
"Contract  With America"  designed to curb what Republicans then said
were  Democratic  abuses  of majority  power.166  The  mutual reinforce-
ment of party demographics  and a narrow ideology that is hostile to de-
liberative  democratic  legitimacy  is  what  signals  that  the  breaches  of
inter-branch  norms  reflect  a genuine  political tendency,  and  not just a
series of unconnected political misadventures.
This might not matter, especially if conventional  avenues of politi-
cal competition made the matter easy to correct.  But they do not.  The
judiciary, of course, is not elected and possesses lifetime tenure.  Even if
outrage over Bush v. Gore were more widespread, no electoral retaliation
against the majority Justices would be possible.  Perhaps more important
Ken Lucas of Kentucky, and David Phelps of Illinois were the only Democrats whose scores
ranked them deeply within the conservative wing").
165  Emblematic of that success is the influence within the Democratic Party of the pro-
business  Democratic Leadership Council,  which provided a strong basis of support for the
presidential candidacies of Bill Clinton and Al Gore.  Extensive information about the DLC is
available at http://www.ndol.org/index.cfm  (last visited April 20, 2003).
166 Gebe Martinez, Democrats Cry Foul as GOP Eases Several House Rules, 61 CONG.
Q. WKLY.  REP. 90, 90 (Jan. 11, 2003).  See also Jonathan Allen, Effective House Leadership
Makes the Most of Majority, 61 CONG. Q. WKLY. REP. 746 (Mar. 29, 2003).538  CORNELL  JOURNAL  OF LAW AND  PUBLIC POLICY  [Vol.  12:503
is the fact that the anti-majoritarian  composition  of the Senate  and the
antidemocratic bias it lends to the electoral  college  system play greatly
into  the hands of an  ideologically  narrow-banded  party  that is  widely
dispersed  geographically.  That  is  because  the nearly  half of the  U.S.
population  that resides in  Republican-dominated  states resides in  states
that are smaller and thus overrepresented  in Congress, especially in  the
Senate.
The 2000 presidential  election proves the point dramatically.  Each
state currently  casts one electoral  vote for each of its Senators and one
for each member of the House of Representatives. 167  Thus, of the 271
electoral  votes credited to George W. Bush, 60 represented  the Senate-
based electoral votes coming from each of the 30 states he won.  Yet, the
population  of those  states  accounts  for slightly under  half of the total
U.S.  population. 68  A  more  democratic  electoral  account-albeit  one
still over-representing the smallest states-would give each state electors
based only on its seats in the House of Representatives,  which is based
on  population.  Giving  the  District  of  Columbia  only  one  elector,
equivalent to the minimum number of House members accorded to every
state,  the electoral  count  under  this  method would  have been  225  for
Gore to 211  for Bush,  rather than 271  for Bush and 266 for Gore.  In
other words, Gore lost not because  we have an electoral college, but be-
cause  we  have  an  electoral  college  that  is  so  profoundly
69
malapportioned. 
167  U.S. CONST. art. It, § 1, cl. 2.
168  Data on the 2000 presidential election results are taken from http://www.archives.gov/
federal-register/electoral-college/electoral  college.html  (last  visited April  20, 2003).  State
population  figures  appear  at  http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/phc-t2.html
(last visited April 20, 2003).
169  Because an electoral college system requires presidential candidates to pay close atten-
tion to all, rather than just the most populous states, it could well be argued that the existence
of some form of electoral college is actually an important mechanism in support of deliberative
democracy.  My point is thus not to criticize the existence of an electoral college per se, but
rather to show how-by building on the malapportionment of the Senate-it plays especially
into the hands of an ideologically narrow, but geographically dispersed party and complicates
the argument that, if "the  people"  are unhappy  with one-party control,  they can effectively
retaliate at the ballot box.  It is sometimes argued also that the problem with the electoral
college is not the Senate-based seats, but rather the "unit rule," under which state legislatures
decide to award all of a state's electors, rather than a proportional number to the winner of the
state popular vote.  However, the primary alternative  to the unit rule-awarding  2 electoral
votes  per state according  to the statewide  winner, and then another for each congressional
district in which a candidate wins-produces distortions of its own.  That is, a candidate can
do better in a state by winning a large number of districts by a razor-thin margin than winning
a small number of districts overwhelmingly.  (Thus, George W. Bush would apparently have
done better in the electoral college if electoral  votes were awarded by congressional district,
not by state. Rhodes Cook, This Just In: Nixon Beats Kennedy, WASH. POST, Mar. 25, 2001, at
B02, available at 2001  WL 17615712.)  The optimal way to balance the deliberative values
furthered by the electoral college with democratic fairness would be to continue an electoral2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
The 2002  Senate elections  confirm  the pattern.  The Republicans
currently hold 51 seats.  However, the population they represent-credit-
ing them with half the population in those  states in which the Senators
belong to different parties-comprises only 44.4 percent of the United
States.' 70  In short, the more widespread geographical  distribution of the
Republicans, despite their narrower ideological appeal, assures them dis-
proportionate  influence  in both the executive  and  legislative branches.
For this reason  alone, it is not surprising that President George  H. W.
Bush was not fatally handicapped  by the Iran-Contra  affair; that public
displeasure over the  1995  budget battle  and impeachment  did not cost
Republicans  control of Congress;  and why, even if the public  thought
that the Senate treated Clinton's judicial nominees unfairly and should be
censured on that score, a national majority would by no means be suffi-
cient to insure a transfer of party control.
Assume that the following propositions are correct:  (1) that recent
breaches of inter-branch norms of accommodation reflect a now systemic
tendency;  (2)  that this tendency is rooted in the demographics and ideol-
ogy of the Republican Party; and (3) that the displeasure of a majority of
Americans  would  be  insufficient  to guarantee  that Republican  control
can  be displaced.  Would the  truth of these propositions  truly  put the
legitimacy of American democracy  at risk?  An observer as thoughtful
and astute as  University  of Pennsylvania  law professor Edward  Rubin
has recently  stated that Americans'  commitment  to democracy is easily
overstated,  and that our sense of legitimacy is more dependent on such
issues  as  security,  prosperity,  and  social justice.171  Professor  Robert
Bennett has put forth a model of "conversational  democracy"  in which
we regard  our  system  as  legitimate not because  all  are  equally  repre-
sented, but because there is essentially universal adult access to a kind of
endless,  free-floating,  multimedia public  policy  discussion that extends
to all  members  of the  polity a  sense  of  sufficient  participation  in  the
system to warrant our allegiance. 72
Operationally,  Rubin  and  Bennett  are  clearly  on  to  something.
Americans  are  not up in arms  over equal representation  in  the Senate,
and conventional wisdom holds that, while the nation is secure and pros-
college system, but eliminate the Senate-based seats and award House-based electoral votes
proportionally  within each state according to the overall state popular vote.
170  A roster of Senators by state appears at http://www.senate.gov/general/contactinfor-
mation/senators_cfm.cfm?OrderBy'state&Sort=AS  (last visited April 20, 2003). State popula-
tion  figures  appear  at  http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/phc-t2.html  (last
visited April 20, 2003).
171  Edward L. Rubin, Getting Past Democracy, 149 U. PA. L. REV.  711, 732-33 (2001).
172  Robert W. Bennett, Democracy as Meaningful Conversation, 14 CONST.  COMMENT.
481  (1997);  Robert W. Bennett, Should Parents Be Given Extra Votes on Account of Their
Children?: Toward a Conversational Understanding of American Democracy, 94 Nw. U. L.
REV. 503 (2000).540  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW  AND PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
perous, incumbents are safe.  Yet, it hardly seems tenable, if the ideologi-
cal gulf widens  among  Democrats  and Republicans,  that a majority  of
Americans  will long  tolerate the systematic exclusion of their interests
and policy preferences by entrenched office  holders representing only a
minority of Americans.  Moreover, we are at an odd cultural moment for
any political party intent on entrenching itself in a manner that weakens
our checks  and balances  system's capacity to facilitate compromise and
consensus.  That is, we have embarked upon a foreign policy that puts a
new premium on our explicit national dedication to democracy.  The val-
ues  the  United  States  offers  most conspicuously  in  opposition  to  the
world of authoritarian  Islamic governments  are the values of tolerance
and inclusiveness best instantiated by a checks and balances approach to
democratic legitimacy.  America's democratic system is thus reaching an
imbalance,  both in the operation of our institutions and in the mismatch
between  American  democratic  rhetoric  and  practice.  The  question  is
what  will replace  it?
IV.  WHAT NEXT?
The ideology and demographics of the Republican Party have made
the 108th Congress an unexpectedly perilous environment for checks and
balances.  In  recent  decades,  when Democrats  were  in charge  of both
Congress and the Executive branch, the divergent constituencies  within
the Democratic Party helped insure that inter-branch debate remained ro-
bust, even as joint partisan control helped promote some degree of inter-
branch  comity.  Now that Republicans control all three branches  of the
national government for the first time in recent memory, party discipline
and aggressive White House control of the party's agenda have consider-
ably undermined  Congress's  vigilance  with respect  to  its institutional
prerogatives.  What should be a contest for influence  between  co-equal
branches, each jockeying for power, even as each accommodates  signifi-
cantly  the agenda of the other, is instead  unfolding  chiefly as  a battle
between  Senate Republicans  and Senate Democrats over partisan priori-
ties  (with occasional  contretemps  between  House  and Senate  Republi-
cans).  Republican  eagerness  to stifle the Democrats'  impact may  well
lead  to the further  erosion  of customary  practices-such  as the  "blue
slip" requirement  in the case of judicial appointments 73-that  have pre-
viously been protective of whoever was in the minority party.  This trend
presumably  is no cause  for concern  among  Republicans  who imagine
they will never again be in the minority or among Democrats who, antic-
ipating an eventual return to Democratic control of one or both political
branches,  would be happy  to run a government  in  which allegiance  to
173  See Dlouhy, supra note  138.2003] WHEN  INTERBRANCH  NORMS  BREAK DOWN
norms of bipartisan  and inter-branch  accommodation have been signifi-
cantly eroded.  Yet, for others  of us to whom the ethos of deliberative
democracy is more appealing, the future  is worrisome.
Of course,  it is by  no means  certain  that episodes like  those de-
scribed  above  are destined  to mark  a long-term  move  away  from the
modus vivendi  of  the late  20th  century  and  towards  a  form of inter-
branch and inter-party competition that is more brutal and less accommo-
dating.  After all, it may  seem hard to imagine recurrences  of the Iran-
Contra,  budget  showdown,  and  impeachment  scenarios.  Republicans
presumably will not repeat their mistakes, and Democrats are unlikely to
perceive these initiatives as securing much benefit to the Republicans at
the Democrats'  expense.  Moreover, even if some pre-presidential delin-
quency were to surface in, say, the life of President George W. Bush, the
diversity  of  constituencies  within  the  Democratic  Party  would  likely
prove a sufficient safeguard against mounting a purely partisan impeach-
ment on grounds unrelated to the welfare of the constitutional system.
Yet the recent history of inter-party warfare  over judicial appoint-
ments points in a negative direction.  In this area, we are already seeing
an escalation of retaliatory moves that shows no obvious prospect of bi-
partisan resolution.  There is more at stake than the appearance of civil-
ity.  The potential damage to the judiciary, both in delaying the filling of
vacancies  and in undermining  public  faith  in judicial independence,  is
considerable.
It is not hard to imagine what a peacekeeping deal would look like.
The White House and Senate Republicans could signal an end to the era
of mutually-assured obstruction by agreeing with the Democrats to a bi-
partisan  "treaty."  The parties  could agree,  for  example, that President
Bush would nominate to half the number of appellate judicial vacancies
existing on January 20, 2001 judicial candidates who had originally been
nominated  by  President  Clinton  and  delayed.  These  nominees  could
even be allocated in a way that would preserve or achieve in at least the
short term a Democratic majority on any appellate court that would have
had a Democratic majority had Republicans processed Clinton nominees
fairly and  promptly.  In  an  ideal  world,  such  an inter-branch  "treaty"
would be followed by a Bush turn to moderation  among judicial appoin-
tees that would emulate Clinton's.  But even if President Bush remained
committed to judicial partisans of the right, his approach would be con-
siderably less troublesome as a matter of inter-branch politics if he were
not also  seeking a windfall  in judicial appointments  due to the past in-
transigence  of Senate  Republicans.  Post-treaty,  if Democrats began  to
behave like the late 90's Senate  Republicans,  Republicans  would have
both standing  to complain  and  the power to respond  effectively.  The
problem with such a scenario is that the equilibrium of mutual forbear-542  CORNELL JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC  POLICY  [Vol. 12:503
ance can only be reasserted at the initiative of the now-dominant  Repub-
lican  right wing.  It is hard to identify  the incentives that would  drive
them to such an initiative.
What seems more probable is that something like the current period
of trench  warfare  will  continue,  with  the ongoing  temptation  for each
party not merely to oppose, but to seek to undermine the other in the eyes
of the voting public.  Each  confronts its internal tensions.  Republicans
will suffer conflicting pressures, on one hand, to accommodate enough of
the northeastern  moderates'  agenda to keep them from leaving the party
and, on the other, to purge the moderates from any positions of influence
and continue  on a path towards an  ideologically narrow party  that wor-
ries little about the institutional prerogatives of Congress or the impor-
tance of legitimating  democratic  rule by  taking all contending  interests
seriously.  The  conflicting  pressures  on  Democrats  will  be  to  move
enough towards  the Republican  agenda to pick up swing voters in  key
states and disable the Republican  strategy  of ruling with a national  mi-
nority of the popular vote, and, contrarily, to move more decisively to the
left in order that the party be able to govern with the greater cohesiveness
and discipline that the Republicans  have managed to achieve.
No matter which strategy prevails, there is reason to worry that new
habits  of unalloyed  combat  will  have replaced  old  habits  of mutually
respectful competition,  to the long-term detriment of democratic  vitality
in  the United States.  It would  not be surprising if the results of many
more years of the current pattern included a further alienation of Ameri-
can voters, continued declines in political interest and participation,  and
persistent erosion in the larger society of those norms of mutual respect
and accommodation  that nurture  social trust and cooperation.  None of
this is  susceptible to ready  measurement, and it may be easy, given the
imponderables of politics and the natural ebbs and flows of partisan in-
fluence, to believe that nothing much is at stake.  That is, as long as the
United States remains reasonably prosperous  and secure, vagaries in the
quality  of our democratic  life are  too  obscure  and uncertain  to worry
about.  On the  other hand,  it  may be that  what is  hardest  to measure
about our political life is also the most precious,  the easiest to lose, and
hardest to recover.  The Framers bequeathed  us a system in which princi-
ples of representative and deliberative democracy might work together to
produce a  government  uniquely suited  to the legitimacy demands  of a
diverse citizenry.  We should not squander that legacy.