A FUTURE OF INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT? BERNE 
AND THE FRONT DOOR OUT 
 
AN ESSAY IN HONOUR OF SAM RICKETSON 
 
By Rebecca Giblin1 
 
In press: Across Intellectual Property (Cambridge University Press, 2019) 
 
 
 
The unamendable treaty 
The  Berne  Convention  was  always  intended  to  be  revised  regularly  to  keep  pace  with 
technological and social change.2 There were seven revisions in its first 85 years, with the 
longest pause being the 20 years between the Rome (1928) and Brussels (1948) Acts, at which 
time the world was understandably preoccupied with other matters.  But progress ground to a 
halt in 1971. Since then, we have gone almost half a century with no substantive revision at all.  
 
That can be attributed, in part, to  the procedure involved. Revising Berne’s substantive 
provisions requires a unanimity of votes cast, effectively giving each member a veto right and 
making change exponentially more difficult as membership grows. As I write there are 176 
contracting parties, with three – the tiny Pacific Island nations of Tuvalu, the Cook Islands and 
Kiribati – joining in 2017 alone. But sheer numbers aren’t the only problem. More significant 
is the chasm between members’ interests, particularly developed and developing nations, which 
has significantly affected Berne’s development since the post-colonial era following World 
War II. In the lead up to that period, as chronicled by Ricketson and Ginsburg in their history 
                                                            
1 Associate Professor, Faculty of Law, Monash University; ARC Future Fellow; CREATe Fellow. This work 
was supported by ARC grant FT170100011. I developed these ideas over many enjoyable hours of debate with 
Sam Ricketson and Jane Ginsburg in New York during late 2017 - thanks to both for your generosity. Some of 
the ideas I touch on are developed more deeply elsewhere: see Rebecca Giblin, ‘A New Copyright Bargain? 
Reclaiming Lost Culture and Getting Authors Paid’ (2018) 41 Columbia Journal of Law & the Arts 369.   
2 Sam Ricketson and Jane C Ginsburg, International Copyright and Neighbouring Rights: The Berne 
Convention and Beyond (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2nd ed, 2006) 340 citing Berne Convention for the 
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, opened for signature 9 September 1886, 828 UNTS 221 (entered into 
force 5 December 1887) art 17 (which envisaged amendment of the Treaty to introduce improvements to 
‘perfect’ the system) (‘Berne Convention’). 
1 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 of Berne, successive revisions had expanded rights and made the treaty ‘increasingly less 
congenial to the interests of developing countries’.3 By 1967, such nations comprised more 
than 40 per cent of the membership, and they were visibly chafing at what Drahos describes as 
a system ‘run by an Old World club of former or diminished colonial powers to suit their 
economic interests’.4 The poorer nations began raising increasingly urgent questions about the 
impact of Berne on their development agendas, and there emerged a real risk that they would 
withdraw from the Berne Union altogether. In a nod to the justice of their claims, the 1967 
Revision contained a Protocol that allowed greater flexibility to developing nations, including 
over the making of translations and copies.5 However, powerful publisher and author groups 
mobilised resistance to the reforms and the Protocol was ultimately abandoned, creating a 
schism which threatened for years to destroy the Union.6 The wounds were sutured, barely, by 
the 1971 Paris Act. Its substitute Appendix offered up less generous concessions that every 
member was, however grudgingly, then able to live with, and the Union held. 
 
In the immediate wake of these events emerged a strong view that further revision should not 
or could not be attempted. Koumantos, in the ‘should not’ camp, argued that the Berne 
Convention already gave authors essentially everything they needed, and that to open it up for 
further revision would be to peek into Pandora’s box. ‘Authors have no reason to ask for a 
revision of the Berne Convention – not even in order to complete or clarify certain points. This 
is because once the procedure of revision is begun once can never know what will come out of 
it.’7 Sam was of the view that revision, however desirable, simply could not be achieved. While 
he did nominate a wish list of future changes to Berne in his 1987 treatise, it was combined 
with  an  observation  that  a  revision  conference  in  the  short  to  medium  term  would  be 
‘pointless’.8 Later, he wrote that ‘the prevailing view [after 1971] was that there would be no 
more revisions of the old kind, and that it would thereafter remain unchanged, a kind of 
                                                            
3  Ricketson and Ginsburg, above n 2, 884. 
4 Peter Drahos with John Braithwaite, Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge Economy? (London: 
Earthscan, 2002) 76. 
5 Berne Convention, revised at Stockholm, 14 July 1967 (‘Stockholm Act’) annex (Protocol Regarding 
Developing Countries).  
6 Ricketson and Ginsburg, above n 2, 913-914. These events have been described as a ‘crisis in international 
copyright’: see Howard D Sacks, ‘Crisis in International Copyright: The Protocol Regarding Developing 
Countries’ [1969] Journal of Business Law 26, 128. 
7 Georges Koumantos, ‘The Future of the Berne Convention’ (1986-1987) 11 Columbia VLA Journal of Law & 
the Arts 225, 236. 
8 Sam Ricketson, The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works: 1886-1986 (London: 
Centre for Commercial Law Studies, Queen Mary College, Kluwer, 1987) 919.  
2 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 enduring artifact to a particular conception of authors’ rights that could be taken no further in 
the changing circumstances of the late twentieth century’.9  
 
Treaty obsolescence doesn’t necessarily result in pain for treaty parties. Even if members don’t 
wish to formally renounce their obligations, it’s not uncommon for outdated parts of toothless 
treaties to be quietly abandoned. Berne, long regarded as ‘little more than a code of polite 
behaviour’,10 might have met that fate had the formal linking of IP and trade by the Agreement 
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement)11 not set it on a 
different course. That change in fortunes came quickly. In 1988, stronger IP rights were 
identified  as  a  United  States  (US)  trade  priority.  After  that,  industry  and  governmental 
discussions about an IP agreement as part of the Uruguay round of the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) rapidly gained momentum, and copyright was put into play as part 
of a complex bargain entwining such disparate areas as agriculture, textiles and access to 
medicines. The speed with which the copyright aspects were settled is enough to make one 
blink. Cornish observed that ‘the allure of freer global trading under a revised GATT’ was 
‘scarcely foreseeable in 1986’,12 and Sam has admitted some embarrassment for mentioning 
the emerging issue only in passing in his 1987 text. And yet by 1990, drafts of what would 
become TRIPS already incorporated Berne as the base on which additional ‘Berne-plus’ rights 
were negotiated, and the copyright text was essentially settled by late 1991. Given the pace at 
which events developed, it’s perhaps not surprising that the parties adopted an existing text as 
a baseline.  Additions were tacked on to resolve some of the urgent controversies of the day, 
such as whether to protect computer programs as literary works. But TRIPS’ biggest revolution 
lay in enforceability. TRIPS took that ‘code of polite behaviour’ and gave it real teeth, 
rendering enforceable virtually the whole via World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute 
resolution mechanisms.  
 
 
 
                                                            
9 Sam Ricketson, ‘The Berne Convention: The continued relevance of an ancient text’ in David Vaver and 
Lionel Bently (eds), Intellectual Property in the New Millennium: Essays in Honour of William R Cornish 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004) 217, 217-218.  
10 William R Cornish, ‘Foreword’ in Ricketson and Ginsburg, above n 2, v.   
11 Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, opened for signature 15 April 
1994, 1867 UNTS 3 (entered into force 1 January 1995) annex 1C (‘Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights’) (‘TRIPS Agreement’). 
12 Cornish, above n 10.   
3 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 New wine into old bottles 
The dangers of that elevation were readily apparent even before TRIPS was formally agreed. 
Writing in 1992, Sam observed that ‘the older and established regimes are now unmistakably 
beginning to show increasing strains when faced with the problems posed by technological 
progress’.13 He saw a lesson in a cautionary Biblical parable: ‘Neither do men put new wine 
into old bottles: else the bottles break and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish: but they 
put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.’14 The story references the practice of 
storing wine in animal skins, which dried out as they aged. Those old skins could no longer 
expand as the fermenting wine released gas – and unfortunate explosions ensued. Sam was 
warning that copyright’s skins were growing dangerously brittle, even as the world was trying 
to lock itself into their continued use. Heedless, world governments formally agreed to TRIPS 
two years later. With adoption of  Berne’s outdated and unamendable rules  becoming a 
condition of unprecedented access to world trade markets, its membership exploded by more 
than 200 per cent from its centenary figure of 86.  
 
To be fair, at that time the full significance of the dawning information age was probably not 
yet fully appreciated. After all, in 1994, less than half a per cent of the world’s population yet 
had access to the internet; little of the world’s culture had been digitised and the potentialities 
of digital abundance yet to become apparent.15 But by 1995, Sam was already warning that ‘the 
norms now embodied in TRIP[S] (and in Berne) are in danger of becoming outdated and 
irrelevant in the face of the challenges posed by digital technology, the convergence of 
technologies and communications, and the emergence of the information superhighway’.16 
Perhaps, as he suggested, a new paradigm of copyright protection may have already been 
required. It was too bad, then, that the world had just doubled down on the old ways of doing 
things. 
 
Those old ways are based on assumptions formed in the world we used to inhabit.17 Berne and 
TRIPS reflect a paradigm where marginal costs of copying and distribution were so high that 
                                                            
13 Sam Ricketson, ‘New wine into old bottles: Technological change and intellectual property rights’ (1992) 
10(1) Prometheus 53, 54. 
14 Matthew, chapter IX, verse 17. 
15 Exploring the significance of the evolution from scarcity to abundance, see generally Mark Lemley, ‘IP in a 
World Without Scarcity’ (2015) 90(2) NYU Law Review 460. 
16 Sam Ricketson, 'The Future of the Traditional Intellectual Property Conventions in the Brave New World of 
Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights' (1995) 26 IIC 872, 898. 
17 For fuller development of these outdated assumptions, see Giblin, above n 1. 
4 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 most works were lost within a few short years of publication. In that context there was little 
downside in the wholesale grant of inordinate terms that would almost certainly outlast their 
owners’ interest, since all but the most popular would be quickly lost regardless. At the same 
time, formalities on exercise and enjoyment of rights were necessarily onerous and expensive, 
and a blanket prohibition made sense to prevent authors from being unfairly burdened.   
 
Today those assumptions no longer hold good (at least for those of us with digital access). We 
have the ability to copy and distribute many kinds of work globally, instantaneously, and at a 
marginal price close to zero. In this paradigm, there’s a real cost to the grant of broad and long 
rights regardless of whether their owners want them, need them, or even know they exist. 
Online connectivity has also changed the costs and benefits of registration so fundamentally 
that we have reached a  point (as I have argued elsewhere) that Berne’s  prohibition on 
formalities, intended to support authors, has become a key barrier to reforms that could secure 
them a fairer share.18 In sum, Berne’s rules were designed for a different world, and were 
locked in and given teeth just as realisation was beginning to dawn about the realities of this 
new one. 
 
So here we are, a quarter of a century after TRIPS was agreed, almost half a century since 
Berne’s last substantive revision, and still using those same old bottles. As they detonate around 
us, the occasion of Sam’s Festschrift seems the ideal occasion to ask: just what are we going 
to do with all this wine?  
 
Our options are limited 
Currently, Berne/TRIPS severely constrain the universe of possibles. Copyright law would 
undoubtedly look very different if we were to design it from scratch today.19 However, the 
chances of any wholesale revision of Berne are vanishingly small, given the vast number of 
members, the chasm between their interests, and the structure that gives even the single-most-
                                                            
18 Giblin, above n 1. 
19 See generally Rebecca Giblin and Kimberlee Weatherall (eds), What if we could reimagine copyright? 
(Acton: ANU Press, 2017).  
5 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 tiny a right to veto. Indeed, that combination makes even minor revisions look seemingly 
impossible to achieve.20 TRIPS has proved effectively unamendable as well.21 
 
That could change. US President Donald Trump has been repeatedly threatening to withdraw 
the US from the WTO, and at the time of writing, the US is deliberately undermining the 
organisation by refusing to fill its appeals court vacancies.22 If the WTO fails, all bets are off. 
However, barring any such upheaval of global political and trading frameworks, Berne/TRIPS 
look set to define the outer bounds of copyright for the foreseeable future. Sam recently 
confirmed his view of past decades, writing in 2018: ‘it may be accepted that revision of the 
Berne text presently remains highly unlikely – to quote a leading character in an iconic 
Australian film, “You’re dreaming!”’23   
 
Assuming revision won’t happen, states can’t simply create a new club with different rules, 
either: Berne’s article 20 only permits members to enter into other international agreements to 
the extent they grant authors more extensive rights or do not derogate from what is already 
granted under Berne.  That limits parties to ‘special agreements’ such as the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) Copyright Treaty (WCT), which, though explicitly responding 
to the need ‘to provide adequate solutions to the questions raised by new economic, social, 
cultural  and  technological  developments’,24  could  not  meaningfully  do  so,  since  any 
amendments had to fall within Berne’s existing strictures. Article 20 was perhaps taken as far 
as it could be with the 2013 Marrakesh Treaty,25 which focused on enabling, rather than 
limiting, use of works. But still, it could not go beyond the limits set out in Berne itself. 
 
                                                            
20 Cf Daniel Gervais, (Re)structuring Copyright: A Comprehensive Path to International Copyright Reform 
(Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2017); Alan Story, ‘Burn Berne: Why the Leading International Copyright 
Convention Must be Repealed’ (2003) 40(3) Houston Law Review 763. 
21 Rebecca Giblin and Kimberlee Weatherall, ‘A collection of impossible ideas’ in Giblin and Weatheral, above 
n 19, 315, 322-323. 
22 See e.g., Rosalind Mathieson, ‘US Block of WTO Appeals Body Compromises System, Director Says’ 
Bloomberg (online), 9 November 2017<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-11-08/u-s-block-of-
wto-appeals-body-compromises-system-azevedo-says>; ‘Disaster Management: The WTO is under threat from 
the Trump administration’ The Economist (online), 7 December 
2017<https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21732108-america-increasingly-resorting-bilateral-trade-
measures-wto-under-threat>.  
23 Sam Ricketson, ‘The International Framework for the Protection of Authors: Bendable Boundaries and 
Immovable Obstacles’ (2018) 41 Columbia Journal of Law & the Arts 341, 353. 
24 WIPO Copyright Treaty, opened for signature 20 December 1996, 2186 UNTS 121 (entered into force 6 
March 2002) Preamble. 
25 Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired or 
Otherwise Print Disabled, opened for signature 27 June 2013, WIPO Doc VIP/DC/8 (entered into force 30 
September 2016). 
6 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 Individual nations might derogate from Berne/TRIPS regardless, gambling that their actions 
won’t be challenged. As Taubman has explained, TRIPS breaches don’t necessarily result in 
enforcement action: 
 
Compliance  with  WTO  standards  is  not  like  policing  a  parking  lot,  where  an 
enforcement officer will issue a ticket and impose a penalty for non-compliance – or a 
speed camera that will routinely issue a penalty for any infringement. Non-compliance 
with TRIPS does not bring automatic penalties, and normally does not even yield a 
formal finding of non-compliance. The only way of reaching an official determination 
of non-compliance is if another country is concerned about IP protection to the extent 
that they are prepared to initiate a legal complaint and follow it right through to its 
conclusion.26 
 
Naturally, political and pragmatic considerations will factor heavily in deciding whether to take 
such  action. Despite  early fears  that  TRIPS would unleash a tsunami  of litigation, few 
derogations have actually attracted an enforcement response to date. For example, various 
developing nations have departed from Berne/TRIPS in furtherance of their development 
programs27 (those hard-wrung concessions of the Berne Appendix ultimately proving so 
unhelpful that they have been implemented virtually nowhere28). So far that has been without 
formal comebacks in the WTO.  However, such tactics will work only where that overall 
political and pragmatic calculus suggests enforcement is not worthwhile. More fundamental 
reforms, those with the potential to threaten the most powerful beneficiaries of the existing 
framework, would be much more likely to trigger a response. That’s likely one reason why we 
haven’t yet seen any attempts at real paradigmatic reform. 
 
A more radical option would be to renounce Berne altogether. That option is easily dismissible 
however, since it would mean the loss of reciprocal international protection for domestic works 
(and could not even re-enliven the Universal Copyright Convention, given that treaty’s special 
                                                            
26 Antony Taubman, A practical guide to working with TRIPS (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011) 13-14.   
27 Alberto Cerda Silva, ‘Beyond the Unrealistic Solution for Development Provided by the Appendix of the 
Berne Convention on Copyright’ (2013) 60 Journal of the Copyright Society of the USA 581, 598-605.  
28 See e.g., Ricketson and Ginsburg, above n 2, 957; Margaret Chon, ‘Copyright and capability for education: an 
approach “from below”’ in Tzen Wong and Graham Dutfield (eds), Intellectual Property and Human 
Development: Current Trends and Future Scenarios (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011) 218, 230, 
233; Lea Shaver, ‘Copyright and inequality’ (2014) 92 Washington University Law Review 117, 148.   
7 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 clauses applying to former Berne nations29). It’s also impossible without abandoning TRIPS 
and the WTO, and hence losing access to vital world trading markets. While it is now thinkable 
(if not expected) that the WTO system might soon come to an end, in part because of the US 
actions described above, just now withdrawal is still simply not an option for virtually any 
member – as suggested by the fact that, at time of writing, no member ever has.30 
 
So Berne/TRIPS are effectively unamendable, they block derogatory agreements, and leaving 
isn’t (yet) an option. Ignoring them can be a rational tactic, but would be highly perilous in the 
case of paradigmatic reforms that threaten to tread on powerful toes. Does this mean we’re left 
with no options while the bottles explode around us, other than to continually lament, in any 
discussion of meaningful reform, ‘But Berne won’t let us do that’?  
 
Berne’s ‘front door out’ 
No, there is at least one other alternative – to take Berne’s front door out. 
 
Berne was only ever intended to regulate members’ treatment of other members’ nationals, and 
so gives states an entitlement to depart from Berne minima with regard to works ‘first 
published’ within their borders.31 However, it has long been assumed that Berne’s standards 
are definitionally more advantageous to authors, and thus that members would rarely (if ever) 
choose to exercise this right. For example, Ginsburg writes:  
 
Although neither [Berne nor TRIPS] prescribes the level of protection a member State 
must afford authors whose works were first published in that State, most countries, 
wary of treating their own authors worse than foreign authors, end up incorporating 
the international norms in to domestic legislation.32  
 
Nations should rightly be wary of giving less preferential treatment to their own authors. But 
as we have seen, the world has changed almost beyond recognition since Berne’s rules were 
                                                            
29 Universal Copyright Convention, opened for signature 6 September 1952, 216 UNTS 132 (entered into force 
16 September 1955) Appendix Declaration Relating to Article XVII. 
30 Full list of members and observers at World Trade Organization, Understanding the WTO: Members and 
Observers <https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org6_e.htm>.  
31 Berne Convention art 5(1). 
32 Jane C Ginsburg, ‘Contracts, Orphan Works, and Copyright Norms: What Role for Berne and TRIPs?’ in 
Rochelle Cooper Dreyfuss, Harry First and Diane Leenheer Zimmerman (eds), Working Within the Boundaries 
of Intellectual Property: Innovation Policy for the Knowledge Society (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010) 
471, 483 (emphasis added).  
8 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 put in place, and many of its underlying assumptions no longer hold good. That makes it timely 
to also challenge the orthodoxy that domestic Berne departure must be definitionally worse for 
authors. Elsewhere, I recently built the case that elements of national departure from Berne 
minima could be the key to creating an alternative copyright bargain that could solve some of 
copyright’s most persistent failures. I sketched a system that more clearly delineated between 
copyright’s  incentives  and  rewards  components,  envisaged  use  of  formalities-supported 
reversion to better secure the rewards share to authors, and – again utilising registration – 
permitted broader use of no-longer-wanted-but-still-copyrighted works in a system analogous 
to a domaine public payant.33 That analysis showed how departures from Berne’s prohibition 
on formalities on exercise and enjoyment of rights (and potentially its limits on exceptions and 
compulsory licensing) could, if carefully tailored, significantly improve authors’ remuneration 
outcomes in ways that aren’t otherwise possible, upending the assumption that Berne departure 
would necessarily make them worse off. And it demonstrated how, simultaneously, it was 
possible to reclaim much of the value and culture lost under current approaches. This cracks 
open a path to a real alternative – for nations to sidestep Berne’s most crippling barriers by 
taking advantage of their right to domestically depart from its minima; to take the front door 
out. Doing so would mean retaining the benefits of reciprocal global protection and access to 
world markets, while regulating their own works and authors in ways that better reflect current 
realities and take advantage of copyright’s non-zero-sum nature. 
 
My ‘front door out’  also raises a number of mind-bending new questions – such as, how would 
the principle of national treatment work where a nation’s departure from Berne minima makes 
domestic authors better off, rather than worse? And what would article 19’s preservation of 
claims to the benefit of ‘greater protection … granted by legislation in a country of the Union’, 
mean for foreign authors where that greater protection could require departure from Berne? 
There’s not space to address these questions here, but they’re tasty fodder for chewing another 
day.  
 
Could the ‘front door out’ be subverted? 
Of course, any solution that depends on elements of domestic departure will make crucial 
determination of works’ country of origin – and therein raise possibilities for subversion. 
                                                            
33 Giblin, above n 1.  
9 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 Article 5(4) of Berne states that a work’s country of origin is the country where it is first 
published, or, where it is published simultaneously (that is, within 30 days of first publication34) 
in multiple Union countries, by the country with the shortest term. The losers in any alternative 
copyright bargain involving elements of domestic Berne departure would likely seek to bypass 
it by manipulating the country of first publication and taking the ‘back door’ in to treatment as 
a foreign work. If they were simply first published in Country B at least 30 days before 
publishing in Country A, would that force Country A to afford its own nationals’ works 
treatment as foreign works? If so, it would seriously undermine the strategy’s feasibility.  
 
For a few compelling reasons however, it seems unlikely that article 5 could be so subverted. 
Berne does not specify what happens where a work’s country of origin differs from an author’s 
country of nationality.35 It has been argued that such cases might be treatable as having two 
countries of origin, that is, that of first publication and that of nationality.36 As explained by 
Ginsburg  and  Ricketson,  ‘the  basis  of  the  suggestion  is  the  assumption  that  the  Berne 
Convention is not to be interpreted as breaking the bonds between Union countries and their 
citizens, as it is only concerned with the relations of Union countries to foreign authors’.37  
 
If a member was to adopt this interpretation, and regulate its own nationals’ works regardless 
of place of first publication, it would seem exceedingly unlikely to be challenged via WTO 
dispute settlement  mechanisms. That is not only because of the political and pragmatic 
considerations canvassed above, but also because Berne’s clear intent to reserve to members 
the right to regulate their own nationals would make it difficult to prove both breach and 
damage.   
 
There’s  another  critical  reason  too  why  it’s  unlikely  that  any  nation  would  push  for 
enforcement of Berne’s country of origin principles precisely as written. Recall that, when a 
work is simultaneously published in multiple Union countries (defined in article 3(4) as 
occurring within 30 days of first publication), the country of origin is the one with the shortest 
term. Where simultaneously published in Union and non-Union countries, the country of origin 
                                                            
34 Berne Convention art 3(4). 
35 Ricketson and Ginsburg, above n 2, 283.  
36 Ibid., 283-284, citing Alfred Baum, ‘Völkerrecht, Berne Konvention und Landesgesetze’ [1950] 
Gewerblicher Rechtsschutz und Urheberrecht 437, 451; Wilhelm Nordemann, Kai Vinck, Paul W Hertin, and 
Gerald Meyer, International Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law (New York: VCH,1990) 75. 
37 Ricketson and Ginsburg, above n 2, 284. 
10 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 is the Union country.38 This text was designed and adopted in a 1960s world. What happens 
when we apply it to the one we inhabit today, by enquiring into the country of origin for works 
first published online? Such works are typically made accessible globally within moments, to 
Union and non-Union countries alike. If online publication amounts to simultaneous first 
publication in every country from which it may be accessed, then a plain English reading 
suggests every Union member with the shortest term will be a country of origin. That was the 
reasoning of a US district court in Kernal Records v Mosley, which held that the online first 
publication of music (on an Australian website) meant that the work was simultaneously 
published in the US, and thus ought to be treated as a local US work.39 If every shortest-term 
member is the country of origin of every internet work, that means every one of those countries 
of origin will have the ability to depart from its minima. Thus, a literal application of Berne’s 
text raises the possibility of blowing the whole Berne system up. This would no doubt give 
pause to any copyright-exporting nations who might otherwise be tempted to argue against an 
interpretation permitting fellow members to regulate their own nationals. The absurdity of that 
literal reading also further demonstrates how unmoored Berne has become from today’s 
realities. 
 
A study group of the International Literary and Artistic Association (ALAI) has sought to avoid 
such an interpretation by arguing that Berne’s article 3(3) requires the distributed copies to be 
in physical form: 
 
We infer this from the words ‘manufacture of copies’ … and the term ‘availability of 
such copies’ (emphasis supplied), which would seem to refer back to the material copies 
that are made available by the author or authorized intermediary distributor. … [T]he 
conclusion that the copies envisioned in article 3(3) are pre-existing physical copies 
also follows from the comparison of the first and second phrases of art 3(3): the 
exclusion  from  the  definition  of  ‘published  works’  of  literary  or  artistic  works 
                                                            
38 Berne Convention art 5(4).  
39 Kernal Records Oy v Mosley, 794 F Supp 2d 1355, 1360 (SD Fla 2011). On appeal, the 11th Circuit was not 
convinced the relevant publication had in fact occurred online, but nonetheless indicated online distribution on a 
public website was consistent with a presumption of simultaneous worldwide availability: Kernel Records Oy v 
Mosley, 694 F 3d 1294, 1306 (11th Cir, 2012). 
11 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 communicated by wire or broadcasting casts doubt on the characterization of works 
‘made available’ to the public over digital networks as ‘published.’40 
 
However, this attempted fix surfaces fresh difficulties. For one thing, article 3(3)’s own text 
specifies that “‘published works” means works published with the consent of their authors, 
whatever may be the means of manufacture of the copies …’41 The inclusiveness of that 
language cuts against ALAI’s proposed technologically-specific reading. For another, this 
reading would still result in numerous countries of origin, especially given  growing use of 
print-on-demand. Further, ALAI’s proposed interpretation would lead to absurdities of its own: 
works distributed exclusively in digital form (as is increasingly the case) would never be ‘first 
published’  anywhere.  Their  authors  would  be  obliged  to  rely  on  article  5(4)(c)’s  rules 
governing unpublished works, which provide that, for most works, the country of origin is the 
country of the author’s nationality.42 While this would at least preserve nations’ rights to 
regulate the works of their own nationals, it creates new difficulties for authors of non-Union 
members, who might then lack a requisite point of attachment. It also raises further difficult 
questions in cases where digitally-distributed works have multiple authors.43 While the ALAI 
Study Group acknowledges these difficulties, it argues that ‘the seemingly counter-intuitive 
result that a work disseminated only in dematerialized digital format is never “published” is 
the less problematic outcome’.44 Ricketson and Ginsburg have separately argued that, in the 
case of simultaneous publication online in a number of countries, it might make sense to have 
a reading that designates the country of origin as the country of the author’s nationality.45  
 
Extending the benefits of domestic departure from Berne 
All this should provide considerable comfort to any nation which, looking for ways past the 
obstacles imposed by Berne’s outdated strictures, chooses to depart from them for its own 
nationals (even as it flags a fresh danger emerging from Berne’s obsolescence). However, that 
still only takes us so far. Since copyright is territorial, enacting countries could only apply such 
systems within their own borders. There, too, they could defeat attempts to subvert them 
                                                            
40 Country of Origin Study Group of the International Literary and Artistic Association (ALAI), Determination 
of country of origin when a work is first publicly disclosed over the internet (14 January 2012) 
<http://www.alai.org/en/assets/files/resolutions/country-of-origin.pdf> 2-3. 
41 Berne Convention art 3(3) (emphasis added). 
42 Berne Convention art 5(4)(c). 
43 ALAI Country of Origin Study Group, above n 40, 5-8. 
44 Ibid., 5. 
45 Ricketson and Ginsburg, above n 2, 285. 
12 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 through adoption of the contract law of foreign jurisdictions.46 But private international law 
problems would inevitably plague any attempt to enforce Berne-departing copyright laws 
beyond their own borders. Could the potential benefits of domestic Berne departure nonetheless 
be extended? 
 
We have seen that article 20 prohibits international agreements that derogate from Berne’s 
minima. Significantly however, it does nothing to prevent nations from agreeing to each 
regulate their own nationals in a harmonised way that involves elements of permitted Berne 
departure. This opens the possibility of countries banding together to individually depart from 
Berne for their own nationals, where overall that would result in a better deal. Harmonised, 
cooperative, front door departure could potentially achieve widespread benefits of a kind 
currently beyond reach. For example, participants could each create appropriate domestic 
registries to facilitate rights clearance and payment. If designed for compatibility and then 
internationally shared, that could soon result in a comprehensive database of the type currently 
ruled out by Berne/TRIPS. Similarly, if nations with shared interests and language were to 
mandate harmonised author protective mechanisms, this could contribute greatly to efforts to 
secure their own creators a fairer share. 
 
Weatherall and I once described the Berne/TRIPS framework as a ‘hostage situation we can’t 
see anyone walking away from’.47 Right now, the existence of the ‘front door out’ does nothing 
to change that. It would take enormous political will to reallocate copyright’s rights and 
responsibilities to take advantage of copyright’s zero-sum nature and better reflect today’s 
realities. Any government considering such an approach would have to face down strong 
resistance from trading partners and corporations with vested interests in the existing ways of 
doing things. It will take time before competing motivations might become strong enough to 
surmount such pressures.  Eventually however, we may reach a point where individual nations 
can no longer afford the waste generated by regulating the digital world with mechanical rules. 
If and when we are finally ready to take authors’ interests seriously, reclaim our lost culture 
and retire that despairing lament of ‘but Berne doesn’t let us do that’ – the front door will be 
there.  
                                                            
46 For a general discussion of private international law issues arising in the copyright context, including 
territorial complexities introduced by the Internet, see Jane C Ginsburg and Pierre Sirinelli, ‘Private 
International Law Aspects of Authors’ Contracts: The Dutch and French examples’ (2015) 39 Columbia Journal 
of Law and the Arts 171. 
47 Giblin and Weatherall, above n 21, 321. 
13 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3351460 