THE “TOO BIG TO FAIL” PROBLEM 
 
Saule T. Omarova* 
 
“Too big to fail” – or “TBTF” – is a popular metaphor for a core 
dysfunction of today’s financial system: the recurrent pattern of government 
bailouts of large, systemically important financial institutions. The financial 
crisis of 2008 made TBTF a household term, a powerful rhetorical device for 
expressing  the  widely  shared  discontent  with  the  pernicious  pattern  of 
“privatizing gains and socializing losses” it came to represent in the public’s 
eye. Ten years after the crisis, TBTF continues to frame much of the public 
policy debate on financial regulation. Yet, the analytical content of this term 
remains remarkably unclear. 
Taking a fresh look at the nature of the TBTF problem in finance, this 
article offers a coherent framework for understanding the cluster of closely 
related, but conceptually distinct, regulatory and policy challenges this label 
actually denotes. It identifies the fundamental paradox at the heart of the 
TBTF metaphor: TBTF is an entity-centric, micro-level metaphor for a 
complex  of  interrelated  systemic,  macro-level  problems.  While  largely 
unacknowledged, this inherent tension between the micro and the macro, the 
entity and the system, critically shapes the design and implementation of the 
key post-2008 regulatory reforms in the financial sector.  
To trace these dynamics, the article deconstructs the TBTF metaphor into 
its two basic components: (1) the “F” factor focused on the “failure” of 
individual financial firms; and (2) the “B” factor focused on their “bigness” 
(i.e.,  relative  size  and  structural  significance).  Analyzing  post-crisis 
legislative and regulatory efforts to solve the TBTF problem through this 
simplifying lens reveals critical gaps in that process, which consistently 
favors  the  inherently  micro-level  “F”  factor  solutions  over  the  more 
explicitly macro-level “B” factor ones. It also suggests potential ways of 
rebalancing and expanding the TBTF policy toolkit to encompass a wider 
range of measures targeting the relevant systemic dynamics in a more direct 
and assertive manner. 
 
                                                 
* Saule T. Omarova is Professor of Law and Public Policy at Cornell University. I would 
like to thank the organizers of and participants in the Minnesota Law Review Symposium, 
“Recession in Retrospect: Financial Regulation and Consumer Protection Ten Years since 
the Financial Crisis of 2008” (Oct. 12, 2018). Special thanks to Claire Hill, Robert Hockett, 
and Patricia McCoy. All errors are my own. 2  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
	
Introduction ................................................................................................... 2 
I.  Deconstructing TBTF: A Paradox Inside the Metaphor ........................... 5 
A. The “F” Factor: “Failure” in Focus ..................................................... 6 
B. The “B” Factor: “Bigness” in the Background .................................... 7 
II. In the Shadow of a Hidden Paradox: Post-Crisis Solutions to the TBTF 
Problem .................................................................................................. 10 
A. The “F” Factor Solutions: Prioritizing the “Micro” .......................... 10 
1. Capital and Liquidity Regulation; Stress Tests ............................. 10 
2. Resolution Plans; Orderly Liquidation Authority ......................... 13 
B. The “B” Factor Solutions: Struggling with the “Macro”................... 14 
1. Size Limits ..................................................................................... 15 
2. Activity-Based Limits .................................................................... 15 
C. How Clear Is The Line? ..................................................................... 17 
III. Facing the Paradox: TBTF in a Systemic Context ................................ 19 
A. Systemic Dynamics and Vulnerability of Current Solutions ............ 20 
1. Complexity and Arbitrage ............................................................. 20 
2. Interactions with the Real Economy .............................................. 22 
3. Procyclicality and Collective Agency ........................................... 24 
B. Paradox Resurfaces: The Rhetoric of “Unintended Consequences” . 26 
IV. What Now? Reframing the Problem, Rebalancing Solutions ............... 28 
A. Reinforcing Existing Tools: Size Caps; Structural Separation ......... 28 
B. Expanding the Reform Agenda: Prices, Products, Public Options .... 34 
Conclusion .................................................................................................. 39 
 
INTRODUCTION  
The phrase “too big to fail” – or “TBTF” – is a popular metaphor for one 
of the core dysfunctions of today’s financial system: the recurrent pattern of 
government bailouts of large, systemically important financial institutions.1 
It is by no means a new phenomenon. The “too big to fail” label became 
famous in 1984, in connection with the crisis involving Continental Illinois 
                                                 
1 See, e.g., William Safire, Too Big To Fail Or To Bail Out? N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 6, 2008), 
available  at  https://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/06/opinion/06iht-
edsafire.1.11699108.html?_r=1. (“Before too big to fail became a nervously practical answer 
to the worry about moral hazard, the word coined to describe the method used to rescue a 
financial entity from the consequences of risky or irresponsible behavior was bailout”). 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  3 
National Bank and Trust Company.2 The phrase itself, however, is even older 
than that: in 1975, for example, public commentators and media used it to 
describe the government rescue of Lockheed Corporation.3 
The global financial crisis of 2008 brought the TBTF phenomenon into 
the spotlight and breathed new life into the old metaphor.4 In 2008-2009, to 
contain a systemic calamity, the governments in the U.S. and Europe rolled 
out massive capital and liquidity support programs not only for banks but also 
for large non-bank financial institutions, including investment banks, money 
market mutual funds, and insurers.5 At the time, the sheer scale and visibility 
of these stabilization efforts created a significant political backlash against 
government bailouts as a policy tool.  
Ironically,  however,  the  crisis  containment  measures  resulted  in  the 
creation of fewer and bigger financial institutions.6 The post-crisis increase 
in the level of concentration of the U.S. financial industry is difficult to deny. 
For example, as of the year-end 2017, top five U.S. bank holding companies 
(BHCs) held 48% of the country’s BHC assets.7 By early 2018, there were 
four U.S. BHCs with more than $1.9 trillion in assets on their individual 
balance sheets.8 Despite the post-crisis passage of the Dodd-Frank Act,9 the 
most wide-ranging regulatory reform in the U.S. financial sector since the 
1930s, the TBTF remains a “live” issue on the public policy agenda and 
continues to generate intense academic and political debates.10  
                                                 
2 See FDIC, HISTORY OF THE EIGHTIES: CONTINENTAL ILLINOIS AND “TOO BIG TO 
FAIL,” available at https://www.fdic.gov/bank/historical/history/235_258.pdf.  
3 See Amy Farber, Historical Echoes: “Too Big To Fail” Is One Big Phrase, FRBNY: 
LIBERTY  STREET  ECONOMICS  (Oct.  5,  2012),  available  at 
http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2012/10/historical-echoes-too-big-to-fail-is-
one-big-phrase.html.  
4 See, generally, Mark Labonte, Systemically Important or “Too Big To Fail” Financial 
Institutions, Congressional Research Service Report R42150 (Sept. 24, 2018), available at 
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42150.pdf. 
5 For a comprehensive overview of these programs in the U.S., see Xiaoxi Liu, The Costs 
of Bailouts in the 2007-08 Financial Crisis, 22 FORDHAM J. CORP.& FIN. L. 417 (2017).  
6 See Matt Egan, Too-big-to-fail banks keep getting bigger, CNN.COM (Nov. 21, 2017), 
available  at  https://money.cnn.com/2017/11/21/investing/banks-too-big-to-fail-jpmorgan-
bank-of-america/index.html; Yaman Onaran, Too Big To Fail, BLOOMBERG.COM (Dec. 8, 
2017),  available  at  https://www.bloomberg.com/quicktake/big-fail  (“There  are  some 
6,000 banks in the U.S. The biggest six have $10 trillion in assets, almost twice as much as 
the next 30 combined. The six biggest banks in the U.S. and Europe have increased their 
assets more than five-fold since 1997. That’s a lot of money in a small number of hands.”). 
7 Labonte, supra note 4 at 2. 
8 Id. 
9 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 
124 Stat. 1376 (2010) (codified in scattered sections of the U.S. Code). 
10 During his Senate confirmation hearings in late 2017, Jerome Powell, now the 
Chairman of the Federal Reserve, famously proclaimed that the TBTF problem ceased to 4  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
Importantly, “TBTF” is a rhetorically potent device, which explains the 
popularity of multiple variations on the “too big” theme in academic and 
popular discussions.11 The phrase is not only extremely capacious but also 
emotionally  charged.  It  strongly  conveys  a  clear  sense  of  fundamental 
unfairness,  the  “wrongfulness”  of  granting  the  ultimate  privilege  of 
invincibility to the most powerful financial conglomerates. A full decade 
after the crisis nearly destroyed global financial markets, the TBTF label 
effectively  crystallizes  the  widely  shared  discontent  with  the  financial 
system.12  Yet,  it  is  surprisingly  conceptually  imprecise.  Despite  the 
significant  and  rapidly  growing  scholarly  literature  discussing  various 
aspects of the TBTF phenomenon, the analytical substance of that term 
remains  remarkably  unclear.13  In  many  ways,  it  still  functions  as  the 
discursive  equivalent  of  the  common  “you  know  it  when  you  see  it” 
approach.  
The purpose of this article is to take a fresh, deeper and more sustained, 
look at the nature of the TBTF problem in finance – and to offer a coherent 
framework for understanding the cluster of closely related, but analytically 
distinct, regulatory and policy challenges this label actually denotes. To be 
clear, this article is not intended as a comprehensive technical analysis of the 
key determinants of, and policy responses to, the TBTF phenomenon. It seeks 
neither to dissect any particular scholarly argument on this broad topic nor to 
critique any particular regulatory measure in this area. My approach here is 
deliberately high-level and taxonomic: this is a broad field-mapping exercise, 
a thought-organizing and clarifying experiment. Developing this type of a 
conceptual map is of critical importance. A careful deconstruction – and 
rediscovery – of the full meaning of the TBTF metaphor elucidates the 
                                                 
exist.  See  Jeffry  Bartash,  Powell  says  the  U.S.  no  longer  has  too-big-to-fail  banks, 
MARKETWATCH.COM  (Nov.  29,  2017),  available  at 
https://www.marketwatch.com/story/powell-says-the-us-no-longer-has-too-big-to-fail-
banks-2017-11-28. Many disagree with this assessment, however. See Dennis Kelleher, ‘Too 
Big To Fail’ is Alive and Kicking. AM. BANKER (Aug. 1, 2018). For a recent official proposal 
targeting  the  TBTF  problem,  see  FEDERAL  RESERVE  BANK  OF  MINNEAPOLIS,  THE 
MINNEAPOLIS  PLAN  TO  END  TOO  BIG  TO  FAIL  (2017),  available  at 
https://www.minneapolisfed.org/~/media/files/publications/studies/endingtbtf/the-
minneapolis-plan/the-minneapolis-plan-to-end-too-big-to-fail-final.pdf?la=en  [hereinafter, 
THE MINNEAPOLIS PLAN]. 
11 See Amanda Aronczyk, Too Big To Fail Is Too Hard To Resist, MARKETPLACE (Apr. 
5, 2011), available at https://www.marketplace.org/2011/04/05/business/economy-40/too-
big-fail-too-hard-resist.  
12 See sources cited supra note 6; Kelleher, supra note 10. 
13  For  a  glimpse  of  the  wide-ranging  literature  on  TBTF  as  a  financial-sector 
phenomenon, see SIMON JOHNSON & JAMES KWAK, THIRTEEN BANKERS: THE WALL STREET 
TAKEOVER  AND  THE  NEXT  FINANCIAL  MELTDOWN  (2010);  GARY  H.  STERN  &  RON 
FELDMAN, TOO BIG TO FAIL: THE HAZARD OF BANK BAILOUTS (2004). 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  5 
fundamental reasons for the continuing persistence of the TBTF phenomenon 
in the financial sector. It also enables us to start envisioning new, potentially 
more effective and integrated solutions to the TBTF problem.  
The article is organized as follows. Part I of the article begins by breaking 
down the TBTF metaphor into two interrelated but conceptually distinct 
components – one focused on the failure of a large financial firm, and another 
focused  primarily  on  its  size  –  and  discussing  the  fundamental  tension 
between the “micro” and “macro” levels of analysis implicit in this duality. 
Part II uses this basic framework to make sense of the wide-ranging post-
2008  efforts  to  combat  the  TBTF  problem  and  demonstrates  the 
predominantly micro-level, entity-centric nature of such efforts. Part III 
examines the resulting inability of the key post-crisis regulatory reforms to 
address TBTF as a systemic, macro-level problem. Part IV sketches out 
potential ways of filling the gaps in the current TBTF policy, by expanding 
and strengthening the more explicitly macro-level, structural approaches to 
this complex, multi-faceted problem. 
I.  DECONSTRUCTING TBTF: A PARADOX INSIDE THE METAPHOR 
At the heart of the TBTF problem, there is a fundamental paradox: TBTF 
is  an  entity-centric,  micro-level  metaphor  for  a  cluster  of  interrelated 
systemic, macro-level problems. This inherent conceptual tension between 
the micro and the macro, the entity and the system, frames much of the public 
policy debate on TBTF. It also renders TBTF a uniquely complex and multi-
layered  phenomenon  and  explains,  on  a  deeper  level,  the  seemingly 
intractable and persistent nature of the TBTF problem.14  
Yet, to date, this critically important internal tension has gone largely 
unnoticed – and its analytical implications unrecognized – by scholars and 
policymakers grappling with numerous specific aspects and manifestations 
of the TBTF phenomenon. Despite the enormous  amount of post-crisis 
learning  and  experimentation,  there  remains  a  significant  gap  in  our 
collective understanding of the TBTF problem. To fill this gap, it may be 
helpful to begin by broadening our theoretical lens and exploring the hidden 
meaning of the TBTF metaphor. 
Intuitively, the easiest method of deconstructing TBTF is to break the 
concept into two principal components, corresponding to the two letters that 
give the acronym its meaning: the letter “B” and the letter “F.” For ease of 
reference, I call these two components the “B factor” and the “F factor,” 
respectively. Despite its apparent simplicity, this technique yields important 
new insights into the complex inner dynamics of the all-too-familiar TBTF 
problem. 
                                                 
14 See infra Parts II-III. 6  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
A.  The “F” Factor: “Failure” in Focus 
What I call here the “F factor” is by far the more salient and widely 
discussed component of the TBTF phenomenon.  
The letter “F” in the acronym stands for a “failure” of a particular 
financial institution. The “F” factor, accordingly, denotes bailouts, or various 
forms of government rescue of financial firms on the brink of insolvency. 
Historically, the phrase “too big to fail” emerged directly in response to, and 
in the context of, such government rescue efforts.15 It is, therefore, hardly 
surprising that public discussions on the TBTF problem continue to revolve 
primarily  around  the  ever-present  possibility  of  government  bailouts  of 
failing financial institutions. 
The continuing discursive and practical emphasis on the “F” factor also 
reflects the heightened normative salience of large financial institutions’ 
seeming  immunity  to  failure.  Because  bailouts  involve  publicly  funded 
assistance to privately owned firms, whose financial woes are a direct result 
of their own profit-seeking activities, they tend to trigger negative reactions 
across  the  political  spectrum.16  At  bottom,  a  bailout  is  the  ultimate 
manifestation  of  the  infamous  dynamics  of  “privatization  of  gains, 
socialization of losses.”17 It exemplifies the fundamental unfairness of the 
situation in which a firm that fully enjoyed the benefits of being a free market 
participant when things were going well repudiates the basic rules of the free 
market when its business decisions bring it to the brink of collapse.  
Relatedly,  government  bailouts  of  private  firms  evoke  an  array  of 
explicitly distributional concerns.18 An actual rescue of a large financial 
institution is an extraordinary act, a direct grant of explicit and tangible public 
subsidy not available to smaller entities. Moreover, the sheer expectation that 
the government will always bail out TBTF financial institutions, internalized 
by other market participants, generates the specter of implicit public subsidy 
of such institutions’ private risk-taking.19 The well-known notion of “moral 
hazard” captures the economic inefficiencies associated with this implicit 
subsidy: large firms shielded from the negative consequences of their risk-
                                                 
15 See supra notes 1-3 and accompanying text.  
16 See Adam Levitin, In Defense of Bailouts, 99 GEO. L. J. 435 (2011). 
17 See, e.g., Joseph Stiglitz, U.S. Does Not Have Capitalism Now, CNBC.COM (19 Jan. 
2010), available at https://www.cnbc.com/id/34921639. 
18 Levitin, supra note 16, at 452 (“Concerns about the systemic risk posed by TBTF 
firms are ultimately distributional anxieties. It is the fear of the broadest macroeconomic 
impact—that everyone will be affected—that animates discussions of systemic risk. While 
macroeconomic impacts are broadly felt by everyone, they are not felt equally. Some are 
harmed more than others, and some might even benefit.”). 
19 For a review of the literature on the TBTF subsidy prepared by the staff of the Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  see 
https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/speeches/literature-review.pdf.  20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  7 
taking have an incentive to take greater risks than they otherwise would.20 
While it is notoriously difficult to quantify the implicit TBTF subsidy, there 
is  hardly  any  confusion  about  the  fundamental  unfairness  and  uneven 
distributional consequences of this pattern: the most vulnerable members of 
society typically end up bearing the disproportionate share of losses caused 
by TBTF firms’ risky behavior.21  
In this sense, bailouts violate the ideologically enshrined public-private 
boundary in finance and expose the porous and negotiated nature of that 
boundary.22 On a deeper level, therefore, TBTF is a public-private boundary 
problem  and,  by  extension,  a  problem  of  political  legitimacy.23  These 
political dynamics built into the “F” factor are especially visible during a 
systemic  crisis  when  bailouts  of  TBTF  firms  constitute  a  concerted 
government strategy of crisis containment.24  
To sum up, the interplay of these considerations explains why the focus 
of the ongoing debate on the TBTF problem remains primarily on the failure 
of an individual firm, or the “F” factor. Placing the undesirable macro-level 
effects of certain financial firms’ failure at the core of the TBTF problem 
gives the debate a degree of conceptual and normative clarity, which is 
critical from the perspective of devising and implementing specific policy 
responses. 
B.  The “B” Factor: “Bigness” in the Background 
In contrast to the “F” factor, the “B” factor generally remains in the 
background of the academic and policy discussions of TBTF. There are 
several reasons for the muted discursive salience of the “B” factor.  
To start with, there is a significant ambiguity with respect to what exactly 
                                                 
20 See Labonte, supra note 4, at 4-5 (discussing “moral hazard”). 
21 See, e.g., Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman, Fed. Reserve Bd., Community Development in 
Challenging  Times,  Address  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Community  Affairs  Research 
Conference  (Apr.  29,  2011),  available  at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20110429a.htm  (stating  that 
poor communities and individuals have been hit the hardest by the economic problems in the 
aftermath of the financial crisis). 
22 For in-depth discussions of the public-private balance in modern finance, see Robert 
C. Hockett & Saule T. Omarova, Private Wealth and Public Goods: A Case for a National 
Investment Authority, 43 J. CORP. L. 437 (2018) [hereinafter, National Investment Authority]; 
Robert C. Hockett & Saule T. Omarova, The Finance Franchise, 102 CORNELL L. REV. 1143 
(2017) [hereinafter, Finance Franchise]; Robert C. Hockett & Saule T. Omarova, Public 
Actors in Private Markets: Toward a Developmental Finance State, 93 WASH. U. L. REV. 
103 (2015) [hereinafter, Public Actors]; Robert C. Hockett & Saule T. Omarova, “Private” 
Means to “Public” Ends: Governments as Market Actors, 15 THEORETICAL INQUIRIES IN L. 
53 (2014). 
23 See Levitin, supra note 16, at 446-47. 
24 See Anna Gelpern, Financial Crisis Containment, 41 CONN. L. REV. 1051 (2008-09). 8  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
the “B” factor denotes.  As used in the acronym TBTF, the letter “B” stands 
for “big” or “bigness.” Thus, on its face, it refers simply to the size of the 
firms’ balance sheets. Size, however, is itself mainly a proxy for an individual 
firm’s structural power and functional significance within the market. From 
this perspective, it makes sense to interpret the “B” factor as encompassing 
the much  more capacious and multi-faceted notion of individual  firms’ 
“systemic importance.”25 Indeed, much of the public discussion of the TBTF 
phenomenon currently revolves around issues of identifying, regulating, and 
supervising  so-called  “systemically  important  financial  institutions,”  or 
SIFIs.26  The  TBTF  problem,  accordingly,  is  often  recast  in  terms  of 
preventing the failure – and avoiding bailouts – of SIFIs.27  
This melding of two concepts – TBTF and SIFI – dramatically expands 
the analytical scope of the “B” factor. The size of an individual firm’s balance 
sheet – its “bigness” in a literal sense – becomes only one key metric of 
systemic significance; the others include the firm’s “interconnectedness,” 
complexity of its operations and structure, and degree of substitutability of 
its products and services.28 Isolating, measuring, and balancing these and 
other related attributes, however, is notoriously difficult.29 It involves making 
numerous qualitative judgments lacking the simplicity of a purely size-based 
scale.30 In effect, a substantively more capacious definition of the “B” factor 
opens it to competing interpretations and thus potentially blunts its impact as 
a policy tool.  
                                                 
25 In fact, in a recent study of the TBTF subsidy, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
deliberately used the term “too important to fail,” or “TITF,” instead of the more familiar 
TBTF.  See INT’L MONETARY FUND, GLOBAL FINANCIAL STABILITY REPORT: MOVING FROM 
LIQUIDITY-  TO  GROWTH-DRIVEN  MARKETS  102  (Apr.  2014),  available  at 
file:///C:/Users/sto24/Downloads/_c3pdf%20(2).pdf.  
26 The Dodd-Frank Act established the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) 
and granted it authority to designate non-bank financial institutions as SIFIs, thereby 
subjecting them to consolidated prudential oversight by the Federal Reserve. 12 USC § 
5323(a)(1).  
27 See, e.g., Labonte, supra note 4, at 1 (defining TBTF as merely a “popular” term for 
SIFIs). 
28 See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Globally systemically important 
banks: Assessment methodology and the additional loss absorbency requirement 1-2 (Nov. 
2011), available at https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs207.pdf. 
29 The bitter fight over designation of MetLife, a large insurance conglomerate, as a SIFI 
subject to enhanced prudential supervision under the Dodd-Frank Act provides a powerful 
illustration of these difficulties. See, e.g., John Heltman, FSOC gives up effort to designate 
MetLife  as  SIFI,  AM.  BANKER  (Jan.  18,  2018),  available  at 
https://www.americanbanker.com/news/fsoc-gives-up-effort-to-designate-metlife-as-sifi.  
30 See Int’l Monetary Fund, Bank for Int’l Settlements, Fin. Stability Bd, Guidance to 
Assess the Systemic Importance of Financial Institutions, Markets, and Instruments: Report 
to  G-20  Finance  Ministers  and  Governors  (Oct.  2009),  available  at 
https://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/100109.pdf.   20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  9 
Even without this complicating interpretive twist, however, the “B” factor 
lacks the normative clarity and rhetorical appeal of the “F” factor. While a 
firm’s failure is an unambiguously bad thing, it is not necessarily the case 
with respect to its size. Unlike an actual failure of a big financial firm, the 
size of the firm, by itself, is not likely to trigger a cascade of other firms’ 
failures. Although a particular firm’s size can amplify the impact of its 
actions on the stability of the market, size is fundamentally an attribute rather 
than an act. Moreover, the growing size of an individual firm’s balance sheet 
may  actually  generate  beneficial  economies  of  scale.31  Diversifying  the 
firm’s assets – a factor that goes to that firm’s broader systemic importance 
rather than its “bigness” – may also generate potentially beneficial economies 
of scope.32 The importance of economies of scale and scope in the provision 
of financial services makes it much more difficult to define the normative 
baseline for assessing the effects of the “B” factor. 
The inherently relative, or relational, nature of the “B” factor in the TBTF 
formulation further complicates this task. What makes a particular firm 
problematic is not simply that it is “big” in some absolute terms but that it is 
“too big” in terms of the macro-economic effects of its failure. In this sense, 
the “B” factor denotes an explicitly systemic, macro-level aspect of the 
problem. All “B” factor determinations involve dynamic assessments of an 
individual entity’s size, market power, or functional significance in relation 
to, and as part of, the financial system as a whole – a difficult and context-
dependent  exercise,  often  involving  counterfactual  assumptions  and 
predictive conclusions.  
In sum, what I call here the “B” factor is where the fundamental tension 
within the TBTF metaphor – that between the “micro-“ and the “macro-“ 
levels of analysis – manifests itself most clearly. By broadening the inquiry 
beyond the discrete event of an individual financial firm’s failure, the “B” 
factor potentially points to the deeper, more structurally significant drivers of 
the TBTF dynamics. At the same time, it is inherently more complex, difficult 
to define with precision, and thus politically and normatively contestable. 
 
                                                 
31 See, e.g., Inci Otker-Robe et al., The Too-Important-to-Fail Conundrum, Int’l 
Monetary  Fund,  Staff  Discussion  Note  SGN/11/12  (May  2011),  available  at 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2011/sdn1112.pdf (reviewing available evidence 
on the economies of scale). 
32 See, e.g., Arnoud W. A. Boot, The Future of Banking: From Scale and Scope 
Economies  to  Fintech,  2  EUR.  ECON.  77,  83-87  (2017),  available  at 
file:///P:/ARTICLES/STRUCTURAL%20REFORM/DRAFTS.NOTES/TBTF%20DRAFT
S/Boot.From.Scale.to.Fintech.2017.pdf (reviewing research on the economies of scope in 
finance).  10  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
II. IN THE SHADOW OF A HIDDEN PARADOX: POST-CRISIS SOLUTIONS TO THE 
TBTF PROBLEM 
Breaking the TBTF concept into two principal components – the “F” 
factor focused on the failure of individual financial firms, and the “B” factor 
focused on the size and other indicia of such firms’ structural power and 
functional importance – provides a helpful framework for assessing the 
nature and efficacy of specific solutions to the TBTF problem. In the first 
instance, it allows for drawing a relatively clear conceptual line between two 
groups of post-crisis TBTF policy responses: the “F” factor solutions and the 
“B” factor solutions, respectively.33 
A.  The “F” Factor Solutions: Prioritizing the “Micro” 
What I call the “F” factor solutions to the TBTF problem are those 
policies and regulations that explicitly target the firm failure aspect of the 
problem.34 Consistent with the heightened salience of the “F” factor in the 
TBTF  context,  this  group  comprises  the  vast  majority  of  post-crisis 
regulatory reforms in this area. 
As a general matter, all currently adopted (or seriously discussed) “F” 
factor solutions to the TBTF problem fall into one, or both, of the two related 
categories. They seek either (1) to minimize individual financial firms’ 
chances of failing (the “don’t let them get too risky” approach); or (2) to 
minimize the broader fallout from individual firms’ failure (the “let them fail 
without bringing down the system and thus necessitating bailout” approach). 
While a detailed analysis of all post-crisis reforms is beyond the scope of this 
discussion, a brief summary of the relevant regulatory changes helps to 
illustrate the point. 
1.  Capital and Liquidity Regulation; Stress Tests 
The first category of the “F” factor solutions includes a wide variety of 
familiar microprudential regulatory tools – such as, e.g., capital adequacy 
ratios, liquidity requirements, consolidated oversight – strengthened and 
repurposed  as  post-crisis  tools  of  macroprudential  regulation  and 
supervision.35  
                                                 
33 Of course, this is only a relatively clear line. As discussed below, various post-crisis 
macroprudential regulatory and supervisory measures attempt to mediate, at least in part, the 
distinction between the “F” and the “B” components of the TBTF problem. See infra note 
48 and accompanying text; Part II.C. 
34 It is important to note, however, that there is no officially labeled “TBTF policy” or 
“TBTF regulatory regime.” Reflecting the all-encompassing nature of the TBTF metaphor, 
these terms are used in public discourse to denote to a complex of regulatory policies that 
seek to address various aspects of the problem. 
35 On macroprudential regulation generally, see Robert Hockett, The Macroprudential 
Turn: From Institutional ‘Safety and Soundness’ to Systematic ‘Financial Stability’ in 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  11 
Capital regulation is the central element in this regime. Its purpose is to 
limit individual banks’ and BHCs’ leverage, primarily by mandating that they 
continuously meet certain mandatory ratios of loss-absorbing “regulatory 
capital” to assets.36 The modern system of so-called “risk-based” capital 
regulation emerged in 1988, when the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision 
(BCBS) published the first common set of risk-based capital standards – 
known as Basel I – agreed upon by regulators from the leading industrialized 
countries.37 In the years leading up to the financial crisis, however, Basel I 
came under intense criticism for being too blunt and not sufficiently sensitive 
to the actual risk of banking firms’ assets. In 2004, the BCBS published a 
revised capital accord, Basel II, which effectively allowed large financial 
institutions’ to determine their own risk-based capital requirements.38 As 
became clear in the fall of 2008, this “tailored” and “risk-sensitive” approach 
led to a dangerous decline in the levels of loss-absorbing capital across the 
banking sector and correspondingly excessive accumulation of leverage and 
risk in the financial system.39 
In  2010,  the  BCBS  adopted  Basel  III,  which,  among  other  things, 
significantly tightened the scope and definition of “regulatory capital” in 
order to enhance its loss-absorbing capacity; imposed more stringent and 
varied risk-based capital requirements (including certain additional “buffers” 
and “surcharges” on top of the core ratios); and introduced a new, non-risk-
based “leverage ratio” requirement.40 These changes generally sought to 
strengthen banking institutions’ safety and soundness by forcing them to 
maintain a more effective balance-sheet cushion against sudden losses of 
their assets’ value.41 
                                                 
Financial Supervision, 9 VA. L. & BUS. REV. 201 (2015); Gabriele Galati & Richhild 
Moessner,  Macroprudential PolicyA Literature  Review  (Bank for Int’l  Settlements, 
Working Paper No. 337, 2011), www.bis.org/publ/work337.pdf; Int’l Monetary Fund, 
Macroprudential  Policy:  An  Organizing  Framework  (2011), 
https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/031411.pdf. For an early articulation of the 
importance of macro- approach to regulation, see Fixer-Upper, infra note 89. 
36 For an overview of bank capital regulation, see RICHARD SCOTT CARNELL, JONATHAN 
R. MACEY, GEOFFREY P. MILLER. THE LAW OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 238-267 (6th ed., 
2017);  MICHAEL S. BARR, HOWELL E. JACKSON, MARGARET E. TAHYAR, FINANCIAL 
REGULATION: LAW AND POLICY 291-311 (2nd ed., 2018). 
37 For a brief history of Basel I Accord, see BARR ET AL., supra note 36 at 291-295. 
38 See id., at 296-306. 
39  See  id.,  at  306-311.  By way  of  clarification,  Basel II  merely  formalized  and 
exemplified the generally permissive regulatory approach to bank capital – and, more 
broadly, safety and soundness – in the pre-crisis era. Thus, the fateful erosion of U.S. banks’ 
loss-absorbing capacity happened despite the significant delays in the U.S. implementation 
of Basel II.    
40  For  an  official  summary  table  of  Basel  III  requirements,  see 
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/basel3/b3_bank_sup_reforms.pdf.   
41 In the U.S., the new Basel III requirements were adopted into regulation by 2014. See 12  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
In addition to these traditional solvency-enhancing measures, Basel III 
also includes new liquidity requirements: a Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 
and a Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR).42 The LCR seeks to ensure the short-
term resilience of individual banking institutions by mandating that they 
maintain a sufficient stock of “high-quality liquid assets” (HQLA), which 
they can easily convert into cash in private markets to meet all of their 
liquidity needs for 30 calendar days.43 The NSFR, in turn, seeks to limit 
banking  institutions’  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale  funding  that  can 
quickly dry up under market stress conditions.44 Specifically, it requires 
banks to have stable funding to meet net outflows in a stressed environment 
for a full year.45 Thus, both LCR and NSFR explicitly aim to improve banks’ 
ability to withstand market-wide shocks. 
Post-crisis introduction of mandatory stress tests, in turn, aims to ensure 
that  individual  financial  institutions  are,  in  fact,  sufficiently  resilient  to 
shocks and, therefore, more likely to avoid failure. In the U.S., for example, 
the Federal Reserve conducts annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and 
Review (CCAR) of the largest BHCs, which test their capital planning and 
positions under various severely adverse economic scenarios.46 In addition, 
certain large BHCs are also required to conduct periodic internal stress tests.47  
It is worth noting here that, in a certain sense, the post-crisis regime of 
enhanced prudential supervision may be viewed as an attempt to synthesize, 
albeit in a partial and indirect manner, the entity-level and the system-level 
factors in addressing the TBTF problem.48 This regime seeks to prevent 
                                                 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/basel/USImplementation.htm.  
42 For an overview of Basel III liquidity standards, see BARR ET AL., supra note 36 at 
327-329. 
43 See https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs238.htm.  
44 See https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d295.htm.  
45 Id. 
46 See https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/ccar.htm. The Federal Reserve’s 
CCAR includes as one of its components the supervisory stress tests of the largest BHCs 
mandated by Section 165(i)(1) of the Dodd-Frank Act. 12 USC § 5365(i)(1), as amended. 
47 See 12 USC § 5365(i)(2), as amended.  
48 See infra Part II.C. The “Minneapolis Plan to End Too Big to Fail,” published by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in December 2017, provides a clear example of a 
deliberate effort to reorient some of the traditional “F” factor solutions toward the “B” 
aspects of the TBTF problem. See THE MINNEAPOLIS PLAN, supra note 10. Thus, the 
Minneapolis Plan advocates using significantly heightened capital requirements (up to 38% 
of the firm’s total consolidated assets) as the lever for forcing large banking institutions to 
reduce, on their own, the size of their balance sheets and their systemic significance. Id. Not 
surprisingly, the Minneapolis Plan was quickly labeled as too radical to be adopted into 
policy, at least in the foreseeable future. See Jeff Cox, Minneapolis Fed proposes massive 
regulation  change  for  banks,  CNBC.,  (10  Jan.  2018),  available  at 
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/10/minneapolis-fed-proposes-massive-regulation-change-
for-big-banks.html.  20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  13 
individual firms’ failure as a threat to systemic stability – and adopts firms’ 
“bigness” as the key metric for gauging that threat. Thus, enhanced prudential 
standards apply to financial institutions on a consolidated basis.49 Their 
applicability and the degree of burdensomeness also explicitly depend on 
individual firms’ asset size. Under the original text of the Dodd-Frank Act, 
enhanced prudential standards applied to BHCs with over $50 billion in total 
assets.50 In 2018, Congress raised this baseline threshold to $250 billion and 
further conditioned the applicability of various specific provisions of the Act 
on BHCs exceeding specified size thresholds.51 Tellingly, however, this push 
for loosening prudential standards applicable to smaller institutions is driven 
by a fundamentally micro-level rationale: the belief that “the character of 
regulation should match the character of a firm.”52 
2.  Resolution Plans; Orderly Liquidation Authority 
A related but conceptually distinct group of “F” factor solutions to the 
TBTF problem targets the resolvability of large financial institutions. The 
core idea here is simple: if, despite regulatory limitations on its risk-taking, a 
large financial firm nevertheless fails, its failure should be contained and 
managed in a way that ensures uninterrupted functioning of the rest of the 
financial system. In other words, the goal is to minimize, if not eliminate, the 
likelihood of government-funded bailouts of private financial firms. 
To this end, the Dodd-Frank Act requires all SIFIs and BHCs with at least 
$250 billion in total consolidated assets to prepare and submit to regulators 
credible resolutions plans, or “living wills.”53 These plans must contain 
detailed information about the firms’ structure and operations and lay out 
how they would be resolved in an orderly and timely manner under various 
failure  scenarios.54  Failure  to  submit  a  credible  resolution  plan  triggers 
regulatory action, including imposition of more stringent capital or liquidity 
requirements and restrictions on activities or acquisitions.55 
                                                 
49 This principle is at the core of the post-crisis concept of SIFI supervision.  
50 The original text of the Dodd-Frank Act, as enacted on July 21, 2010, is available at 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-111publ203/pdf/PLAW-111publ203.pdf.  A 
brief legislative history of the Dodd-Frank Act is available at https://www.llsdc.org/dodd-
frank-legislative-history.  
51 Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 115-
174 (05/24/2018).  
52 Bd. Of. Gov. of Fed. Res. Sys., Statement on Proposals to Modify Enhanced 
Prudential Standards for Large Banking Organizations by Vice Chairman for Supervision 
Randal  K.  Quarles  (Oct.  31,  2018),  available  at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/quarles-opening-statement-
20181031.htm.  
53 See 12 USC § 5365(d), as amended. 
54 See, generally, 12 CFR Part 243. 
55 12 CFR § 243.6.  14  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
Furthermore, Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act established the Orderly 
Liquidation Authority (OLA), a special resolution regime for financial firms 
whose failure would have “serious adverse effects on financial stability.”56 
The OLA is generally modeled on the traditional bank resolution regime.57 
Although the statute establishes a multi-agency procedure for initiating the 
OLA proceedings, the FDIC manages the process and exercises receivership 
powers similar in scope to its bank receivership powers.58 This includes, 
among other things, the power to create and operate a bridge company if 
necessary to ensure the continuity of operations critical to the economy. This 
so-called “Single Point of Entry” (SPOE) approach allows the failed firm’s 
functional subsidiaries – banks, broker-dealers, etc. – to operate as usual, 
while the recapitalization takes place at the level of the parent holding 
company.59   
To facilitate SPOE resolutions, the Federal Reserve promulgated rules 
requiring all G-SIBs60 – a handful of the largest, globally significant U.S. 
financial  institutions  –  to  meet  certain  “total  loss-absorbing  capacity” 
(TLAC) requirements through equity and long-term debt at the level of the 
ultimate parent company.61 The TLAC requirements seek to take advantage 
of structural subordination of the parent company’s debt to mitigate the risk 
of a run at the level of the operating subsidiaries. Accordingly, the “bail-in” 
of the failed parent company’s TLAC creditors is envisioned as a practical 
alternative to a publicly funded bailout.62  
B.  The “B” Factor Solutions: Struggling with the “Macro” 
The “B” factor solutions to the TBTF problem are those policies and 
regulations that explicitly address the “bigness” aspect of the problem.63 
Consistent with the muted salience of the “B” factor in the TBTF context, 
only a small number of post-crisis regulatory reforms are in this group. These 
reforms, moreover, tend to be highly controversial and difficult to implement. 
The “B” factor solutions generally fall into two categories: (1) regulatory 
measures that directly target financial firms’ balance-sheet size: and (2) 
                                                 
56 12 U.S.C. § 5383(b). 
57 For an overview of OLA, see BARR ET AL., supra note 36 at 991-996. 
58 See id.; Labonte, supra note 4 at 29. 
59 See FDIC, Resolution of Systemically Important Financial Institutions: The Single 
Point  of  Entry  Strategy,  78  Fed.  Reg.  76,614  (Dec.  18,  2013),  available  at 
https://www.fdic.gov/news/board/2013/2013-12-10_notice_dis-b_fr.pdf.  
60The international Financial Stability Board regularly designates certain financial 
institutions as “global systemically important banks,” or G-SIBs, using a specially designed 
assessment  methodology.  The  2018  list  of  G-SIBs  included  eight  U.S.  BHCs.  See 
http://www.fsb.org/2018/11/2018-list-of-global-systemically-important-banks-g-sibs/.  
61https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20161215a1.pdf.  
62 Id. 
63 See supra Part I.B. 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  15 
structural reforms that inhibit the growth and reduce systemic significance of 
TBTF firms by subjecting them to various activity-based limitations.64 
1.  Size Limits 
Direct limits on financial firms’ size – a traditional antitrust tool – are 
both the most obvious and the least common type of a “B” factor solution.  
As a practical matter, size limits are relevant only in the context of regulatory 
approvals of mergers. Thus, Section 622 of the Dodd-Frank Act generally 
prohibits mergers and acquisitions if they would result in a firm with total 
liabilities  exceeding  10%  of  the  total  liabilities  of  all  financial  firms.65 
Importantly, however, these concentration limits do not limit or preclude 
financial institutions’ “organic” growth not involving outside acquisitions. 
Another potential source of size limits is Section 121 of the Dodd-Frank 
Act, which gives the Federal Reserve authority to require any BHC with at 
least $250 billion in assets to terminate any activities and to sell any assets, 
if such a BHC poses “a grave threat to the financial stability of the United 
States.”66 The exercise of this authority, however, is subject to stringent 
procedural  requirements  and  reserved  for  extraordinary  situations:  the 
Federal Reserve cannot order divestment of a firm’s assets based simply on 
its “bigness.” To date, the Federal Reserve has not exercised this power in 
practice. 
2.  Activity-Based Limits 
“Structural reform” is a broad term for measures that limit the universe 
of legally permissible activities and investments of certain financial firms – 
mainly, publicly insured deposit-taking institutions. In many ways, structural 
reform  constitutes  a  deeper,  more  explicitly  system-oriented  form  of 
macroprudential  regulation.67  It  is  also  the  most  politically  salient  and 
controversial such form.  
In Europe, the trauma of the latest financial crisis has led to a serious 
effort to reconsider the traditionally prevalent “universal banking” form of 
organization in the European financial sector. In the post-crisis era, several 
jurisdictions,  including  the  U.K.,  Germany,  Belgium,  France,  and  the 
European Union, sought to address their newly salient TBTF problem by 
introducing some form of intra-firm structural separation between publicly 
insured deposit-taking activities and the rest of financial services performed 
                                                 
64 The following discussion focuses on the currently existing regulations and does not 
examine any proposed reforms that, if adopted, would fall into the “B” factor category. 
65 12 USC § 1852. 
66 12 USC § 5331. 
67 For a detailed discussion, see Saule T. Omarova, Central Banks, Systemic Risk, and 
Financial Sector Structural Reform, in ROSA LASTRA & PETER CONTI-BROWN (EDS), 
RESEARCH HANDBOOK ON CENTRAL BANKING 487 (2018) [hereinafter, Structural Reform]. 16  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
by universal banks.68 In the United Kingdom, this structural reform took form 
of “ring-fencing” traditional banks’ “core activities” – retail deposit-taking 
and payments, small business lending, etc. – in separately capitalized and 
managed  entities,  which  were  expressly  prohibited  from  engaging  in 
proprietary trading and other risky financial activities.69 The stated purpose 
of this approach was twofold: (1) to shield vital retail banking services from 
external financial shocks (i.e., to minimize contagion); and (2) to make large 
financial institutions easier to resolve in the event of failure.70  
  The EU Commission pursued a similar strategy of “subsidiarization,” 
initially laid out in the Liikanen Report and later formulated (in a revised 
form) in the EU Commission’s proposed regulation.71 The Commission’s 
proposal,  however,  invited  intense  controversy  and  was  ultimately 
withdrawn.72 
The principal piece of post-crisis structural reform in the U.S. is the so-
called “Volcker Rule,” named after the former Chairman of the Federal 
Reserve Paul Volcker.73 It refers to Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Act, 
which prohibits federally-insured banks and their affiliates – or “banking 
entities” – from (1) conducting short-term proprietary trading in financial 
instruments (including securities and derivatives), and (2) investing in or 
sponsoring certain “covered funds” (including, principally, hedge funds and 
private equity funds).74  The original impetus behind this provision was to 
erect a strict structural barrier between publicly subsidized banks that offer 
systemically critical public utility-type products and services, on the one 
hand, and non-depository financial institutions that trade and deal in risky 
financial  assets,  on  the  other.75  As  enacted,  however,  the  Rule’s 
transformative  aspirations  are  significantly  diluted  by  the  numerous 
exclusions and exemptions from its prohibitions.76   
In December 2013, after several years of issuing proposed rules and 
getting thousands of comments, federal bank regulators issued a joint final 
rule, in which they further defined the scope of the statutory prohibitions and 
                                                 
68 See id. at 492-495. 
69 The UK reforms were the brainchild of the Vickers Commission, named after Sir John 
Vickers, a prominent Oxford economist. For an overview of the UK “ring-fencing” reforms, 
see id. at 492-493. 
70 Id. at 493. 
71 For an overview of the EU’s structural reform efforts, see id.at 494-495. 
72 See https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/cwp_2018_annex_iv_en.pdf.  
73 See Structural Reform, supra note 67, at 496-498. 
74 12 U.S.C. § 1851 (2012)).  
75 See Jeff Merkeley & Carl Levin, The Dodd-Frank Act Restrictions on Proprietary 
Trading and Conflicts of Interest: New Tools to Address Evolving Threats, 48 HARV. J. ON 
LEGIS. 515 (2011). 
76 For a list of statutory “permitted activities,” see 12 U.S.C. § 1851(d).  20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  17 
exemptions.77 As implemented by the regulators, the Volcker Rule attempts 
to draw a myriad of fine lines between transactions and activities that, despite 
being  economically  similar,  are  either  (1)  prohibited,  (2)  categorically 
excluded from the prohibitions, or (3) specifically exempt from them.78 This 
elaborate line drawing, in effect, translates the statute’s harshly prohibitive 
main operative provisions into a far more porous and fluid regime, whose 
applicability and degree of intrusiveness depend on facts and circumstances 
surrounding transactions at hand.79  
In June 2018, federal bank regulators proposed further loosening of the 
Volcker Rule, expressly seeking to limit the applicability of its structural 
limitations to the largest U.S. financial conglomerates.80 The continuing 
rollback of the Volcker Rule raises serious questions about its future impact.  
C.  How Clear Is The Line? 
The purpose of the preceding discussion was not to provide a detailed 
analysis of the Volcker Rule or any other specific set of post-crisis reforms 
but merely to outline the key features that explain the underlying differences 
between what I call the “B” factor solutions and the “F” factor solutions to 
the  TBTF  problem.  Even  a  brief  discussion  of  these  ongoing  reforms, 
however, is illuminating.  
Thus, it is clear that, compared to the “B” factor solutions, the “F” factor 
solutions occupy a far more prominent position in the evolving post-crisis 
regime of macroprudential regulation and supervision. Failure of a large 
financial firm seems to provide a much more easily graspable analytic focus 
for the TBTF policy-making. The range of regulatory and supervisory tools 
designed  to  reduce  the  chances  of  a  systemically  important  financial 
institution’s failure and bailout is fairly wide and varied. As the existing 
methods  of  identifying  and  monitoring  the  key  indicators  of  systemic 
importance  are  growing  increasingly  sophisticated,  policy-makers  and 
regulators seek to apply these tools in a more tailored and risk-sensitive 
                                                 
77 See, 12 C.F.R. Parts 44 (OCC), 248 (Federal Reserve), 351 (FDIC) and 17 C.F.R. Part 
255 (SEC). All subsequent references to the Volcker Rule are to the statutory text as 
interpreted and implemented in the final rule issued by the federal regulatory agencies. For 
a summary of the tortured history of the rulemaking, as well as a detailed analysis of the final 
rule’s provisions, see Sullivan & Cromwell LLP, U.S. Agencies Approve Final Volcker Rule, 
Detailing Prohibitions and Compliance Regimes Applicable to Banking Entities Worldwide 
(Jan. 27, 2014). 
78 For an overview of these provisions, see Structural Reform, supra note 67, at 496-
498. 
79 Id., at 496.  
80 For an overview of the proposed changes, see Nathan S. Brownback & V. Gerard 
Comizio,  Significant  Revisions  of  the  Volcker  Rule,  Harvard  Law  School  Forum  on 
Corporate  Governance  and  Financial  Regulation  (June  18,  2018),  available  at 
https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2018/06/18/significant-revisions-of-the-volcker-rule/.  18  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
manner.  
Yet, despite all of this conceptual and operational refinement, the size of 
individual  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets  –  their  “bigness”  in  its 
simplest form – remains a critical determinant of the nature and intensity of 
the appropriately tailored prudential oversight.81 It is no coincidence, for 
example,  that  the  post-crisis  regime  of  enhanced  prudential  supervision 
applies only to BHCs above a certain asset size, which now stands at $250 
billion.82  Recent  legislative  and  regulatory  efforts  to  roll  back  various 
provisions  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  moreover,  are  framed  explicitly  by 
reference  to  easing  compliance  burden  of  “small”  and  “medium-sized” 
financial  institutions.83  In  an  important  sense,  the  “B”  factor  provides 
conceptual scaffolding that quietly supports the rich array of “F” factor 
solutions to the TBTF problem. 
In fact, the post-crisis regime of enhanced prudential supervision of large 
BHCs and SIFIs, discussed above, may be viewed as a partial attempt to 
mediate the conceptual distinction between the “F” and the “B” aspects of the 
TBTF problem.84 Thus, the currently evolving macroprudential approach 
fully embraces the notion that the source of the problem is the capacity of a 
single firm (“micro”) to generate undesirable systemic effects (“macro”) – 
but takes the view that this capacity can be controlled and diminished without 
necessarily shrinking or dismembering the firm.85  
The “B” factor solutions, in turn, display a different, albeit similarly 
revealing, internal tension. As described above, policies in this category 
much more explicitly aim to effect structural changes in the financial sector 
and, at least in that sense, are inherently systemically oriented. These policies 
target firms’ size and activities in a more intrusive manner, by directly 
capping their liabilities or determining the composition of their assets. While 
“F”  factor  solutions  generally  aim  to  shape  financial  firms’  economic 
incentives to better align them with the public interest, “B” factor solutions 
operate by directly redrawing the key legal and economic boundaries within 
financial markets. The bluntness and potentially high-impact character of this 
type of regulatory intervention render “B” factor solutions inherently more 
politically salient and controversial than “F” factor solutions.  
                                                 
81 See supra Part II.A. 
82 See supra note 51 and accompanying text. 
83 Id.; see also supra notes 77-75 and accompanying text. 
84 See supra Part II.A. 
85 Even the Minneapolis Plan does not advocate mandatory size limits or activity-based 
breakups of large banking firms, relying instead on capital requirements to incentivize such 
firms to reduce their size and systemic importance voluntarily. See supra note 48 and 
accompanying text. Moreover, the proposal’s general framing retains its conceptual focus on 
the need to minimize the likelihood and public costs of bank bailouts – the quintessential 
feature of the “F” factor approach. See THE MINNEAPOLIS PLAN, supra note 10.  20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  19 
Yet, despite these differences, post-crisis “B” factor solutions are often 
framed simply as a variation on the familiar “F” factor ones. Policymakers 
and regulators routinely justify size limits or activity restrictions as measures 
targeting the resilience and resolvability of TBTF firms, rather than their 
“bigness” or structural market power.86 In this sense, the predominantly 
macro-level “B” factor approach seeks to replicate, and continues to exist 
within, the primarily micro-level “F” factor discourse. This consciously self-
limiting interpretation has significant practical implications: it leaves the full 
potential of the financial sector structural reform largely untapped. 
Importantly, this discursive triumph of “micro” over “macro,” entity-
centric over systemic perspectives creates an appearance of normative and 
conceptual coherence in the current approaches to the TBTF problem. It 
accordingly  makes  the  fundamental  paradox  embedded  in  the  TBTF 
metaphor  more  difficult  to  see  and  appreciate.  The  tensions  re-emerge, 
however, as TBTF policies come under pressure in the process of their 
implementation. 
III. FACING THE PARADOX: TBTF IN A SYSTEMIC CONTEXT  
As discussed above, the bulk of post-crisis solutions to the TBTF problem 
operate mainly on a micro-level and target primarily individual financial 
institutions’ balance sheets. While the overall orientation and rhetoric of post-
crisis  financial  regulation  are  self-consciously  macro-prudential,  most 
regulatory  tools  are  still  fundamentally  geared  toward  identifying, 
monitoring,  and  influencing  individual  firms’  economic  choices.87  An 
unspoken assumption behind much of regulatory action in this realm is that 
fortifying individual financial firms’ balance sheets – that is, making them 
both less prone to failure and easier to resolve if they nevertheless fail – will 
more or less automatically translate into a stronger, more resilient financial 
system.88 
This  common  fallacy  of  composition  becomes  difficult  to  ignore, 
however, when one widens the lens beyond a single entity’s balance sheet –
or even many individual entities’ balance sheets – and examines the efficacy 
of TBTF solutions in the context of the broader systemic dynamics.89 This 
                                                 
86 See supra notes 69-70 and accompanying text. Presumably, this normative framing 
reflects policymakers’ and regulators’ desire to downplay the politically contestable aspects 
of structural reforms. 
87 See supra Part II.A. 
88 See supra notes 84-85 and accompanying text. 
89 For more on this underlying “fallacy of composition” in financial regulation, see Saule 
T. Omarova, Ethical Finance: Risk, Culture, and Structure, 27 CORNELL J. L. & POL’Y 101; 
131-133  (2018);  Robert  Hockett,  Bretton  Woods  1.0:  A  Constructive  Retrieval  for 
Sustainable Finance, 16 N.Y.U. J. LEG. & PUB. POL’Y 401 (2013); Robert Hockett, A Fixer-
Upper for Finance, 87 WASH. U. L. REV. 1213 (2010) [hereinafter, Fixer-Upper]; Robert 20  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
shift in perspective exposes certain important vulnerabilities built into the 
current  regulatory  approaches.  It  also  sheds  light  on  potential  ways  to 
strengthen or supplement such approaches in order to address the TBTF 
problem more effectively.90   
A.   Systemic Dynamics and Vulnerability of Current Solutions 
Perhaps  the  most  significant  truly  systemic  factor,  explicitly  and 
prominently  incorporated  in  the  existing  TBTF  policy,  is  markets’ 
susceptibility  to  risk  contagion.  Many  regulatory  and  supervisory 
requirements expressly seek to minimize or eliminate the risk of one firm’s 
failure spreading throughout the system, via direct counterparty exposures, 
asset “fire sales,” or otherwise.91 Both the “F” and the “B” factor solutions to 
the TBTF problem, discussed above, are more or less directly concerned with 
minimizing contagion and containing the damage from any large financial 
firm’s failure.92 
Despite  its  obvious  importance,  however,  contagion  is  not  the  only 
relevant systemic factor in the TBTF context. In today’s interconnected and 
fast-moving  financial  universe,  each  individual  firm’s  risk  profile  is 
invariably  dependent  upon  a  wide  variety  of  system-wide  trends  and 
relational dynamics. Incorporating these dynamics into analyses of firms’ 
resilience is, therefore, both necessary and complicated. To put it simply, 
what seems perfectly workable in the context of a single balance sheet, 
considered in isolation, may or may not produce intended results when the 
entity actually interacts with the outside world. 
A few examples help to illustrate how certain core systemic dynamics 
shape the efficacy of the traditional TBTF solutions. 
1.  Complexity and Arbitrage 
It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  today’s  financial  system  is  growing 
increasingly  complex  and  difficult  to  manage.  This  overarching  trend 
manifests itself not only in the dazzling organizational complexity of large 
financial conglomerates, but also in the exponential growth of complex 
                                                 
Hockett, Bubbles, Busts, and Blame? CORNELL LAW SCHOOL RES. PAPER NO. 11–09, 
available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1805930. 
90 See infra Part IV. 
91 In fact, the concept of “systemic risk” in the financial sector is often defined by 
reference to contagion. See, e.g., Steven L. Schwarcz, Systemic Risk, 97 GEO. L. J. 193, 204 
(2008) (defining systemic risk as “the risk that (i) an economic shock such as market or 
institutional failure triggers (through a panic or otherwise) either (X) the failure of a chain of 
markets or institutions or (Y) a chain of significant losses to financial institutions, (ii) 
resulting in increases in the cost of capital or decreases in its availability, often evidenced by 
substantial financial-market price volatility.”). 
92 See supra Part II. 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  21 
financial  instruments  –  derivatives,  asset-backed  securities,  and  other 
structured products – and correspondingly complex markets in which they 
trade.93  
Derivatives  and  structured  products  are  notoriously  difficult  to 
understand  and  value,  even  with  the  help  of  increasingly  sophisticated 
mathematical  modeling.94  Functionally,  they  separate  and  repackage 
ownership,  payment,  and  other  rights  and  obligations  associated  with 
previously largely indivisible financial assets. Institutionally, they trade in 
globalized, technologically sophisticated, dealer-run markets that connect 
myriads  of  institutional  actors  through  an  intricate  network  of  direct 
contractual links and indirect common exposure to risks.95 These markets are 
huge, unpredictable, and fundamentally opaque.96 
Importantly,  this  complexity,  opacity,  interconnectedness,  and 
fragmentation make it extremely difficult to measure and analyze not only 
the overall pattern of risk distribution in the financial system but also the true 
level of individual financial firms’ risk exposure. This is particularly true 
because the shape-shifting nature of derivatives and other complex financial 
instruments enables continuous – and dangerously procyclical – flows of risk 
and leverage across regulatory boundaries.97 The pre-crisis growth of the 
infamous “shadow banking” sector is a vivid example of these dynamics.98 
In the post-crisis era, rapid advances in digital technology and computing 
power – and the increasingly high role of “fintech” – potentially further 
amplify the underlying patterns of hidden accumulation and dispersion of 
risk.99 
These  macro-level  conditions  of  market  complexity  and  pervasive 
                                                 
93 See Saule T. Omarova, License to Deal: Mandatory Approval of Complex Financial 
Products, 90 WASH .U. L. REV. 64; 68-84 (2012) [hereinafter, License to Deal]. 
94 See, e.g., Henry T.C. Hu, Misunderstood Derivatives: The Causes of Informational 
Failure and the Promise of Regulatory Incrementalism, 102 YALE L.J. 1457, 1463 (1993) 
(arguing that financial regulators cannot keep up with development of complex derivatives). 
95 See, Dan Awrey, The Mechanisms of Derivatives Market Efficiency, 91 N.Y.U. L. 
REV. 1104 (2016). 
96 Id. 
97 See Charles Goodhart, Financial Regulation, HANDBOOK OF CENTRAL BANKING, 
FINANCIAL REGULATION AND SUPERVISION 326 (EIJFFINGER & MASCIANDARO, EDS., 2011); 
Marcus Brunnermeier et al., The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation, Geneva 
Reports on the World Economy 11 (2009). For more on market procyclicality, see infra Part 
III.A.3. 
98  See,  e.g.,  Tobias  Adrian  &  Hyun  Song  Shin,  The  Shadow  Banking  System: 
Implications for Financial Regulation, Fed. Res. Bank of NY Staff Report No. 382 (July 
2009); Tobias Adrian, Adam B. Ashcraft, Nicola Cetorelli, Shadow Bank Monitoring, Fed. 
Res. Bank of NY Staff Report No. 638 (Sept. 2013); Gary Gorton & Andrew Metrick, 
Regulating the Shadow Banking System, Brookings Paper on Econ. Activity (2011). 
99 See Saule T. Omarova, New Tech v. New Deal: Fintech as a Systemic Phenomenon, 
36 YALE J. REG. (forthcoming 2019) [hereinafter, Fintech as a Systemic Phenomenon]. 22  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
regulatory arbitrage cast significant doubt on the ability of the primarily 
micro-level TBTF solutions to deliver the desired results. As risky activities 
and exposures of large, diversified financial institutions get harder to quantify 
and contain, keeping these institutions from failing and triggering a cascade 
of losses becomes an increasingly system-wide undertaking. This means that 
keeping the principal focus of TBTF regulation on individual firms’ balance 
sheets is bound to miss the core market dynamics allowing risk move in and 
out of any individual firm’s observable orbit. 
2.  Interactions with the Real Economy 
Another crucial systemic aspect that current TBTF solutions tend to 
ignore is the functional relationship between the financial sector and the 
broader economy.  
The principal object of the current regime of prudential regulation and 
supervision  of  financial  institutions  is  these  institutions’  safety  and 
soundness. Regulators and supervisors monitor and evaluate the strength of 
firms’ loss-absorbing capital cushions, robustness of their risk underwriting 
and management procedures, and quality of their asset portfolios primarily 
with the eye toward preventing these firms’ failure. However, regulators do 
not second-guess private financial firms’ substantive business decisions in 
terms of how well they channel capital to its most productive uses in the non-
financial,  or  “real,”  economy.100    Although  various  tax  or  regulatory 
incentives may influence these decisions, individual financial institutions are 
generally  free  of  governmental  interference  in  their  credit-allocation 
decisions.101  
In fact, this vesting of substantive control over economy-wide credit 
allocation in private actors’ hands is a core element of the U.S. paradigm of 
financial regulation.102 The reason for this outsourcing of allocative decisions 
to  private  financial  firms  is  rooted  fundamentally  in  their  presumed 
                                                 
100 To the extent that there are direct legal and regulatory restrictions on the types or 
concentrations of loans and other assets that banking institutions can hold on their balance 
sheets, these restrictions are designed to ensure banks’ safety and soundness. While these 
regulations affect financial flows into various segments of the economy, they are not meant 
to operate as tools of industrial policy. 
101 Thus, specific laws and regulations may deliberately incentivize financial firms to 
invest in various “preferred” asset classes. This includes, for example, allowing banks to 
calculate their capital ratios using lower risk weights for certain residential mortgage loans. 
This  is,  however,  very  different  from  regulators  judging  the  validity  of  individual 
commercial loans extended by any particular bank on the basis of their broader macro-
structural or socio-economic impact, rather than by reference to the bank’s own safety and 
soundness. 
102 Elsewhere, I refer to this paradigm as the “New Deal settlement in finance.” See 
Fintech as a Systemic Phenomenon, supra note 99. For a deeper theoretical account, see 
Finance Franchise, supra note 22. 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  23 
informational advantages and individualized economic incentives. Because 
private  market  actors  are  presumably  superior  decision-makers  “on  the 
ground,” their judgments on which real-economy projects to fund are not to 
be substituted by those of the regulators.103 
 In this paradigm, the public explicitly bears the primary responsibility 
for maintaining the appropriate aggregates of credit in the economy, or 
system-wide credit modulation.104 As explained in detail elsewhere, this 
division of roles is characteristic of the public-private franchise model of 
finance.105 This model is inherently unstable: the private franchisees (private 
financial institutions) often abuse their allocative powers in pursuit of higher 
profits. The entire regime of government regulation of financial firms – 
especially, TBTF firms – is designed to guard against this danger and to 
minimize the obvious moral hazard built into this system.106  
In reality, however, allocation and modulation of credit and money in the 
financial system are intimately connected tasks. Systemically destabilizing 
asset price booms are the direct effect of socially suboptimal allocative 
decisions by individual market participants.107 Forgetting or ignoring this 
fundamental link undermines both the financial system and the real economy. 
The former suffers from excessive speculation and instability, while the latter 
suffers from excessive financialization and erosion of productive capacity. 
Not only does the financial system grow too large vis-à-vis the rest of the 
economy, it also becomes too self-referential and even predatory. Instead of 
serving capital needs of the productive economic enterprise, it systematically 
diverts financial flows toward socially unproductive financial speculation.108 
Viewed from this perspective, the familiar methods of combatting TBTF 
appear  fundamentally  incomplete.  While  focusing  on  the  safety  and 
soundness, solvency and liquidity of large financial firms, the post-crisis 
TBTF solutions remain essentially agnostic with respect to the macro-level 
structural effects of these firms’ credit allocation decisions. Yet, persistent 
economy-wide misallocation of credit is a critical factor in destabilizing the 
financial system and exacerbating the moral hazard built into its operation. 
In this sense, decisively resolving the TBTF problem ultimately requires a 
serious rebalancing of the currently dysfunctional relationship between the 
financial system and the broader economy. As long as the financial system 
remains self-referentially speculative and divorced from the real economy, 
                                                 
103 See sources cited supra note 102.  
104 Finance Franchise, supra note 22, at 1150-1157. See also, Fixer-Upper, supra note 
89 (advocating “regulation as modulation”). 
105 See Finance Franchise, supra note 22. 
106 Id. at 1158-1164 (explaining these general dynamics in the banking context). 
107 Id. at 1213-1214. 
108 Id. at 1212-1218 See also, National Investment Authority, supra note 22, at 448-458. 24  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
the TBTF phenomenon is unlikely to disappear. 
3.  Procyclicality and Collective Agency 
A vital attribute of the financial system relevant to the TBTF discussion 
is the pervasive tendency toward procyclicality in the operation of financial 
markets – and the correspondingly critical market-stabilizing role of certain 
“big” market actors. 
On a fundamental level, the term “procyclicality” denotes a particularly 
pernicious  form  of  self-reinforcing,  or  recursive,  collective  action 
problems.109  Generally,  collective  action  problems  arise  in  situations  in 
which the multitude of individually rational actions ultimately produce a 
suboptimal  –  collectively  irrational  –  outcome.110  Financial  markets,  in 
particular, are rife with collective action problems that have a recursive 
quality.111 Financial asset bubbles, fueled by short-term speculation and 
followed  by  devastating  busts,  exemplify  this  phenomenon.  While  it  is 
individually rational for each firm to purchase assets during the bubble phase 
and sell them during the bust phase, these mutually reinforcing, individually 
rational decisions aggregate into collectively dysfunctional outcomes: i.e., 
financial crises.112  
Avoiding  this  collective  irrationality  necessarily  requires  coherent 
collective agency, exercised counter-cyclically.113 In simple terms, it requires 
a different kind of a market actor: one whose actions are not constrained by 
the same dictates of individual rationality that make everyone else to pile into 
the same market “bet,” and who is both able and willing to take the opposite 
side of that collectively irrational bet. This market contrarian role is essential 
to the stable functioning of the financial market: it effectively operates as the 
internal mechanism of dynamic countercyclical self-regulation.  
Importantly, to be effective, the relevant collective agent must be not only 
free of the usual motivational constraints: it also must possess sufficient 
resources to withstand the inevitable market pressure long enough to generate 
the desired price correction. In other words, the collective agent must be 
“big.” In the context of today’s huge and interconnected financial markets, 
that agent must be very big. 
This basic reality casts the familiar TBTF problem in an unexpected light. 
                                                 
109 For an in-depth analysis of market procyclicality as a recursive collective action 
problem, see Robert Hockett, Recursive Collective Action Problems: The Structure of 
Procyclicality in Financial and Monetary Markets, Macroeconomies, and Formally Similar 
Contexts, 3 J. FIN. PERSP. 1 (2015) [hereinafter, Recursive Collective Action Problems]. 
110 Id. at 3. 
111 Id. at 1. 
112 Id. at 17-22; Robert Hockett, Bretton Woods 1.0: A Constructive Retrieval for 
Sustainable Finance, 16 N.Y.U. J. LEG. & PUB. POL’Y 401, 420-425 (2013). 
113 Recursive Collective Action Problems, supra note 109, at 23-32.  20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  25 
It brings to the fore the fact that, to ensure financial stability, we need to have 
a  certain  kind  of  “big,”  economically  powerful,  strategically  positioned 
market actor.114 From this perspective, “bigness” is not a bug but a necessary 
institutional feature of the modern financial system. Of course, this fact does 
not invalidate any of the fundamental public policy concerns associated with 
the TBTF phenomenon – including, in particular, concerns related to the 
destabilizing effects of moral hazard.115 It means, however, that a truly 
effective  solution  to  the  TBTF  problem  must  incorporate  a  thoughtful 
approach to strengthening the existing – and creating new – institutional 
forms  of  counter-cyclcical  collective  agency  in  today’s  large-scale  and 
increasingly complex financial markets.  
As a practical matter, only public instrumentalities acting directly within 
financial markets are fully equipped to perform this critical function.116 
Public instrumentalities’ unique built-in advantages—large size, access to 
public  funding,  long-term  investment  horizon,  legal  and  regulatory 
privileges—enable them to take on greater risk at times when no private 
market actor is able to do so.117 Public instrumentalities are the true “natural” 
market contrarians whose presence is critical in order to resolve financial 
markets’ dysfunctional tendency toward procyclicality. Even the biggest 
private firms are inherently incapable of performing this role reliably and 
consistently.118  
This  analysis  helps  to  reframe  the  “bigness”  element  of  the  TBTF 
metaphor  not  simply  as  an  issue  of  individual  firms’  size  or 
interconnectedness, but as a much broader issue of the relative roles and 
competencies of the public and private actors in the financial system. It also 
highlights the deeper sense in which TBTF is ultimately a problem of the 
public-private  balance  in  finance. Focusing  on  individual  private  firms’ 
balance sheets or other characteristics is simply too narrow an approach to 
                                                 
114 To some extent, the renewed legislative and regulatory emphasis on the critical 
stability-enhancing role of clearinghouses and other “financial market utilities” (FMUs) – 
big, strategically positioned entities acting as collective agents in certain market contexts – 
reflects the post-crisis realization of this fundamental fact. It is telling, for example, that Title 
VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act deals specifically with systemically important FMUs. See 12 
U.S.C. § 5461 et seq. However, to the extent that these systemically significant FMUs are 
profit-seeking private entities, their elevated status in the post-crisis era raises an additional 
specter  of  potentially  significant  TBTF  concerns.  See,  e.g.,  David  Skeel,  What  if  a 
clearinghouse fails? (June 6, 2017), available at https://www.brookings.edu/research/what-
if-a-clearinghouse-fails/; Steven J. Lubben, Failure of a Clearinghouse: Dodd-Frank’s Fatal 
Flaw? 10 VA. L. & BUS. REV. 149 (2015); Mark Roe, Clearinghouse Overconfidence, 101 
Cal. L. Rev. 1641 (2013). 
115 See supra Part I.A. 
116 See Recursive Collective Action Problems, supra note 109, at 24. 
117 See Public Actors, supra note 22, at 138. 
118 See id; sources cited supra note 114. 26  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
this problem. 
B.  Paradox Resurfaces: The Rhetoric of “Unintended Consequences”  
This fundamental inability of the current TBTF solutions to incorporate 
the broader systemic determinants of the TBTF phenomenon comes into 
sharp relief in the context of the financial industry’s efforts to roll back post-
crisis  regulatory  reforms.  In  the  U.S.,  these  efforts  aim  primarily  at 
dismantling or weakening the principal elements of the Dodd-Frank Act’s 
regime  of  macroprudential  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial 
institutions.  
Rhetorically, this deregulatory campaign is often framed by reference to 
so-called “unintended consequences” of post-crisis regulation.119 However 
disingenuous  or  self-interested  the  industry’s  claims  may  be,  they 
nevertheless highlight a very real underlying weakness of the current regime: 
the lack of sufficient attention to the systemic, macro-level aspects of the 
TBTF problem. 
For example, one of the industry’s most commonly used deregulatory 
arguments posits that strict prudential oversight of banks and other regulated 
financial institutions  merely  pushes  risky  activities  into the unregulated 
“shadow” markets. Therefore, the argument goes, the post-crisis attempts at 
instituting such oversight are inherently futile and harmful. 
Regardless of its obviously and deeply flawed logic, this argument hits at 
the  real  point  of  vulnerability  in  the  current  regulatory  philosophy:  its 
systematic bias toward fundamentally entity-level solutions. As a result of 
this bias, most post-crisis regulatory reforms do not deal in a sufficiently 
explicit manner with the broader dynamics of risk creation and transfer across 
the formal entity and sectoral boundaries. Accordingly, most current TBTF 
solutions do not directly foreclose opportunities for regulatory arbitrage that 
dilute or distort their intended effect.  
Another reliable – and quite successful – industry argument is that the 
supposedly  excessively  burdensome  and  costly  post-crisis  regulation 
unnecessarily constrains availability of credit to individuals and small and 
medium-sized businesses. The argument is that the higher costs of regulatory 
compliance  –  and  especially  the  more  stringent  regulatory  capital 
requirements – make it prohibitively expensive for banks to make loans to 
otherwise deserving companies. This, in turn, impedes economic growth and 
                                                 
119 Of course, proponents of greater oversight of the financial sector also use the rhetoric 
of “unintended consequences” to show that various provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, as 
implemented, failed to deliver the expected public benefits. This discussion, however, 
purposely focuses on the explicitly anti-regulatory or deregulatory arguments advanced or 
supported by the financial industry. These arguments use the rhetoric of “unintended 
consequences” to roll back many of the core post-crisis attempts to eliminate or control the 
TBTF problem.   20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  27 
job-creation.  Therefore,  the  argument  goes,  it  is  necessary  to  lift  or 
significantly relax post-crisis regulatory constraints on banks’ risk-taking for 
the sake of the real economy and its unimpeded growth.120  
Substantively, this argument is without merit.121 There is currently no 
shortage of capital available for lending in the banking system, so the real 
problem is not so much banks’ lending capacity as the systematic distortions 
in their credit allocation decisions.122 In the context of the present discussion, 
however, this particular line of deregulatory rhetoric is noteworthy for its 
overt acknowledgment of the fundamental functional link between finance 
and the broader economy. The industry’s deregulatory offensive effectively 
seizes on the fact that the post-crisis shift to macroprudential oversight is not 
sufficiently “macro-” in its scope. As long as this remains the case, it will be 
difficult to rebuke the industry’s attacks on the regulatory regime designed to 
constrain the growth of TBTF firms. 
A different, more subtle line of arguments against pursuing aggressive 
TBTF policies build on the financial markets’ need for coherent collective 
agency, exercised counter-cyclically, as a vital self-correction mechanism.123 
As discussed above, only sufficiently large market participants can perform 
this critical stabilization role effectively and on the requisite scale: in this 
sense, “big” is not necessarily “bad.”124 This understanding, however, can be 
used  to  argue  that  “smart”  regulatory  reforms  should  view  the  size  of 
financial mega-firms’ balance sheets not so much as a problem – and, in any 
event, not as the main problem – but more as an organic product and an 
institutional feature of modern finance. Accordingly, instead of seeking to 
eliminate  the  TBTF  problem  through  overly  restrictive  regulations,  the 
                                                 
120 See, e.g., Joint Letter to Congress from The Mid-Size Bank Coalition of America and 
the Regional Bank Coalition (Jan. 26, 2017), available at http://regionalbanks.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/MBCA-RBC-Joint-Letter-to-Congress-1-26-17.pdf  (“Many  of 
Dodd-Frank’s provisions sap resources that we could instead deploy to extend credit and 
dynamically serve our communities. We face higher operational costs and are forced to divert 
capital and funding away from the products we offer and lending that helps businesses 
expand and create jobs.”). 
121 See, e.g., Anat Admati et al., Fallacies and Irrelevant Facts in the Discussion of 
Capital Regulation, CENTRAL BANKING AT A CROSSROADS: EUROPE AND BEYOND 33 
(CHARLES GOODHART ET AL., EDS. 2014). 
122 See, Written Testimony of Saule T. Omarova before the U.S. Senate Committee on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, “Fostering Economic Growth: Midsized, Regional 
and  Large  Institution  Perspective,”  (June  15,  2017),  available  at 
https://www.banking.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Omarova%20Testimony%206-15-17.pdf.  
The allocative distortion results from the basic fact that it remains far more profitable for 
banks and other financial institutions to channel credit into speculative secondary-market 
trading rather than to fund long-term investments in the real economy. See National 
Investment Authority, supra note 22, at 446-458. 
123 See supra notes 109-115 and accompanying text. 
124 Id. 28  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
argument goes, we should aim to accommodate and manage the growth and 
activities of large, systemically important market actors.  
Although this argument is typically framed in technocratic terms, it 
carries a clear normative message: The government should not waste its 
limited resources trying to depress the size or market power of individual 
financial firms – it should “work with” these firms to help them perform their 
socially beneficial functions. In practical terms, however, this usually means 
asymmetrically expanding the public’s responsibility for backing up these 
firms’ rapidly growing private liabilities and supporting the rapidly growing 
markets in which they trade. Recent proposals to formalize and enlarge the 
scope of the government’s role as the provider of “last resort” liquidity and 
solvency support to major dealer-firms and other SIFIs illustrate this trend.125 
They also underscore the deeply political stakes in the TBTF battle over the 
public-private balance of power in finance. 
In sum, many of the familiar criticisms of – and arguments for reversing 
– post-crisis regulatory reforms derive their strength from playing on various 
systemic aspects of the TBTF problem, which these reforms do not explicitly 
or effectively address. By doing so, these deregulatory and anti-regulatory 
arguments exploit the hidden tensions within the TBTF concept and policy 
framework.126  
Of course, rolling back post-crisis regulatory reforms is by no means the 
only, or the best, possible response to this reappearance of the TBTF paradox. 
To the contrary, since the problem with the current TBTF solutions is their 
failure to incorporate certain core macro-level dynamics, the appropriate cure 
for this problem would be to expand and strengthen the structural, systemic 
focus of the TBTF policy toolkit.  
IV. WHAT NOW? REFRAMING THE PROBLEM, REBALANCING SOLUTIONS 
Generally,  there  are  two  mutually  complementary  approaches  to 
rendering the TBTF policy more effective and responsive to key systemic 
dynamics discussed above: (1) to build up the arsenal of more comprehensive 
and  assertive  “B”  factor  solutions;  and  (2)  to  supplement  traditional 
regulatory approaches to TBTF by directly targeting specific dysfunctions in 
the operation of financial markets. 
A.  Reinforcing Existing Tools: Size Caps; Structural Separation 
A good starting point for rebalancing post-crisis TBTF policies would be 
                                                 
125  See,  e.g.,  Kathryn  Judge,  The  Guarantor  of  Last  Resort,  97  TEXAS L. REV. 
(forthcoming 2019); HAL S. SCOTT, CONNECTEDNESS AND CONTAGION (2016); PERRY 
MEHRLING, THE NEW LOMBARD STREET: HOW THE FED BECAME THE DEALER OF LAST 
RESORT (2010). 
126 See supra Part II.C. 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  29 
to  expand  the  range  and  potential  impact  of  the  “B”  factor  solutions, 
discussed above.127 The “B” factor, with its more organic focus on the 
structural drivers of the TBTF problem, deserves greater prominence in how 
we understand and mitigate that problem in the interconnected and complex 
world of modern finance.128  
The most readily available choice in this respect is to start using the 
existing regulatory and supervisory tools more assertively and consistently – 
and for the explicit purpose of shaping the broad structural dynamics in the 
financial sector. For example, the Federal Reserve could begin exercising its 
broad statutory powers to reduce the balance sheet size and to limit the scope 
of activities of any BHC with assets above the $250-billion threshold that 
poses “a grave threat to the financial stability of the United States.”129 
Pursuant to this authority, the Federal Reserve can order these large financial 
institutions  to  terminate  any  activity,  divest  any  assets,  or  freeze  any 
acquisition plans.130 Although the exercise of this authority by the Federal 
Reserve  is  explicitly  conditioned  on  the  requisite  “grave  threat” 
determination,  it  nevertheless  represents  a  potentially  powerful  tool  for 
breaking up TBTF mega-firms. A similarly potent tool that federal bank 
regulators could start utilizing is their legal authority to order significant asset 
divestitures  and  other  restructuring  by  large  financial  institutions  that 
repeatedly failed to submit credible “living wills,” discussed above.131  
Of course, the key challenge for the Federal Reserve and other regulators 
is to signal to the market their resolve to use these extraordinary tools in the 
appropriate circumstances – and be ready to follow through with this threat 
in practice. This is a difficult commitment to make credibly, especially in 
light  of  federal  bank  regulators’  traditional  distaste  for  taking  public 
enforcement actions – and the financial industry’s traditional propensity to 
fight such inherently complex determinations in courts. 
To target the “B” factor in the TBTF problem more consistently and 
directly, Congress could extend the regulators’ authority to break up TBTF 
                                                 
127 See supra Part II.B. 
128 It should be emphasized here that all of the explicitly systemically oriented, structural 
solutions discussed below should supplement, rather than replace, the current regime of 
entity-based regulation and supervision. It is crucial to address the TBTF problem on the 
micro-level and the macro-level as part of a unified and dynamic strategy. For a recent 
defense of entity-based prudential oversight of non-bank SIFIs, see Jeremy C. Kress, Patricia 
A.  McCoy,  Daniel  Schwarcz,  Regulating  Entities  and  Activities:  Complementary 
Approaches to Nonbank Systemic Risk, S. CAL. L. REV. (forthcoming 2019), available at 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3238059. 
129 12 USC § 5331. For an earlier discussion of Section 121 of the Dodd-Frank Act that 
created this authority, see supra note 66 and accompanying text. 
130 Id. 
131 See supra notes 53-55 and accompanying text. 30  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
firms by simply mandating such restructuring whenever any firm reaches 
some specified size threshold. Several academic and legislative proposals 
have  advanced  this  TBTF-focused  variation  on  the  traditional  antitrust 
approach.132  For  example,  in  October  2018,  Senator  Bernie  Sanders 
introduced a bill aptly entitled “Too Big To Fail, Too Big To Exist,” which 
would cap the size of the largest financial institutions so that any single 
company’s total exposure would not exceed 3% of the country’s GDP.133 
In addition to, or in lieu of, these antitrust-type measures, policymakers 
and regulators could also pursue a range of broader structural reforms aiming 
to control the growth of TBTF firms by restricting their permissible business 
activities. In fact, one of the fundamental tenets of the U.S. system of banking 
laws and regulations is the principle of separation of banking from commerce, 
which seeks to keep deposit-taking institutions structurally separate from 
non-financial,  commercial  companies.  Thus,  U.S.  commercial  banks 
generally cannot conduct any activities that fall outside the statutory concept 
of “the business of banking.”134 Moreover, under the BHC Act, companies 
that own or “control” U.S. banks – i.e., U.S. BHCs – are generally restricted 
in their ability to engage in any business activities other than banking, 
managing banks, or certain activities “closely related” to banking.135  
 Since the 1980s, the scope of banks’ and BHCs’ permissible activities 
has  been  steadily  and  gradually  expanding.136  Most  notably,  in  1999, 
Congress authorized certain qualifying BHCs to become “financial holding 
companies” (FHCs) and to conduct a wide range of financial and even some 
commercial activities.137 One obvious consequence of this activity expansion 
was a dramatic consolidation of market power in the small number of mega-
                                                 
132 See Jonathan R. Macey & James P. Holdcroft, Jr., Failure is an Option: An Ersatz-
Antitrust Approach to Financial Regulation, 120 YALE L. J. 1368 (2011); SIMON JOHNSON 
& JAMES KWAK, THIRTEEN BANKERS: THE WALL STREET TAKEOVER AND THE NEXT 
FINANCIAL MELTDOWN (2010).  
133  The  original  text  of  the  proposed  legislation  is  available  at 
https://www.sanders.senate.gov/download/tbtfleg?inline=file.  At the time of its unveiling, 
the bill’s proposed size cap equaled about $584 billion, which would have resulted in the 
breakup of six largest U.S. BHCs. See, https://www.sanders.senate.gov/newsroom/press-
releases/sanders-sherman-introduce-legislation-to-break-up-too-big-to-fail-financial-
institutions.  
134 12 U.S.C. § 24 (Seventh). 
135 12 U.S.C. §§ 1841-43. In essence, the BHC Act is an antitrust legislation tailored to 
the unique public significance and vulnerabilities of the modern banking system. 
136 See Saule T. Omarova, The Quiet Metamorphosis: How Derivatives Changed the 
“Business of Banking,” 63 U. MIAMI L. REV. 1041 (2009); Saule T. Omarova, The 
Merchants of Wall Street: Banking, Commerce, and Commodities, 98 MINN. L. REV. 265 
(2013) [hereinafter, Merchants of Wall Street]. 
137 12 U.S.C. § 1843(k). See also sources cited supra note 136.  20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  31 
sized financial conglomerates.138 Another, perhaps less obvious, systemic 
consequence was a qualitative increase in the nature and degree of fragility-
inducing interconnectedness and complexity in the financial sector. Among 
other things, the removal of the Glass-Steagall era prohibitions on cross-
affiliations created unprecedented opportunities for undetected leakages of 
the public subsidy from insured banks to their non-bank affiliates engaged in 
high-risk dealing and trading operations.139 This direct amplification of the 
TBTF problem is especially pronounced in the context of large U.S. banking 
institutions expanding into purely commercial activities that themselves have 
a  heightened  systemic  significance,  such  as  trading  in  key  physical 
commodities and energy.140  
These developments notwithstanding, however, U.S. banks’ and BHCs’ 
activities,  investments,  and  organizational  affiliations  remain  subject  to 
significant  limitations.  In  this  sense,  the  existing  regime  of  separating 
banking from commerce provides a natural platform for federal regulators to 
maintain and reinforce – rather than weaken or eliminate – certain key 
structural boundaries in the financial system.141 
In the post-crisis era, there have been several attempts to legislate further 
structural separations between depository institutions and other financial 
market  intermediaries.    Thus,  in  July  2013,  a  bipartisan group  of  U.S. 
Senators, led  by  Elizabeth  Warren  and  John  McCain,  introduced  a bill 
entitled the “21st Century Glass-Steagall Act of 2013.”142 The proposed bill 
                                                 
138 See Dafna Avraham, Patricia Selvaggi, and James Vickery, A Structural View of U.S. 
Bank  Holding  Companies,  FRBNY  ECON.  POL.  REV.  65  (July  2012),  available  at 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/epr/12v18n2/1207avra.pdf.  
139 For an analysis of these important intra-FHC dynamics, and their systemic stability 
implications,  see  Saule  T.  Omarova,  From  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  to  Dodd-Frank:  the 
Unfulfilled Promise of Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act, 89 N. C. L. Rev.1683 (2011). 
140 For a comprehensive analysis of U.S. FHCs’ commodities activities in the post-1999 
era, see Merchants of Wall Street, supra note 136. 
141 Recently, the U.S. regime of separation of banking and commerce came under 
increasing pressure from the financial industry seeking to expand its presence in the 
emerging “fintech” sector, among other things, by acquiring or affiliating with various 
technology firms. Allowing organizational affiliations between banks and technology firms, 
however, would critically undermine the public policy goals at the heart of the U.S. bank 
regulation. It would also potentially open the door to the formation of mega-sized finance-
technology conglomerates that would take the TBTF problem to a qualitatively new level, 
both as a political matter and as a matter of economic policy. For a detailed discussion, see, 
Written Testimony of Saule T. Omarova before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs, “Fintech: Examining Digitization, Data, and Technology,” 
(Sept.  18,  2018),  available  at 
https://www.banking.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Omarova%20Testimony%20and%20Appe
ndix%209-18-18.pdf.  
142  The  original  text  of  the  proposed  legislation  is  available  at 
http://www.warren.senate.gov/files/documents/21stCenturyGlassSteagall.pdf.  The Glass-32  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
sought  to  (1)  prohibit  federally  insured  deposit-taking  institutions  from 
affiliating  or  having  interlocking  management  with  securities  firms, 
insurance companies, and derivatives dealers; and (2) tighten the scope of 
banks’ permissible activities, among other things, by prohibiting investments 
in structured or synthetic products.143 
In a somewhat different vein, the post-crisis proponents of so-called 
“narrow” banking advocate separating banks’ deposit-taking function from 
their lending function, thus restricting or even taking away banks’ power to 
create credit and money and effectively turning them into “safe” money-
market mutual funds.144 While some of these proposals would allow “narrow 
banks” to engage in some forms of low-risk lending, others would restrict 
their activities to providing basic payments and safekeeping services and 
investing in government debt and other short-term money instruments. 
All of these proposed approaches – imposition of mandatory size caps, 
revival of the Glass-Steagall regime, and creation of “narrow banks” – raise 
potentially significant design and implementation issues and, accordingly, 
invite both serious conceptual criticism and politically motivated attacks.145 
Whether, and under what conditions, any of these specific measures could – 
or even should – become law is a complicated question beyond the scope of 
this discussion. For present purposes, the key point is that these ideas define 
the current range of potential “B” factor solutions to the TBTF problem that 
are  far  more  radical  than  the  Volcker  Rule  or  “ring-fencing”  reforms, 
discussed above.146  
Ironically, the radicalism of these proposed structural reforms comes 
fundamentally from recreating ideas born out of the Great Depression. Of 
course,  that  fact  does  not  automatically  invalidate  these  proposals. 
                                                 
Steagall Act of 1933 prohibited organizational affiliations between commercial banks and 
securities firms. Banking Act of 1933 (Glass-Steagall Act), Pub. L. No. 73-66, 48 Stat. 162 
(codified as amended in scattered sections of 12 U.S.C.), repealed in part by Financial 
Services Modernization Act of 1999 (Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act), Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 
Stat. 1338 (codified in scattered sections of 12 and 15 U.S.C.). 
143 Id. Sec.3. 
144 See, e.g., LAWRENCE KOTLIKOFF, JIMMY STEWART IS DEAD: ENDING THE WORLD’S 
ONGOING FINANCIAL PLAGUE WITH LIMITED PURPOSE BANKING (2011); Adam Levitin, Safe 
Banking, 83 U. CHI. L. REV. 357 (2016); George Pennacchi, Narrow Banking, 4 ANN. REV. 
OF FIN. ECON. 1 (2012); Arthur J. Wilmarth, Narrow Banking: An Overdue Reform that 
Could Solve the Too-Big-to-Fail Problem and Align U.S. and U.K. Regulation of Financial 
Conglomerates, 31 BANKING & FIN. SERV. POL’Y REP. 1 (2012). In principle, these proposals 
build on the idea of “100% reserve banking,” advanced in the wake of the Great Depression 
by economists Irving Fisher and Henry Simons and later developed by the Austrian and 
Chicago school economists. 
145 For a discussion of these proposals, see Structural Reform, supra note 67, at 498-
500. 
146 See supra Part II.B.2. 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  33 
Nevertheless, it raises concerns about the extent to which they take into 
account – and are able to reshape or counteract – the systemic dynamics that 
continue to impede effective resolution of the TBTF problem.147 Achieving 
that lofty goal is likely to require a bolder and more comprehensive approach 
to  structural  reform  than  the  “neo-Glass-Steagall”  regime  or  “narrow 
banking” are able to offer. 
This new kind of an enhanced structural reform should incorporate an 
explicitly  systemic  view  of  finance  and  draw  the  legal  and  regulatory 
boundaries not simply with an eye to individual firms’ balance sheets, but 
with an eye to the functional dynamics of the financial market as a whole. 
Accordingly, these reforms would have to pursue a deliberately diverse and 
ambitious  set  of  policy  objectives,  well  beyond  the  familiar  goals  of 
insulating deposit-taking banks from excessive risk-taking and minimizing 
the likelihood and public cost of their failure. Thus, these reforms should 
explicitly seek to reduce the levels of complexity and opacity of the financial 
system.  They  should  also  seek  to  minimize  the  incentives  –  or  create 
structural  disincentives  –  for  individual  firms  to  engage  in  regulatory 
arbitrage, especially in the usual procyclical fashion. Finally, and perhaps 
most  importantly,  these  reforms  should  target  the  systemic  problem  of 
continuous credit misallocation and growth of speculative secondary-market 
trading.  
To achieve these goals, it might make sense, for example, to redefine the 
key structural boundary in the financial sector as that separating financial 
institutions whose principal function is to assist companies’ and individuals’ 
capital-raising in primary markets, on the one hand, from institutions engaged 
predominantly  in  facilitating  trading  and  transfer  of  financial  risk  in 
secondary markets, on the other.148 Among other things, this supra-functional 
approach to structural reform would refocus regulatory attention on the core 
sources of systemic financial instability: the built-in propensity of secondary 
markets for financial instruments to over-generate tradable risk.149  
Needless to say, developing a blueprint for this type of a comprehensive 
and  bold  structural  reform  is  no  easy  task.  It  requires  a  fundamental 
attitudinal shift in the debate on the proper scope and tools of financial 
                                                 
147 See supra Part III. 
148 For an early effort to articulate this supra-functional approach to structural reform, 
see Saule T. Omarova, Wall Street as Community of Fate: Toward Financial Industry Self-
Regulation, 159 U. PENN. L. REV. 411, 475-482 (2011) (proposing separate licensing and 
regulatory regimes for (1) financial institutions facilitating “risk transfer” through the 
creation and trading of complex financial products, and (2) financial institutions facilitating 
more traditional “capital formation” in primary markets). 
149 For a detailed explanation and a taxonomy of the core meta-transactional techniques 
for such over-generation of tradable financial risks in secondary markets, see Fintech as a 
Systemic Phenomenon, supra note 99. 34  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
regulation:  a  shift  that  involves  re-examining  underlying  assumptions, 
redefining key problems, resetting normative priorities, and recognizing new 
possibilities.150 
B.  Expanding the Reform Agenda: Prices, Products, Public Options  
Even  the  most  thoughtfully  designed  and  comprehensive  structural 
reform,  however,  is  vulnerable  to  private  market  actors’  attempts  to 
circumvent regulatory boundaries.151 It is, therefore, important to expand the 
reform  agenda  beyond  the  traditional  “B”  factor  solutions  and  to  start 
devising policy tools that would target undesirable market dynamics directly. 
In a deliberate shift from financial firms’ “bigness” or systemic significance 
to  financial  markets’  functional  mechanisms,  these  next-generation  “B” 
factor solutions would seek to reduce and control systemic complexity, 
regulatory arbitrage, and over-generation and misallocation of credit.  
Systemically Significant Prices 
Among other things, that may mean expanding the conceptual framework 
to incorporate a focus on what has been termed “systemically important 
prices and indices,” or SIPIs.152 SIPIs are prices and indices that take on 
particular market‐wide importance, because they are (1) associated with 
ubiquitous inputs to production, (2) associated with highly popular asset 
classes, or (3) used as benchmarks in determining other prices.  Examples of 
SIPIs include prevailing wage and salary rates, certain energy and commodity 
prices, the S&P500 index, the federal funds rate, and the leading interbank 
borrowing rates.153  SIPIs play a critical role in the growth, complexification, 
and volatility of financial markets.154 Accordingly, the malfunctioning of the 
mechanisms used to determine individual SIPIs is an important potential 
source of systemic instability. Thus, the process for setting certain SIPIs gives 
                                                 
150 I intend to develop the basic framework for such an explicitly systemically oriented 
approach to structural reform in a separate research project. 
151  See Structural  Reform, supra  note 67, at  501-502  (discussing  the “boundary 
problem”). 
152 See Robert C. Hockett & Saule T. Omarova, Systemically Significant Prices, 2 J. FIN. 
REG. 1 (2016) [hereinafter, Systemically Significant Prices] (introducing and discussing the 
concept of SIPIs, market vulnerabilities they create, and regulatory strategies for addressing 
such vulnerabilities). 
153 Id. 
154 For example, until very recently, the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), a 
reference rate at which large banks borrowed short-term wholesale funds from one another 
on an unsecured basis, served as the principal benchmark for the vast majority of variable-
rate loans, mortgage-backed securities, and derivatives traded in global financial markets. 
As of 2013, LIBOR underpinned more than $300 trillion in derivatives contracts alone. See 
David Hou & David Skeie, LIBOR: Origins, Economics, Crisis, Scandal, and Reform, 
FRBNY Staff Report No. 667 (Mar. 2014),  20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  35 
rise to concerns about large-scale market  manipulation and conflicts of 
interest  likely  to  have  widely  distortive  effects  on  financial  markets.155 
Moreover, excessive speculation in assets whose prices are systemically 
important poses a heightened danger of triggering self-reinforcing fire sale 
spirals across numerous markets.156  
Regulatory  measures  that  minimize  market  vulnerabilities  arising  in 
connection with the operation of various SIPIs are, therefore, important 
supplements to the more traditional entity-focused TBTF solutions.157 Such 
measures could include the creation of a special regime for designating 
particular asset prices and indices as SIPIs and subjecting their derivation and 
maintenance  to  specially  developed  regulatory  standards.  Among  other 
things, this regime could require licensing of private firms that create or 
maintain  specific  indices  or  benchmarks  designated  as  SIPIs,  impose 
supervisory controls on the process of deriving SIPIs, mandate enhanced 
antitrust and antifraud oversight of the relevant markets and activities, or even 
establish some form of utility-style regulation with respect to certain SIPIs.158   
Financial Product Approval 
Another potential regulatory reform along the same, more explicitly 
macro-structural, lines would introduce a system of mandatory pre-approval 
of financial products, explicitly aimed at reducing the complexity and opacity 
of financial markets.159 As explained more fully in my prior work, the idea of 
product approval operationalizes a simple but powerful intuition: if we cannot 
effectively regulate and control systemic risk associated with the increasing 
complexity and interconnectedness in financial markets, we need to reduce 
and control the overall level of complexity in the system.160 Because much of 
that risk-generating complexity is a result of strategic efforts of financial 
firms that structure, market, and deal in complex financial instruments, the 
                                                 
155 Recent price-rigging scandals involving LIBOR and foreign exchange benchmark 
rates demonstrate the far-reaching global impact of dysfunctional SIPI dynamics. As a result 
of these scandals, LIBOR is currently being phased out. See Jill Treanor, Libor interest rate 
to be phased out after string of scandals, THE GUARDIAN (Jul 28, 2017), available at 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jul/27/libor-interest-rate-phased-out-scandals.   
156 For a detailed discussion of market vulnerabilities associated with SIPIs, see 
Systemically Significant Prices, supra note 152, at 9-13. 
157 For a more detailed discussion of the relevant regulatory measures, see id. at 14-20. 
158 Id. 
159 See License to Deal, supra note 93 (advancing a proposal for designing a financial 
product approval scheme). 
160 Id. at 66. It is worth emphasizing that, in the context of this discussion, complexity – 
of financial instruments, institutions, and markets – is viewed merely as a key functional 
variable driving and explaining an entire complex of socially undesirable dynamics in the 
financial system, and not as some intrinsic social “evil.” See id. at 68-75 (discussing the 
concept of strategic complexity and its role in increasing systemic risk). 36  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
most radical and direct method of reducing systemic risk would be to insert 
regulatory controls at the point of product development, before the risk is 
introduced into the financial system.161 
A properly designed product approval regime would provide a procedural 
mechanism for ensuring that financial innovation and the creation of complex 
financial instruments, in fact, advance productive economic enterprise and 
offer real public benefits – as opposed to merely fueling financial speculation 
and regulatory arbitrage.162 Under this regime, financial institutions would 
have to demonstrate to the regulators that each complex financial product 
they intend to market meets three statutory tests: (1) an “economic purpose” 
test, which would place the burden of proving the social and commercial 
utility of each proposed financial instrument on the financial institutions 
seeking its approval; (2) an “institutional capacity” test, which would require 
a review of the applicant firm’s ability to effectively manage the risks and 
monitor the market dynamics of the proposed product; and (3) a broad 
“systemic effects” test, which would require a finding that approval of the 
proposed product would not pose an unacceptable risk of increasing systemic 
vulnerability  and  otherwise  will  not  raise  significant  public  policy 
concerns.163  
In essence, this approach would function as a simple burden-shifting 
device: instead of prohibiting any specific activities, it would impose the duty 
to provide information necessary for evaluating potential risks and benefits 
of a specific financial product on the party that has the best access to such 
information – and the greatest incentives not to disclose it voluntarily.164 By 
eliminating socially counterproductive complexity, this approach would also 
potentially  enhance  the  reliability  of  traditional  mechanisms  of  private 
market discipline.165  
Credit Modulation and Allocation 
Another set of unorthodox policy tools may be combined under the 
general heading of “public options:” i.e., various institutional forms of direct 
public participation in financial market activities. As elaborated elsewhere, 
public  instrumentalities  already  play  an  indispensable  role  in  making, 
                                                 
161 Id. at 66. 
162 For a discussion of how systemic complexity, financial speculation, and regulatory 
arbitrage continue to hinder the effective operation of post-crisis TBTF policies, see supra 
Part III. 
163 License to Deal, supra note 93, at 67. 
164 Of course, designing a workable regime of financial product approval is a complex 
undertaking bound to raise multiple legal, economic, and political questions. For an in-depth 
discussion of these issues, see id. at 113-140. 
165 Id. at 68-69. 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  37 
facilitating, and preserving putatively private financial markets.166 They act 
as collective agents, uniquely capable of counteracting and thus solving 
recursive  collective  action  problems  permeating  the  operation  of 
decentralized markets in which they operate.167 Crucially, they act within, not 
without, the markets – a factor that fundamentally changes the way we are 
conditioned to understand public-private dynamics in finance. As market 
actors, public instrumentalities are able to affect asset prices and shape 
private firms’ behavior in a more nimble and direct way than can be done 
through traditional regulation or supervision. Expanding these participatory 
capacities of public actors would accordingly amplify this self-correction 
market mechanism crucial for safeguarding systemic financial stability.  
One potential example of such proactive and systematic exercise of 
collective agency would be an expansion of the Federal Reserve’s so-called 
“open market operations” (OMO) beyond their current focus on interest rate-
setting via trading in U.S. government bonds, to encompass trading in a wide 
range of financial assets.168 This more comprehensive OMO strategy – or 
OMO Plus – would aim explicitly to prevent destabilizing asset price bubbles 
and  busts,  by  executing  counter-cyclical  trades  in  the  relevant  asset 
markets.169 In parallel to its existing Treasury bond-trading, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) would establish a separate trading 
portfolio replicating the market portfolio: effectively, an index fund reflecting 
the proportional values of all financial asset classes constituting the financial 
market as a whole.170 If, for example, a particular asset class—such as 
mortgage-backed securities or technology stocks—rises in market value at 
rates suggestive of a bubble trend, the FRBNY trading desk would short these 
securities, in order to put downward pressure on their prices.171 Acting in this 
manner would tend to tighten the flow of speculative credit to the asset class 
in  question,  both  because  (1)  speculative  profit  prospects  would  be 
diminished by the price drop; and (2) the Federal Reserve’s actions would 
signal to the market its determination that current prices of the asset in 
question are artificially inflated. Conversely, the FRBNY trading desk would 
go  long  on  particular  asset  classes  when  they  appear  to  be  artificially 
undervalued. The same process would apply with respect to broader market 
price fluctuations.172  
                                                 
166 See sources cited supra note 22. 
167 See supra Part III.A.3. 
168 For a basic description of the mechanism of Open Market Operations, see ANN-
MARIE MEULENDYKE, U.S. MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS 163–88 (1998).  
169 For a more detailed proposal, see Public Actors, supra note 22 at 141-144. 
170 This portfolio could be constituted synthetically, rather than through the purchase of 
actual assets – an option with fewer upfront costs. See id. at 141. 
171 Id. at 142. 
172 Id.  38  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
Another example of a policy directly targeting broad financial market 
dynamics would involve an establishment of a new federal instrumentality – 
dubbed elsewhere the National Investment Authority (NIA) – charged with 
developing and implementing a comprehensive strategy of national economic 
development.173 This new instrumentality would operate as a true hybrid 
public-private market actor, enabling private investors to overcome currently 
insurmountable collective action problems that render investment in long-
term public infrastructure projects individually irrational.174  
In highly simplified and abbreviated terms, the NIA would function much 
like a typical Wall Street asset manager: it would set up a series of collective 
investment funds (structured similarly to traditional private equity funds), 
actively solicit private investors to purchase passive equity stakes in its funds, 
and  then  select  and  manage  individual  funds’  portfolios  of  public 
infrastructure assets.175 Reversing the fundamental logic of a traditional 
“public-private  partnership”  model,  this  new  entity  would  channel  the 
enormous  amounts  of  private  capital  held  by  pension  funds,  insurance 
companies, university endowments, banks, foreign sovereign wealth funds, 
and  other  institutional  investors  into  the  coordinated  construction  and 
maintenance  of  large-scale,  economic  growth-boosting  infrastructures.176 
Examples  of  such  transformative  public  infrastructures  would  include 
nationwide  networks  of  clean  energy  provision  and  state-of-the-art 
transportation, regional air and water cleaning and preservation programs, 
systems of ongoing adult education and technical training, networks of mixed 
public-private “startup” finance funds, and so on.177  
At present, private investors are often unwilling to finance such socially 
beneficial projects, primarily because of the longer time horizons and higher 
private risks associated with the provision of public goods.178 The NIA would 
act directly and proactively to alleviate these risks. By deliberately exploiting 
the unique advantages of the federal government – its vast scale, high risk 
tolerance, lengthy investment horizons, and direct backing by the full faith 
and credit of the United States – it would enable private investors to capture 
reasonable  gains  from  the  provision  of  currently  under-provided, 
transformative collective goods.179  
                                                 
173 For a detailed proposal, see National Investment Authority, supra note 22. 
174 See id. at 444-454 (identifying and analyzing such collective action problems). 
175 See id. at 475-480 (outlining the general structure and functions of the NIA as an 
asset manager). 
176 Under the traditional “public-private partnership” model, profit-seeking private firms 
are typically paid to manage – or mis-manage – public money. See id. at 439-440. 
177 For a detailed discussion of the specific methods and techniques of financial and legal 
engineering the NIA could adapt to this end, see id.at 469-490. 
178 See id. at 448-451; 454-455. 
179 See id. at 446-458. The key to achieving this goal is the NIA’a ability to synthesize 20-Dec-18]  The TBTF Problem -DRAFT  39 
If thoughtfully designed and implemented, this innovative reform would 
open new opportunities for a more effective channeling of financial capital 
into  productive  economic  enterprise,  as  opposed  to  socially  harmful 
speculation in financial instruments.180 In this sense, it would significantly 
enhance the long-term stability and resilience of the U.S. financial system – 
and blunt some of the key underlying systemic factors that currently hinder 
the ability of traditional TBTF solutions to deliver their intended results in 
practice.181 In a truly organic fashion, an effective structural rebalancing of 
the nation’s real economy would also help to rebalance, both structurally and 
functionally, its financial system. 
To be clear, the purpose of this brief overview is not to elaborate any 
specific proposal in any significant detail but to provide some examples of 
potential  avenues  for  introducing  an  explicitly  systemic,  market-wide 
perspective in the TBTF policy. Supplementing the familiar range of TBTF 
solutions with these types of bolder, broader measures is a critical – and 
presently largely missing – element in the process of eliminating the TBTF 
problem.182 Of course, such unorthodox “public options” as those sketched 
out above are bound to meet with fierce criticism and resistance on the part 
of the financial industry. Even the well-meaning observers and experts might 
be hesitant to venture quite so far outside the established policy perimeter. 
Yet, simply articulating these innovative options as potential additions to the 
financial sector reform agenda would mark a significant step toward a more 
coherent  and  integrated  strategy  of  eliminating  the  TBTF  phenomenon. 
Hopefully, for good. 
CONCLUSION 
“Too big to fail,” or TBTF, is a complex, capacious, and rhetorically 
powerful metaphor. It functions as an “umbrella” term, a discursive mirror 
reflecting the full spectrum of interrelated systemic, macro-level problems in 
today’s finance. At the same time, however, TBTF is a fundamentally micro-
level, entity-centric concept. While largely unacknowledged, this inherent 
tension between the micro and the macro, the entity and the system, continues 
to frame the ongoing public policy debate on TBTF. It also decisively shaped 
the design and implementation of the key post-2008 regulatory reforms in the 
financial sector.  
Deconstructing the TBTF metaphor into its two basic components – the 
                                                 
privately payable “equity strips” that reflect otherwise non-capturable public gains from the 
provision of collective goods. Id. at 451-454. 
180 For a thorough discussion of the institutional design and implementation issues in 
connection with this proposal, see id. at 480-490.  
181 See supra Part III. 
182 To re-emphasize, these measures should supplement, not supplant, the current regime 
of entity-based prudential regulation and supervision. See supra note 128.  40  The TBTF Problem - DRAFT  [20-Dec-18 
“F” factor focused on the “failure” of individual financial firms and the “B” 
factor focused on their relative size and structural significance – provides a 
helpful framework for analyzing post-crisis legislative and regulatory efforts 
to solve the TBTF problem. This analysis reveals critical gaps in the post-
crisis reform process, which consistently favors the inherently micro-level 
“F” factor solutions over the more explicitly macro-level “B” factor ones. It 
also suggests potential ways of rebalancing and expanding the current TBTF 
policy toolkit to encompass a wider range of measures targeting the relevant 
market-wide, or systemic, dynamics in a more direct and assertive manner.  
Pushing the boundaries of our collective understanding of, and efforts to 
eradicate, the TBTF phenomenon by reinstituting the importance of self-
consciously structural, systemic policy responses is bound to invite numerous 
questions and criticisms, both constructive and otherwise. There may not be 
simple answers or bullet-proof defenses to all of them. Yet, the TBTF 
problem is not going to disappear unless and until we find better, more 
comprehensive  and  effective,  ways  of  solving  it.  By  mapping  out  the 
conceptual terrain on which such solutions may be found, this article is taking 
a meaningful step toward that goal. 