1 
 
Neurolaw in Australia: The use of neuroscience in Australian criminal proceedings 
 
Armin Alimardani1*, Jason M. Chin2, 3 
 
1-Faculty of Law, University of New South Wales (UNSW), NSW, Australia (a.alimardani@unsw.edu.au) 
 
2-T.C. Beirne School of Law, University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia (j.chin@uq.edu.au) 
3-School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia 
 
Abstract 
Recent research has detailed the use of neuroscience in several jurisdictions, but Australia remains a notable 
omission. To fill this substantial void we performed a systematic review of neuroscience in Australian criminal 
cases. The first section of this article reports the results of our review by detailing the purposes for which 
neuroscience is admitted into Australian criminal courts. We found that neuroscience is being admitted pre-trial (as 
evidence of fitness to stand trial), at trial (to support the defence of insanity and substantial impairment of the mind), 
and during sentencing. In the second section, we evaluate these applications. We generally found that courts admit 
neuroscience cautiously, and to supplement more well-established forms of evidence. Still, we found some instances 
in which the court seemed to misunderstand the neuroscience. These cases ranged from interpreting neuroscience as 
“objective” evidence to admitting neuroscience when the same non-neuroscientific psychiatric evidence would be 
inadmissible for being common sense. Furthermore, in some cases, neuroscientific evidence presents a double-edged 
sword; it may serve to either aggravate or mitigate a sentence. Thus, the decision about whether or not to tender this 
evidence is risky.   
Keywords: Neurolaw; Australian criminal justice system; neuroscience; criminal law; law and science; law and 
technology; sentencing 
   2 
 
Part I. Introduction 
  In  step  with  rapid  technological  developments,  neuroscientific  evidence  is  playing  an  increasingly 
important role in criminal proceedings in many jurisdictions across the world (see, [1–7]). Despite its widespread 
use, little research has examined how neuroscientific evidence is being used in Australian Criminal courts.1 In this 
article, we seek to fill that void by providing the first systematic review and analysis of the application of 
neuroscientific evidence in Australian criminal proceedings. This is important because neuroscience in court has 
been the subject of considerable academic debate, in part due to the potential for misunderstanding and prejudice it 
presents [8, 9].2 Moreover, basic neuroscientific research itself has been criticized for its use of low sample sizes and 
unduly flexible methodologies [10]. Generally, our review finds that Australian courts are appropriately cautious in 
their use of neuroscience, using it as evidence corroborating more traditional forms of evidence, such as expert 
witness statements and clinical psychological findings. However, we do note cases in which the use of neuroscience 
was of little (or no) relevance, and in which the trial judge fundamentally misconstrued the evidence. 
  In  this  article,  we  adopt  a  broad  definition  of  neuroscience.3  We  will  review  cases  in  which  the 
neuroscientific evidence takes the form of both diagnostic (i.e., individuating) evidence and framework evidence 
[11]. By diagnostic evidence, we mean evidence about the brain and brain functioning of a particular person (usually 
the accused or offender). This can be gleaned by diagnostic imaging tools (e.g., functional magnetic resonance 
imaging or fMRI) or classic neuropsychological testing (e.g., where a psychiatrist makes some inference about the 
patient’s brain based on his or her behaviour). For a review of the latter, see [12]. By framework evidence, we mean 
general knowledge about the relationship between the brain and behaviour. This form of evidence is based primarily 
on imaging studies. Importantly, diagnostic evidence rests on framework knowledge because the expert must infer 
that the individual’s case is an instance of an established relationship between brain and behaviour. For example, an 
expert opining that an accused’s frontal lobe damage impaired his ability to control his actions is, by necessity, 
relying on previous research demonstrating a relationship between the frontal lobe and impulse control [13]. 
                                                 
1 We are aware of two recent and well-considered works analysing Australian neurolaw that have adopted a narrow focus. First, 
for a focus on the fMRI methodology, see [7]. And for a focus on New South Wales sentencing decisions in which the 
neuroscientific evidence was a mitigating factor, see [49].  
2 See [20] for a review of the current theoretical arguments surrounding neurolaw. 
3 In adopting this scope, we follow other recent works, see, e.g., [4, 5]. 3 
 
   In the remainder of this part, we will discuss how we went about researching the Australian criminal 
neurolaw jurisprudence. Part II then goes on to review the use of neuroscience in criminal decisions. This review 
spans its use both pre-trial and at trial. Part III then focuses on the role neuroscientific evidence plays in informing 
sentencing decisions. Then, in Part IV, we draw upon the earlier parts to critically reflect on the use of neurolaw in 
Australia. In Part V, we conclude.   
It is useful to briefly describe the breadth of our search – the scope of cases from which we drew in filling 
in the picture of Australian neurolaw (for more information about our methodology see the Appendix). First, we 
reviewed all 695 criminal cases in the Australian Neurolaw database (on file with the authors) — the only public 
database of Australian Neurolaw cases4 — and sorted the cases into different categories (e.g., ‘fitness to stand trial’). 
We then performed our own search on AustLII — a public database of Australian cases with extensive coverage5 — 
using a variety of keywords (i.e. ‘CT scan’). We restricted our search to the three levels of court most likely to hear 
relevant criminal cases: The Supreme Court, the Court of Criminal Appeal, and the District Court. Further, the 
search was not restricted to a specific time period or to specific jurisdictions in Australia.6 As a result of this search 
on AustLII, we reviewed 779 cases (on file with authors). 
The selection of cases and the sample size in this study were based on our intention to explore and illustrate 
different uses of neuroscience in criminal courts and not to speak to the amount of neuroscientific evidence in 
Australian criminal courts generally (quantitative analysis). Therefore, this article is unable to indicate whether any 
particular use is more common than others. For instance, we cannot say that neuroscientific evidence is being 
proffered more as evidence of vitiated intent or as evidence supporting a defence of mental impairment.7 Rather, our 
qualitative results reflect the use of neuroscientific evidence in Australian criminal jurisprudence on the basis of 
commonly used categories following the procedural timeline of a criminal law matter (i.e. pre-trial, trial and 
sentencing). 
Several limitations inherent to our search should be noted. First, many Australian criminal cases are not 
reported or are otherwise made available. Additionally, our examination of the use of neuroscience in Australian 
                                                 
4 A large proportion of cases on the Database are not published, and the public do not have access to them. 
See, https://neurolaw.edu.au. 
5 See, https://www.austlii.edu.au/austlii/guide/user_guide.pdf. 
6 The Australian jurisdictions are as follow: (i) New South Wales, (ii) Victoria, (iii) Queensland, (iv) Western Australia, (v) 
South Australia, (vi) Tasmania, (vii) Northern Territory and (viii) Australian Capital Territory. 
7 We will describe these criminal law concepts in Part II. 4 
 
courts is based on the contents of the judgments. As such, we did not have access to the expert reports themselves. 
This means that there may be other aspects of neuroscientific evidence that are relevant to this study but were 
excluded from the judgment and have subsequently not been examined. Still, the reported decisions are significant 
because they represent the precedents available to parties as they determine their positions and submissions. 
Part II. Neuroscience pre-trial and at trial 
Neuroscience Pre-Trial 
In the pre-trial phase courts sometimes consider neuroscientific evidence in the context of applications to 
declare the accused unfit to stand trial. As a matter of fairness and justice, parties are not tried unless they possess a 
minimum capacity to understand and participate in proceedings (See [14–16]). In determining whether the accused 
is fit to stand trial, the trial judge must determine if he or she can understand the nature of the charge and follow the 
evidence that would be presented should the trial take place (See [14, 17] for a review). One way of establishing that 
an accused is incapable of comprehending the charge and relevant evidence is to demonstrate that they suffer from 
an “impaired mental process.” 
For example, in R v Moar,8 the accused brought evidence from a clinical psychologist that he was suffering 
from an impaired mental process. Moar was accused of several sexual assaults that had occurred over 40 years prior 
to the trial and claimed, at the time of the trial, to be suffering from a variety of psychological and physical 
ailments.9 The expert neuropsychologist diagnosed Moar with a cerebrovascular disease (i.e., a disease of the blood 
vessels supplying oxygen to the brain) resulting in cognitive impairment.10 This diagnosis helped explain Moar’s 
impaired short memory and difficulty in processing incoming information.11 Moreover, this evidence was largely 
consistent with that of a geriatrician and a forensic psychiatrist, who also concluded that Moar was unfit to stand 
trial.12 The court accepted the neuroscientific evidence and appeared to give it significant weight, finding that Moar 
was indeed unfit to stand trial.  
                                                 
8 [2012] SADC 47. 
9 Id. at 25. 
10 Id. at 42-43. 
11 Id. at 43. 
12 Id. at 39-59. But note that two other experts, a psychiatrist and a forensic neuropsychologist opined that Moar’s condition was 
not severe enough to merit a finding that he was unfit to stand trial. 5 
 
Similarly, in Re Ma’a,13 the court accepted evidence from MRI, CT and SPECT scans to support other 
psychological evidence suggesting that the accused was suffering from dementia stemming from damage to his front 
and/or temporal lobes.14 Interestingly, the first set of scans were not conclusive and there was a suggestion of 
malingering,15  but  later  scans  indicated  that  the  accused’s  condition  was  progressing.16  We  note  here  that 
neuroscientific evidence, while not determinative of dementia, may be a useful diagnostic tool when malingering is 
suspected.17  
Overall, such cases indicate some uses of neuroscience before the trial begins. In the next section, we will 
discuss different uses of neuroscience at trial.  
Neuroscience at Trial 
In this section, we will discuss uses of neuroscientific evidence at trial, beginning with the defence of 
mental impairment/illness (all states except Tasmania and Queensland have removed the word “insanity” from their 
criminal codes in favour of illness or impairment) [18]. These cases diverge from assessments of fitness to stand trial 
in an important way: the assessment for fitness to stand trial involves an inquiry into the mental state of the accused 
at the time of the trial, while applying the defence of mental impairment/illness involves an inquiry into the mental 
state of the accused at the time the alleged crime was committed. Therefore, because any neuroscientific evidence 
relevant to the accused will typically be gathered close to the time of trial, neuroscience is more logically relevant, 
and can be more confidently applied, to the fitness to stand trial determinations. When applying neuroscience to the 
defence of mental impairment, experts are forced to make estimations or guesses as to the mental state of the 
accused at the time the act in question took place. This inherently leads to less probative value and relevance of 
neuroscientific evidence. Despite this, neuroscience is still adduced in these situations, likely because it bears 
directly on the presence or absence of a mental impairment or illness. 
                                                 
13 [2010] QMHC 6. 
14 Id. at 47-49.  
15 Id. at 24. 
16 Id. at 11-13. 
17 For other instances of the use of neuroscience for determination of accused’s fitness to stand trial see, R v Blackman [2016] 
NSWSC 1579; R v Wilson [2015] NSWSC 1538; Robinson, Clifford Mark v R [2008] NSWCCA 64. See also R v Littler [2001] 
NSWCCA 173 in which evidence of organic brain disease revealed in a CT scan support a decision to permanently stay the 
charges against the accused. 6 
 
Mental Illness Defence 
  Mental illness is a complete defence to a criminal charge. The accused, however, bears the onus of proving 
this defence on a balance of probabilities. To successfully raise the defence, the accused must prove that, due to a 
mental disease, he or she did not understand the nature or quality of the act, or the wrongfulness of the act [18, 19]. 
  R v Singh is illustrative of the use of neuroscience in supporting a mental illness defence.18 In that case, the 
accused was charged with murder and three psychological experts reported on his mental state.19 Because Singh had 
resided in a mental hospital just prior to the killing, a great deal of evidence contemporaneous with the act was 
available. This included several of the results of neuropsychological testing and an MRI image. Both were consistent 
with a neurodegenerative disorder (i.e., loss of neuron function or structure)20 capable of impairing cognitive and 
emotional control (i.e., executive functions).21 The trial judge, accepting the psychological evidence, found that Mr. 
Singh was not guilty on the ground of mental illness.22  
  Another revealing case can be found in R v Berlingo,23 a case in which an accused charged with the murder 
of his wife argued that he was suffering from fronto-temporal lobe dementia at the time the act was committed.  
Importantly, there was neuroscientific evidence that was inconsistent with this contention.24 In particular, an expert’s 
interpretation of the neuroscientific evidence was not consistent with this diagnosis:25 
This witness felt that there was simply nothing in the MRI scan pictures that positively supported diagnosis of either 
frontal lobe or fronto-temporal lobe dementia. Indeed, he went so far as to assert that the MRI scan pictures could 
well have been those of someone aged 50. He said that he did not even see any age related atrophy and was surprised 
that "this patient has cognitive problems". 
Despite this lack of definitive neuroscientific corroboration, the Court found that the accused was suffering 
from dementia and did so based on the classic manner of inferring it from the facts of the case and from expert 
psychiatric testing. In particular, the accused was 72 and the attack seemed completely out of step with his 
                                                 
18 [2010] NSWSC 638. 
19 Id. at 18. 
20 Singh 24, 37-38. 
21 Ibid. 
22 Id. at 44. 
23 [2003] SASC 109. 
24 Id. at 83, 93-128.  
25 Id. at 120. 7 
 
personality  and  relationship  with  his  wife.26  Further,  his  children  testified  that  he  had  become  increasingly 
withdrawn and confused in the years leading up to the attack.27 These observations were consistent with the 
accused’s interview with the police after being arrested.28 Ultimately, the Court seemed to place the most weight on 
the evidence of the expert (a neurologist) who “not only reviewed the relevant MRI and PET scans, but also made a 
detailed clinical examination and assessment of the accused, personally interviewed the children of the accused and 
had careful regard to the neuropsycholological [sic] reports.”29 As a result, the Court placed less weight on the 
opinion of the Crown’s neurologist, who focused on the inconclusive MRI.30 
  Berlingo demonstrates a sensitive approach to neuroscience. The Court readily acknowledged that a 
dementia diagnosis would resolve the mental impairment defence issue: “It is common ground that, if it be shown 
that the accused was, at the relevant time, suffering from a condition of fronto-temporal dementia, then he was 
plainly suffering from a mental impairment within the meaning of the statute.”31 But, in determining whether fronto-
temporal lobe dementia was present, the Court considered a variety of sources, brain imaging being just one.  
Substantial Impairment  
  Substantial impairment is a partial defence to murder, which reduces that charge to manslaughter.32 The 
accused must show, on a balance of probabilities, that he or she was substantially impaired by an “abnormality of 
mind” due to a non-transitory mental or psychological condition at the time the event occurred.33 As with the full 
defence of mental impairment, the language in the substantial impairment defence seems to have invited parties to 
proffer neuroscientific evidence.  
The case of R v Peterson (No. 4) provides an example.34 Mr. Peterson was accused of murdering his friend 
by bludgeoning his head with a table leg during a fight. Peterson was a man of limited intellectual ability35 and the 
                                                 
26 Id. at 54. 
27 Id. at 66. 
28 Id. at 57. 
29 Id. at 151. 
30 Id. at 237-238. 
31 Id. at 235. 
In this case, there were a number of expert witnesses who made different conclusions about accused’s mental condition. For more 
detailed examination of their reports please refer to the case. 
32 The defense of substantial impairment by abnormality of mind is only recognized in four Australian jurisdictions, see [18] 
33 See [18]. 
34 [2014] NSWSC 1056. 
35 Id. at 59. 8 
 
trial judge accepted that the deceased had started the fight (but rejected the accused’s self-defence claim).36 Four 
experts – two psychiatrists and two clinical neuropsychologists – gave evidence about Peterson’s mental condition.37 
The psychiatrists noted that Peterson suffered from two underlying conditions: intellectual disability and “executive 
dysfunction caused by frontal lobe damage.”38  
This diagnosis of frontal lobe damage was made on the basis of a behavioural assessment, and not any kind 
of brain scan.39 The experts explained that these impairments affected the accused’s ability to control his behaviour40 
and understand the consequences of his actions.41 Justice Campbell accepted the expert evidence42 and allowed the 
partial defence.43  
There  are  also  other  cases  in  which  neuroscientific  evidence  supports  the  defence  of  substantial 
impairment.44 In Regina v A S Moffatt [No 3],45 for example, the court accepted that the long-term alcohol abuse 
resulted in the brain impairment, however, it was concluded that the mental condition was not severe enough and 
rejected the defence of substantial impairment. 
Examining Intention 
Besides the formal defences described above, neuroscientific evidence may be proffered as evidence 
pertaining to the accused’s intention. The relevance of neuroscience is less clear in these cases than in doctrines that 
specifically invoke mental impairment and illness [20]. Moreover, gradients of intention are themselves fuzzy and 
the relationship between areas of the brain and these gradients is even fuzzier (see [21]).  
In R v H, LP, the accused was charged with murder and attempted murder in relation to a shooting but 
claimed that he did not have the intent to kill.46 The accused argued that he could not have formed the requisite 
                                                 
36 Id. at 45. 
37 Id. at 56. 
38 Id. at 57. 
39 Id. 
40 Id. at 60. 
41 Id. at 62. 
42 Id. at 76. 
43 Id. at 75.; We will also discuss another substantial impairment case, Director of Public Prosecutions v AB [2013] NSWSC 
1739 in our analysis in Part IV. 
44 For example, see R v Glanville [2010] NSWSC 364, in which damage to the accused’s frontal lobes from a motorcycle 
accident supported his substantial impairment defence. 
45 [1999] NSWSC 233 
46 [2013] SASC 183. 9 
 
intention for murder because he was extremely intoxicated (blood level = .252-.284).47 To support this defence, the 
accused tendered the evidence of a psychiatrist who provided a thorough explanation of the effect alcohol has on a 
person’s brain.48 He noted that alcohol “depresses…brain function” 49 causing the drinker to go in and out of 
consciousness, akin to an individual in a “comatosed [sic]” state.50 The trial judge concluded that, “Although his 
condition was one of gross intoxication and his behaviour was in many ways bizarre, nevertheless I find it proved 
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused had the intention [to kill].”51 As such, while the trial judge admitted the 
framework evidence52 that alcohol can impact brain function and behaviour, it appeared that the court did not find 
such potential impact severe enough to negate his intention. 
  Besides the intention to commit the charged criminal act, neuroscientific evidence may call into question 
the accused’s intention in other ways. For instance, the Supreme Court of Western Australia admitted medical 
evidence detailing an accused’s frontal lobe injury to assist in assessing admissions he made during a police 
interview.53 The evidence of the brain injury was relevant to the voluntariness of the admissions,54 their reliability,55 
and whether the conduct of the police in interviewing a brain-damaged individual was unfair.56 
  Thus far, we have reviewed different uses of neuroscience at two stages: pre-trial and trial. In the following 
section, we will discuss how neuroscientific evidence is relevant to sentencing.  
Part III. Neuroscience at sentencing 
Courts consider many factors when determining a prisoner’s sentence. Neuroscientific evidence informs the 
application of many of these factors. First, neuroscientific evidence may impact upon the moral culpability of the 
offender. This will be the case when brain impairment affects the offender's judgement, ability to understand the 
                                                 
47 Id. at 75. 
48 Id. at 65-68. 
49 Id. at 66. 
50 Id. at 65. 
51 Id. at 82. 
52 i.e., the psychiatrist, of course, could not have examined the accused while he was intoxicated, and therefore the expert’s report 
was not about the accused per se, but generally how brains are affected by alcohol. 
53 The State of Western Australia v Clifton [2012] WASC 302. 
54 Id. at 43-58. 
55 Id. at 54. 
56 Id. at 59-63. For more cases about memory and admission of evidence see, CDK v Commissioner of Victims Rights [2016] 
NSWCATAD 300; R v Hawi & ors (No 27) [2011] NSWSC 1673. 10 
 
wrongfulness of criminal behaviour, or capacity to control his/her acts and emotions. In other words, if brain 
impairment is causally connected to the commission of the offence, the offender is less blameworthy.57  
Another sentencing factor is deterrence.  Sentencing with the purpose of deterrence aims to deter the public 
from committing similar crimes (i.e., general deterrence) or the offender from committing further crimes. (i.e., 
specific deterrence). Punishing an individual with a brain impairment may reduce the effectiveness of general 
deterrence because the offender is not representative of the population and is thus not a suitable example to deter the 
society from committing a crime.58 An impairment may also militate against specific deterrence, as punishment may 
not deter an individual with a brain abnormality from further offending. Similarly, if the brain impairment that 
contributed to the offending is treated, there is less need for specific deterrence.59 In cases where brain impairment is 
not treated, if the impairment makes the experience of custody more onerous for the offender than for other 
prisoners, the court may mitigate the punishment.60 
Finally, courts consider the protection of society when determining a sentence. Here, an untreatable (or 
difficult to treat) brain abnormality may increase the risk of re-offending and thus militate towards a longer sentence 
in order to keep the offender away from those who could be harmed.61 To illustrate this complex interplay between 
sentencing factors and neuroscientific evidence, we will now discuss several representative cases. We will begin 
with cases in which neuroscience mitigates the sentence and then contrast them with cases in which the sentence 
was aggravated.62 
Neuroscience as a mitigating factor 
Neuroscientific evidence may mitigate sentencing by supporting an explanation for why the offender 
behaved the way he or she did (i.e. the degree of offender’s culpability). That is the case in the first two sentencing 
decisions we discuss, DPP v Cook63 and R v Terence Martin.64 Neuroscientific evidence may be also unrelated to the 
commission of the crime itself but still relevant during sentencing. For instance, it may provide information about 
                                                 
57 R v Israil [2002] NSWCCA 255; R v Hemsley [2004] NSWCCA 228 (at 33 –36). 
58 Engert (1995) 84 A Crim R 67 at 71 per Gleeson CJ; R v Hemsley [2004] NSWCCA 228. 
59 Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa [2010] NSWCCA 194; also see, R v Henry (1999) 46 NSWLR 346, 
(Wood CJ at CL, Adam and Kirby JJ) at 46. 
60 See, R v Hemsley [2004] NSWCCA 228. 
61 Benitez v R (2006) 160 A Crim R 166; Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa [2010] NSWCCA 194  
62 For more discussion of mental condition and sentencing see [18, 50]. 
63 [2015] VCC 116. 
64 [2011]. Unreported judgment. For a summary of this case see, https://neurolaw.edu.au/cases/10703.   11 
 
how the offender would react to a jail sentence. This jail-experience factor played a part in the third case in this 
section, DPP v Buckley.65 
In DPP v Cook, the offender pled guilty to a charge of armed robbery of a supermarket. At the time of the 
robbery, the offender apologised to the staff and said that he had a drug issue. A month later he claimed that he 
could not remember the robbery.66 Several expert psychological reports were tendered to the court. The first report 
by a general practitioner concluded that the offender’s seizures caused a brain condition at the time of the offence. A 
hospital neurology report on the offender noted that because of an organic brain disorder, the offender had 
significant cognitive impairment including problems  with daily living and planning.67 Finally, a report by a 
psychiatrist stated that there was a compounding interaction between the offender’s drug addiction, his pre-existing 
cerebral deficits and dysfunctional background.68  
The sentencing judge concluded that there was a causal relationship between these mental issues and his 
criminal behaviour and noted that without the pre-existing mental illness, the offender would not have committed 
that offence.69 The judge found that the offender’s brain damage reduced his moral culpability and made general 
deterrence less of a factor.70 
In Cook, the neuroscientific evidence focused on an impairment in brain structure, an effectively permanent 
feature of the offender’s anatomy. By contrast, some conditions are more transient, such as those caused by a 
chemical imbalance in the brain. This was the situation in R v Terence Martin,71 in which the offender was found 
guilty of sexual intercourse with a minor and production of child exploitation material. The offender, who was a 
member of Tasmanian Legislative Assembly, had no prior convictions. His sexual desire was triggered after taking 
Parkinson’s medication. Before taking this medication, he was allegedly celibate. The medication did not initially 
improve Martin’s condition and the dosage of the medication was doubled on two different occasions. Following the 
increase in dosage, the offender formed hyperactive sexual tendencies. He spent approximately $150,000 on 
engaging with sex workers on 506 occasions. He also looked at internet pornography including child pornography. 
                                                 
65 [2013] VCC 471. 
66 Id. at 1; 3; 4. 
67 Id. at 12. 
68 Id. at 13. 
69 Id. at 14. 
70 Id. at 11; 14. 
71 See, https://neurolaw.edu.au/cases/10703.   12 
 
Changing the medication did not help to prevent further hypersexuality, however terminating all treatment was 
successful in stopping his abnormal sexual behaviours.   
A report from a neurologist indicated that the offender's behaviour was a severe case of hypersexuality 
induced by the medication that also resulted in a change of sexual preference. Even though the offender understood 
the relationship between the drug and his sexual activities, he was not able to control his behaviour. A forensic 
psychiatrist similarly opined that the medication caused the offender's behaviour. The sentencing judge agreed that 
the medication caused mental issues. Consequently, the offender's capacity for "choice, moral reasoning and 
judgment" was reduced. As in Cook, this determination mitigated the offender’s moral culpability and reduced the 
significance of general deterrence. 
Unlike Cook and Martin, in some cases there is no connection between neuroscience and criminality, but 
neuroscience is still relevant to sentencing. In DPP v Buckley,72 for instance, the offender suffered a stroke and a CT 
scan indicated an acquired brain injury. While it appeared that the brain impairment was not causally related to 
criminal behaviour and consequently did not influence the offender's moral culpability, the judge concluded that 
psychological issues derived from the brain impairment would make the prison sentence more onerous for him.73 As 
such, the brain impairment reduced the sentence due to custodial hardship.74  
Neuroscience as an aggravating factor 
While the offenders in the above cases appeared to benefit from adducing neuroscientific evidence at 
sentencing, such evidence does not always represent such a clear advantage to the offender. This is the case when 
the neuroscientific evidence suggests that the accused poses a particular risk of reoffending. In R v McCann,75 the 
jury found the offender guilty of manslaughter for strangling the deceased.76 Five experts opined regarding the 
offender's mental condition. A clinical psychologist found evidence of cognitive impairment consistent with frontal 
                                                 
72 [2013] VCC 47. 
73 Id. at 12; 13. 
74 Other than custodial hardship there are other sentencing factors that do not require a link between neurological impairment and 
criminal behaviour. For example, because an offender with brain impairment may not be a proper tool to deter the society from 
offending, the court may give lower consideration to general deterrence even if the brain impairment is not causally connected to 
offending or it occurs after the crime, see, R v Caleb James O'Connor aka John Coble [2013] NSWDC 272. 
75 [2012] NSWSC 1462. 
76 Id. at 2-13; 28. 13 
 
lobe  damage,  resulting  in  issues  such  as  poor  planning  and  evaluation  of  behavioural  responses.77  A 
neuropsychologist reported that CT and MRI indicated brain abnormalities.78 The neuropsychological assessment 
also revealed problems with working memory and impairment in creating novel ideas.79 
Although the sentencing judge acknowledged that the offender’s mental condition meant that lower weight 
should be attached to moral culpability and general deterrence, his honour also added that, “However, … the 
irreversible condition of the frontal lobes and the brain generally, raises the question of his dangerousness in the 
future.”80 As such, the offender’s brain condition was both a mitigating and aggravating factor. 81 
There are several reasons why evidence of the offender’s brain condition will not always be an aggravating 
factor, as it was in McCann. As noted above, the neuroscientific evidence may indicate a condition that is 
temporary, such as with the effects of the Parkinson’s medication in Martin. Alternatively, the brain impairment 
may reduce – rather than increase – the risk of future offending. This was the case in R v Goodridge (no 2).82 In 
Goodrich, the offender was found guilty of murder.83 Much earlier – at the age of three – the offender was run over 
by a car and experienced a head injury. As a result, he could not remember his childhood.84 In 2010, he suffered 
another head injury following an assault in gaol.85  Four experts, three psychiatrists and a psychologist, submitted 
reports. The psychologist reported that the offender had marked cognitive deficits that were associated with his 
history of cerebral insult and a lengthy history of substance and alcohol abuse.86 The psychiatrists reported brain 
damage resulting from excessive alcohol use and head injuries,87 baseline low IQ, poor judgment, cognitive 
impairment,88 and the result of an MRI scan that indicated brain abnormality89 consistent with vascular disease.90 
                                                 
77 Id. at 17. 
78 Focal abnormalities in the frontal lobes and significant cerebral atrophy Id. at 21. 
79 Id. at 21. 
80 Id. at 36; Although two psychiatrists believed that the risk of re-offending was fairly low, the judge accepted the third 
psychiatrist’s opinion that the offender posed a risk of violence to community once he is released (Id. at 37-40). 
81 Proof of brain impairment may also have another negative outcome for the defendant. For instance, according to the Crimes 
(High Risk Offenders) Act 2006 (NSW), in order to prevent further offending by ‘high-risk sex and violent offenders’, the court 
may impose post-sentence preventive detention order or an extended supervision order at the end of the custodial sentence. See, 
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders) Act 2003 (Qld); Dangerous Sexual Offenders Act 2006 (WA); Serious Sex Offenders 
Act 2013 (NT); also see [51]. There are many concerns with regard to these Acts such as proportionality of the sentence, double 
punishment and procedural fairness. See [51-53]. 
82 [2012] NSWSC 1180. 
83 Id. at 5-10. 
84 Id. at 41. 
85 Id. at 30. 
86 Id. at 32, 41-43. 
87 Id. at 33. 
88 Id. at 34-36. 
89 ‘cerebral atrophy and lesions in the white matter’ Id. at 35. 14 
 
The MRI scan, a cognitive test, and the offender’s memory issues contributed to a diagnosis of dementia. 91 It was 
concluded that if the cognitive decline continued, the offender's lifespan would not be more than 6 to 7 years.92 
The sentencing judge concluded that “[h]is long-standing history of alcohol abuse and the concomitant 
brain damage meant that he was prone to binge-drinking which tended to make him behave erratically and 
aggressively”93 with impaired judgment. Consequently, his moral culpability was reduced.94 His mental condition 
also significantly reduced the consideration of general and specific deterrence.95 Importantly, the sentencing judge 
found that the offender’s severely compromised mental condition (i.e. his dementia and short lifespan) eliminated 
his danger to the society.96 
McCann  and  Goodrich  also  demonstrate  the  particular  relevance  of  neuroscientific  assessments  in 
sentencing decisions (as opposed to trial decisions). The inquiry at sentencing is broadened from not just the state of 
the accused’s (or offender’s) brain when the crime was committed, but its condition post-conviction and beyond. In 
cases like these, neuroscientific evidence (and psychological evidence generally) is more likely to be relevant 
because the state of the offender’s brain post-conviction is the fact-in-issue.97  
The double-edged sword effect of neuroscience 
As we discussed earlier in relation to R v McCann,98 while a brain abnormality may support a more lenient 
sentence (for example, due to lessening the effect of general deterrence and reducing moral culpability), it may also 
require the risk of re-offending to be given greater consideration. Since the neuroscientific evidence can both 
support a more severe sentence or a more lenient sentence, it is often labelled a double-edged sword [1]. Many 
scholars have discussed this dual effect of neuroscience on sentencing (see, [44-46]). For instance, Owen Jones and 
                                                                                                                                                             
90 Id. at 31. 
91 Id. at 35. 
92 Id. at 34; 36. 
93 Id. at 37. 
94 Id. at 18; 37. 
95 Id. at 44; 45. 
96 Id. at 46. 
97 For further cases about contribution of neuroscience to sentencing in Australia see, R v Lepore [2013] SASCFC 13 (where 
fresh neuroscientific evidence in the appellate court required mitigation of the sentence); The Queen v Hildebrandt [2014] VSC 
321 (where the offender’s frontal-lobe damage was a mitigating factor in sentencing); The Queen v Giles [2014] VSC 210 (where 
neuroscientific evidence indicated further consideration of future offending and protection of the society); The Queen v Furlan 
[2014] VSC 361 (where the offender's acquired brain injury was a mitigating factor in sentencing); Ross v R [2006] NSWCCA 65 
(where the sentence was found to be excessive for the defendant who suffered from frontal-lobe impairment); Regina v Michael 
James ELSWORTH [2000] NSWSC 582 (where neuroscience explained the criminal behaviour); R v Tortell, R v Tsegay [2007] 
NSWCCA 313 (where neuroscientific evidence indicated frontal-lobe damage); R v Millard [2014] ACTSC 267 (where 
neuroscience reduced the consideration of moral culpability). 
98 [2012] NSWSC 1462 15 
 
Francis Shen explain that, “a brain too broken may be simply too dangerous to have at large, even if it is somehow 
less culpable” ([25] p. 362 quoted in [5]).  
Beyond McCann, this double-edged feature of neuroscientific evidence has been recognised in Australia 
since at least 1979. In two highly cited judgments of the High Court of Australia (HCA), Veen v R99 and Veen v R 
100
(No 2),  the accused’s brain damage contributed to the successful defence of substantial impairment. However, 
while his brain impairment was considered a mitigating factor, it also resulted in arguments regarding the danger the 
101
offender would present to society.  Accordingly, defence lawyers may find a decision about whether or not to use 
neuroscientific evidence risky. However, that does not seem to be the case in Australia. In most sentencing cases 
that we analysed in this study, neuroscience only leads to mitigation and is rarely used as evidence for the offender’s 
risk of recidivism.102 
Neuroscience and the Juvenile’s Brain  
A  subset  of  sentencing  cases  focuses  on  juveniles.  These  cases  rely  on  studies  of  developmental 
neuroscience that have increased our understanding  of the neural bases of psychosocial development during 
adolescence  and  adulthood.  Such  studies  explain  the  relationship  between  neurological  development  and 
behavioural tendencies such as risk-taking or impulsivity in adolescents [26]. For instance, the prefrontal cortex – 
the area of the brain that is associated with advanced thinking abilities such as planning and measuring risk and 
reward, as well as self-regulation and impulse control – is immature during adolescence. As such, juveniles are more 
inclined to take risks and tend to act more impulsively than older individuals [27]. 
In the U.S., scholars have discussed the  influence of this research on reduced sentences for juveniles in the 
criminal justice system [28]. In some recent U.S. cases, courts ordered comparatively lower sentences for juveniles 
who committed serious crimes than for their adult counterparts [29]. For instance, in one decision, the death penalty 
                                                 
99 [1979] HCA 7; (1979) 143 CLR 458 
100 Veen v R (No 2) [1988] HCA 14; (1988) 164 CLR 465 (29 March 1988). 
101 Also, in R v Morton [2010] NTSC 26, EEG and MRI scans confirmed brain damage and temporal lobe epilepsy resulting in 
mental impairment, that led to a reduced weight given to moral culpability, and general and specific deterrence, but resulted in a 
greater consideration of the need to protect society from the risk of recidivism.  
102 Similar to this study, an empirical study in the U.S. by Deborah Denno titled “The Myth of the Double-Edged Sword: An 
Empirical Study of Neuroscience Evidence in Criminal Cases” indicates that only in a few cases neuroscience is an indicative of 
the offender’s risk of recidivism. [5] 16 
 
for juveniles who committed their crimes before the age of 18 was set aside.103 In another case, life without parole 
was prohibited for non-homicides with juveniles who were under 18 when the crime was committed [28, 29]. 104 
While brain development and biological maturity are historically considered to have been achieved by the 
age of eighteen or during early adulthood, some relatively recent studies have found that the connection between a 
person’s prefrontal cortex and the areas of the brain associated with rewarding giving and responding to social and 
emotional stimuli is not complete until their mid-twenties [27, 30]. The bond that develops between these two areas 
of the brain in later years enables the prefrontal cortex to control the emotionally aroused actions and lead to socially 
accepted behaviour [31]. 
In Australian criminal proceedings, neuroscience has also contributed to the way in which courts sentence 
juveniles and young adults. In Webster (a Pseudonym) v R105, the Victorian Court of Appeal106 stated that sentencing 
young offenders requires a different application of the various purposes of punishment in comparison to sentencing 
adults.107 Three reasons were given for this: the immaturity of a young offender reduces their moral culpability, 
“custody can be particularly criminogenic for a young person, whose brain is still developing”, and the process of 
maturation and development that they are experiencing provides a unique opportunity for rehabilitating a young 
offender.108  
To support the relationship between the immaturity of young offenders and their criminality, the court, 
quoting  from  a  study  ([32]  p.  434),  mentioned  that  ‘[w]hile  the  cognitive  capacities  of  16-year-olds  may 
approximate those of adults, psychosocial maturation proceeds more slowly than cognitive development, leading to 
social and emotional differences between adolescents and adults that continue well beyond mid-adolescence and 
have profound effects on decision making’.109 In relation to the importance of rehabilitating juvenile offenders, the 
court referred to research [26] that has shown that immature juvenile brains respond to punishment in a way that 
increases the risk of re-offending rather than reducing it.110 
                                                 
103 Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005). 
104 Graham v. Florida, 560 U.S. 48 (2010). 
105 [2016] VSCA 66. 
106 Majority decision. 
107 Id. at 7. 
108 Id. at 8. 
109 Id. at 26. 
110 Id. at 27. 17 
 
In another case, with regard to the influence of alcohol and drugs on young male offenders when compared 
to more mature adults, the court explained that ‘[r]esearch shows that the executive functions of the brain of 
eighteen and twenty-five years old males are still developing…Consequently, alcohol, drugs and passion impair the 
judgment of young men to a greater degree than the same ingredients are likely to do with more mature males.’111 
The court also noted that sentencing considerations related to the age of the offender should not alter based on the 
seriousness of the offence.112   
A different aspect of the mental development of a juvenile offender and their future dangerousness was 
discussed in R v Wong.113 In that case, the psychiatrists explained that the brain and personality of an eighteen-year-
old offender are still developing. As such, ‘[i]t would [be] expected that [the offender’s] brain and personality will 
mature during the years he spends in custody accompanied by improved judgment and impulse control.’ 114 
Part IV. Critical Analysis of Australian Criminal Courts’ Use of Neuroscientific Evidence 
  Now that we have reviewed the many uses of neuroscience in Australian criminal courts, it is possible to 
critically reflect on those uses. As many commentators have noted, the amount of basic and applied research in 
neuroscience has greatly increased over the past several decades (For a review, see [33]). In other words, it is a 
discipline that is still very much in its formative stages. While the scientific literature underlying neuroscience can 
self-correct over the years, there are fewer opportunities for self-correction in law (e.g., limited rights of appeal) . As 
a result, both scientists and legal actors must establish an “ethic of caution” when relying on neuroscientific 
evidence [34]. In other words, should not go beyond their data and make claims that cannot be defended (see, [34] p. 
38-42). 
  The importance of caution when relying on neuroscientific evidence is underscored by recent findings 
demonstrating uncertainties in its scientific foundations. For instance, it is well known that neural imaging studies 
are expensive to perform and thus have historically included fewer participants than non-imaging behavioural 
studies. Denes Szuchs and John Ioannidis recently performed a study finding that this lack of sample size is so 
                                                                                                                                                             
For a similar case see, R v Hawkins [2015] ACTSC 333 at 64, “[the offender’s] age is also relevant in itself. He is still a 
relatively young man and neuroscience shows that the male brain is not fully mature and developed until mid twenties.” 
111 R v Khosravi, Alborz [2008] NSWDC 298 at 1. 
112 Id. at 71. 
113 [2010] NSWSC 171. 
114 Id. at 27. 18 
 
problematic that it is likely that over half the published studies in cognitive neuroscience contain spurious findings 
[10]. Similarly, neuroscience researchers have a great deal of discretion in how they analyse imaging data. Many 
have likely strategically selected measurement points (i.e., voxels) in brain images when comparing them to the 
behaviour of interest ([35]; see also [36]). This practice produces artificially inflated findings (i.e., “voodoo 
correlations”) that misrepresent the robustness of the specific claim.  
  More generally, there have  been two  broad academic responses (schools of thought) to the  use of 
neuroscience evidence in the courtroom (see [20] for a review). The first is sceptical and cautious. These researchers 
say that brain states are rarely relevant to criminal law criteria, which are largely behavioural [34]. And moreover, 
the use of brain images in court may be highly prejudicial with lay factfinders ascribing them more weight than they 
deserve ([8]; see also [9]). As a result, neuroscience may be high in persuasiveness but possess little-to-no legal 
relevance (i.e., Morse refers to such evidence as merely ‘rhetorically relevant’)[9, 34]. The second school of thought 
embraces a more expansive role for neuroscience in the criminal justice system [37]. 
  As we will discuss below, we did not observe many of the first school of thought’s concerns about 
neuroscience in court in our review of the Australian jurisprudence. This is demonstrated by the fact that the 
neuroscience is generally treated as a contributory tool among other tools in assessing a mental state or merely a 
suggestive evidence rather than dispositive proof of a mental state (i.e. smoking gun). For example, recall that in 
Berlingo, other traditional forms of psychiatric assessment overcame imaging suggesting there was no mental 
impairment.115  Still,  the  picture  in  Australia  was  not  unilaterally  so  rosy.  We  did  find  some  indication  of 
neuroscience’s prejudice and merely rhetorical relevance. We will describe these in the following section. 
Prejudicial Neuroscience and Rhetorical Relevance in Australian Neurolaw 
  One of the most serious dangers presented by the rapid increase in neuroscience in court is that the tribunal 
of fact may place undue weight on this evidence. In evidence law, this danger is meant to be countered by the trial 
judge’s discretion to exclude evidence when the danger of prejudice it presents outweighs its probative value [38]. 
                                                 
115 Beyond the cases reviewed above, see also R v Santos [2001] NSWSC 923 where the offender’s substantial impairment 
defence (manslaughter) was based on three contributory factors. First, the offender suffered personality change (i.e. irritable and 
predisposed to losing temper) as the result of a head injury. Neuropsychological testing also showed cognitive impairment as 
another result of head injury. The third factor was depression that according to expert report "added to his difficulties in 
understanding [victim’s] actions and resolving the issues which arose from them.” (at 20) While none of these factors seems to be 
sufficient to substantially impair the offender's abilities, the combination of these factors met that threshold. 19 
 
And, in Uniform Evidence Act jurisdictions, there is a mandatory exclusion of such evidence in criminal matters 
when it is adduced by the prosecution [38].116 For instance, trial judges often exclude images from grisly crime 
scenes under the theory that they add little to the understanding of the crime, but may deeply prejudice the jury 
against the accused [39]. In the context of neurolaw, one of the first objections to the use of neuroscientific images in 
court was that they were overly prejudicial and added little to the expert’s testimony [8]. In particular, Joseph Dumit 
was concerned that fact-finders would overemphasise testimony buttressed by brain images because they seemed 
more objective: “…I argue there is an undue risk in courtrooms that brain images will not be seen as prejudiced, 
stylized  representations  of  correlation,  but  rather  as  straightforward,  objective  photographs  of,  for  example, 
madness” [8].117 
Scans are not objective (see [8, 34]), in that their  meaning relies on interpretation by expert neuroscientists 
(and others). In other words, brain scans are, by themselves, almost never dispositive of any legally meaningful 
mental condition [8, 34, 40, 41]. To illustrate the latter point, Emma Sprooten and colleagues performed a meta-
analysis of 537 fMRI studies spanning 21,427 total participants [42]. They examined whether those scans could 
reliably differentiate between patients suffering from five major mental illnesses (schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, 
major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and obsessive compulsive disorder). They found that fMRI was largely 
not up to the task – the differences between patients and controls were largely the same across illnesses. In other 
words, fMRI, currently, has very low diagnostic specificity. Of course, brain scans can certainly assist an expert in 
coming to an opinion or diagnosis (see [8]). That process, however, depends on the subjective judgment of the 
expert – the scan should not be mistaken as objective, dispositive evidence. 
  In reviewing case law, it can be difficult (and sometimes impossible) to determine if a judge or jury is 
misconstruing neuroscientific evidence as objective. We did, however, find one judgment in which a trial judge’s 
reasons expressly misconceived neuroscientific as objective. In this case, R v Hussein,118 the issue was whether Mr. 
Hussein was fit to stand trial. The defence proffered a clinical neuropsychologist, Dr. Dowla, who performed a scan 
                                                 
116 Uniform evidence jurisdictions are New South Wales, Tasmania, Victoria, the Northern Territory, and the Australian Capital 
Territory. 
117 The neurolaw literature mainly criticises the use of brain imaging evidence and it seems there is less concern about other types 
of neuroscientific evidence (See [55, 56]). As such, the main focus of this section is on cases that brain imaging evidence is 
discussed because that seem to present to most possibility for prejudice.  
118 [2011] NSWDC 103. 20 
 
showing abnormalities in the Hussein’s prefrontal cortex.119 Still, the prosecution’s experts maintained that Hussein 
was fit to stand trial.120 Ultimately, the trial judge preferred the defence’s experts and seemed to misunderstand the 
nature of the neuroscientific evidence: “To my mind, there is clear objective evidence from Dr. Dowla’s testing of 
Mr. Hussein’s disability.”121 (emphasis added) He thus found Hussein unfit to stand trial.122 Brain scans, while a 
useful diagnostic tool, should not be considered objective evidence. They rely on the subjective interpretation of the 
analyst. 
  Despite the experience in Hussein, many researchers have found that fact-finders do not have their 
decision-making overwhelmed by the purported objectivity of neuroscience (see [43, 44]). Recently, Shen and 
colleagues  performed  a  study,  presenting  some  participants  with  EEG  information  that  either  supported  or 
challenged the accused’s credibility [43]. They found that the EEG information indeed influenced the verdict 
participants chose, but the overall strength of the case was a stronger predictor of the verdict (approximately double 
the effect size). While there still seems to be no strong consensus in the field [43], it seems safe to say that 
neuroscientific evidence can affect jurors’ (or, more specifically, the jury-eligible subject pool commonly used in 
studies like Shen’s) decision-making, but it does not seem as prejudicial as academics originally thought. 
  Our review generally accords with findings like those made by Shen and colleagues. We found that 
Australian judges rarely expressly favoured neuroscience over well-established behavioural psychological evidence. 
One case that came close to the line was R v AB.123 In that case, the accused argued that he had been substantially 
impaired when he killed his wife.124 The trial judge considered the opinions of several psychological experts who 
opined on the accused’s dementia. Some of the cognitive measures were inconclusive. For instance, the accused 
scored a 24 on the Minimum Mental State Examination (MMSE, a test for cognitive impairment) – a borderline 
score.125 The trial judge weighed this score together with an MRI that showed frontal lobe damage: “…‘frontal 
impairment’ – in which judgment and planning are adversely affected – are not demonstrated well in an MMSE and 
behavioural impairments are not tested. It is important, therefore, not to ascribe too much significance to this test in 
                                                 
119 MRI and EEG scans did not indicate any abnormality. But the third test a Ceretec Brain Perfusion Study, showed some 
abnormalities. Id. at 20, 24. 
120 Id. at 40-43. 
121 Id. at 40. 
122 Id. at 46, 47. 
123 [2013] NSWSC 1739. 
124 See Part II for a description of substantial impairment. 
125 Id. at 51. 21 
 
light of the MRI’s demonstration of frontal lobe damage.”126 In other words, the trial judge appeared to be aware of 
the limitations of the various tests that were performed, rather than irrationally preferring the neuroscientific tests.  
  The experience in AB also illustrates the fact that, in Australia,  the neuroscience is regularly duplicative of 
well-established clinical tests and thus may be categorized as merely rhetorically relevant [34]. In AB, for instance, 
the finding of substantial impairment due to dementia was supported (beyond the MMSE) by other classic forms of 
psychiatric testing and interviewing.127 The dangers with admitting merely rhetorically relevant evidence are not as 
serious as misunderstanding evidence, but the practice can consume valuable court resources and encourage parties 
to retain costly rebuttal witnesses. The practice can also lead to legal outcomes that are plainly irrational. The legal 
treatment of neuroscientific and non-neuroscientific evidence about intoxication is an excellent example of an 
irrational legal distinction. 
On the topic of intoxication evidence, contrast the admitted testimony of the expert in H, LP (reviewed in 
Part II), who couched his testimony about the effects of alcohol in neuroscientific terms, with a long line of cases 
excluding opinion evidence about the effects of intoxication (but not couched in neuro-language). These latter cases 
excluded the evidence because it was either irrelevant or duplicative of common sense. As to common sense, courts 
noted that intoxication is a phenomenon that juries can adequately form their own judgments about: “where the jury 
are faced with aberrations of human behaviour caused by the intake of alcohol, that is an area they are perfectly able 
to form a judgment about without being assisted by the experts…”128 And regarding relevance, courts have held that 
the expert evidence is not sufficiently probative of the fact in issue (often intent).  
These cases excluding expert evidence about the role of intoxication on intent are difficult to reconcile with 
H, LP. In H, LP, the defence’s psychiatrist had not examined the accused directly after the event and merely gave 
framework evidence “of a general nature as to how alcohol affects the processes of thought that go on within a 
person’s  brain.”129  This  was  precisely  the  type  of  evidence  excluded  in  the  earlier  cases,  only  couched  in 
neuroscientific language. This distinction supports some concerns with neuroscientific evidence. Indeed, several 
studies support a phenomenon sometimes termed “neuromania” whereby lay people prefer explanations that include 
                                                 
126 Ibid. 
127 Id. at 52. It is noteworthy that as discussed above in cases such as Berlingo and Re Ma’a that malingering is suspected 
neuroscientific evidence might be helpful and provide additional information on which to base a diagnosis. 
128 R v Haidley and Alford [1984] VR 229 at 233, quoting R v Darrington and McGauley [1980] VR 353. And for similar 
reasoning see R v Morgan [1986] 2 Qd R 627 at 656; R v Carn [1982] 5 A Crim R at 469-470.  
129 H, LP at 66. 22 
 
neuroscientific  jargon  [45].  For  example,  in  a  well-known  series  of  studies  titled  “The  seductive  allure  of 
neuroscience explanations”, Deena Weisberg and colleagues reported that their participants found descriptions of 
psychological phenomena more satisfying when they included irrelevant neuroscientific terms [46]. Similarly, 
scientific studies are more persuasive to lay people when they include irrelevant neuroscience [47]. In our analysis, 
neuromania indeed appears to be the only way to reconcile H, LP and the traditional Australian legal position on 
intoxication evidence.130 
Finally, while in some cases it appears that neuroscience is merely duplicate of other traditional forms of 
evidence, it may still be useful. There are several circumstances where other types of evidence may be inconclusive 
and unable to meet the legal standard of proof.131 This is evident in cases where the expert is not confident about the 
outcome  of  the  assessment,  or  cases  in  which  different  experts  have  conflicting  opinions.  In  such  cases, 
neuroscience can have a “buttressing” function when it is coupled with other types of evidence, forming a more 
robust claim [48] and meet the standard of proof.132 
  
Part V. Conclusion 
Despite recent research finding that parties increasingly rely on neuroscience as evidence in court, very 
little is known about how such evidence is being used in the Australian legal context. This study has demonstrated, 
for the first time, that neuroscience is being used in Australian courts in the forms of diagnostic and framework 
evidence at several stages in the legal process: pre-trial, trial, and sentencing. In  general, the admission of 
neuroscientific evidence throughout the court process leads to the conclusion that Australian courts welcome the 
submission of neuroscience.  
                                                 
130 Although note that H, LP was a judge alone trial and thus the trial judge may have been more permissive towards the evidence 
for that reason. Still, the contrast between the traditional position whereby intoxication evidence is irrelevant and the trial judge 
in H, LP taking the time to specifically report the “neuroscientific” opinion evidence about intoxication is striking. We cannot, 
however, conclusively rule out other distinctions between H, LP and the traditional position towards evidence of the effects of 
extreme intoxication.  
131 The two main standards of proof are ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ and ‘on the balance of probability’. When the ultimate fact in 
question is to the detriment of the accused/offender, the standard is the former, and when it is for their benefit, the standard is the 
latter.  
132 For instance, in R v McCann (discussed above) two psychiatrists suggested that the offender posed a low risk of re-offending. 
However, the court, based on the irreversible condition of the offender’s brain and another psychiatrist’s report (i.e. referred his 
‘dementing process’), concluded that the offender was a danger to the community. 23 
 
Our analysis of how Australian criminal courts use neuroscientific evidence suggests that courts perform 
balanced reasoning between neuroscientific evidence and other types of evidence, and that neuroscience is generally 
treated as a contributory tool rather than definitive proof (or, a ‘smoking gun’). Further, courts appear to be cautious 
about the limitations of neuroscience and do not seem to unilaterally favour it over more traditional forms of 
evidence. (except the alcohol case, H, LP which suggested the court prefers evidence couched in neuroscientific 
language).133 
Although this research extends our knowledge of the use of neuroscience and qualitatively examines 
hazards and themes that may flow from the use of this evidence in Australian criminal law, it cannot provide 
empirical conclusions. As such, we encourage more comprehensive empirical research to build on our findings. 
 
Appendix 
Following our review of criminal cases on the Australian Neurolaw database we sorted them into different 
categories such as ‘fitness to stand trial’, ‘sentencing’, ‘the juvenile brain’, and ‘the brain and memory’. As our 
categories were largely based on a review of cases in the Australian Neurolaw Database, the general search on 
AustLII aimed to find any other reasons for the use of neuroscience in Australia that were not included in the 
Australian Neurolaw Database.  
We used a variety of keywords including ‘neuroscience’, ‘brain’, ‘neuropsychology’, ‘EEG’, ‘MRI’, ‘CT 
scan’, ‘fMRI’ and ‘SPECT scan’. As the result of our search thousands of cases were produced; however, as the 
purpose of this study is to explore different uses of neuroscience in criminal courts, we purposefully reviewed a 
number of cases to find out whether neuroscience is used in a way that we had not previously considered. 
Accordingly, revision of cases ended when we could not find any new use of neuroscience.  
In order to identify cases where neuroscience was used for specific purposes, we used Boolean operators. 
For instance, to find cases in which reference is made to both ‘memory’ and ‘the brain’, we searched ‘brain AND 
memory’. We also used more complex searches such as ‘(false/5/memory) AND brain AND eyewitness’. This only 
produced results in which ‘brain', ‘eyewitness', ‘false’ and ‘memory’ were noted in the case, and where there are not 
                                                 
133 And this is consistent with empirical research examining the effect of neuroscientific jargon on laypeople. See [46]. 24 
 
more than 5 words between ‘false’ and ‘memory'. This approach (proximity operator) helped to avoid cases where 
irrelevant  combinations  (i.e.  ‘false  accusation’  and  ‘childhood  memory’)  are  noted  in  different  parts  of  the 
judgement. 
We then sorted the cases into different categories (similar to our categories on the Australian Neurolaw 
Database). A review of the dataset indicated that in some categories all the cases were from a single jurisdiction (i.e. 
New South Wales). We conducted a further search to balance the distribution of cases from different jurisdictions. 
As such, our research better represents the use of neuroscience in Australia.  
Of the 779 cases that we reviewed, a proportion of the cases were irrelevant to the study and were 
excluded. For instance, in many cases neuroscientific tests, such as MRI and CT scans, were used to examine other 
body parts than the brain, or were conducted on the victim rather than the accused/offender. Occasionally the cases 
were also the same as those listed on the Australian Neurolaw Database. 
 
Acknowledgements  
Special thanks to Prof. Gary Edmond, Dr Allan McCay, Prof. Nicole Vincent and anonymous reviewers for 
providing feedback that greatly improved the manuscript.  
 
Reference list 
1.   Chandler, Jennifer A. 2016. The use of neuroscientific evidence in Canadian criminal proceedings. Journal 
of Law and the Biosciences 2. Oxford University Press: 550–579. 
2.   Catley, Paul, and Lisa Claydon. 2015. The use of neuroscientific evidence in the courtroom by those accused 
of criminal offenses in England and Wales. Journal of Law and the Biosciences 2. Oxford University Press: 
510–549. 
3.   de Kogel, C. H., and E. J. M. C. Westgeest. 2015. Neuroscientific and behavioral genetic information in 
criminal cases in the Netherlands. Journal of Law and the Biosciences 2: 580–605. doi:10.1093/jlb/lsv024. 25 
 
4.   Farahany, Nita A. 2016. Neuroscience and behavioral genetics in US criminal law: an empirical analysis. 
Journal of Law and the Biosciences 2. Oxford University Press: 485–509. 
5.   Denno, Deborah W. 2015. The Myth of the Double-Edged Sword: An Empirical Study of Neuroscience 
Evidence in Criminal Cases. Boston College Law Review 56. Boston College School of Law: 493–551. 
6.   Denno, Deborah W. 2016. How Prosecutors and Defense Attorneys Differ in Their Use of Neuroscience 
Evidence. Fordham L. Rev. 85. HeinOnline: 453–479. 
7.   Houston, L, and A Vierboom. 2012. Neuroscience and law: Australia. International Neurolaw. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg: 11–42. 
8.   Dumit, Joseph. 1999. Objective brains, prejudicial images. Science in Context 12. Cambridge University 
Press: 173–201. 
9.   Morse, Stephen J. 2005. Brain overclaim syndrome and criminal responsibility: A diagnostic note. Ohio St. 
J. Crim. L. 3. HeinOnline: 397. 
10.   Szucs, Denes, and John P A Ioannidis. 2017. Empirical assessment of published effect sizes and power in 
the recent cognitive neuroscience and psychology literature. PLoS biology 15. Public Library of Science: 
e2000797. doi:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2000797. 
11.   Faigman, David L, Richard J Bonnie, B J Casey, Andre Davis, Morris B Hoffman, Owen D Jones, Read 
Montague, Stephen Morse, Marcus E Raichle, and Jennifer A Richeson. 2016. G2i Knowledge Brief: A 
Knowledge Brief of the MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Law and Neuroscience. MacArthur 
Foundation Research Network on Law and Neuroscience. 
12.   Buckholtz, Joshua W, Valerie F Reyna, and Christopher Slobogin. 2016. A neuro-legal lingua franca: 
Bridging law and neuroscience on the issue of self-control. (Forthcoming; Vanderbilt Public Law Research 
Paper No. 16–32) Mental Health Law & Policy Journal. 
13.   Raine, A. 2013. The anatomy of violence: The biological roots of crime. Vintage. Vintage. 26 
 
14.   Campbell, Ian Graham. 1988. Mental disorder and criminal law in Australia and New Zealand. Lexis Pub. 
15.   Freckelton, Ian. 1996. Rationality and flexibility in assessment of fitness to stand trail. International Journal 
of Law and Psychiatry 19. Elsevier Science: 39–59. 
16.   Mullen, Paul E. 2002. Commentary: Competence assessment practices in England and Australia versus the 
United States. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law Online 30. American Academy 
of Psychiatry and the Law: 486–487. 
17.   Samuels, Anthony, Colman O’Driscoll, and Stephen Allnutt. 2007. Fitness issues in the context of judicial 
proceedings. Australasian Psychiatry 15. SAGE Publications Sage UK: London, England: 212–216. 
18.   Bronitt, Simon, and Bernadette McSherry. 2017. Principles of Criminal Law. Thomson Reuters 
(Professional) Australia Pty Limited. 4th ed. 
19.   Allnutt, Stephen, Anthony Samuels, and Colman O’driscoll. 2007. The insanity defence: from wild beasts to 
M’Naghten. Australasian psychiatry : bulletin of Royal Australian and New Zealand College of 
Psychiatrists 15: 292–298. doi:10.1080/10398560701352181. 
20.   Slobogin, Christopher. 2017. Neuroscience nuance: dissecting the relevance of neuroscience in adjudicating 
criminal culpability. Journal of Law and the Biosciences 4: 577–593. doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsx033. 
21.   Morse, Stephen J. 2002. Uncontrollable urges and irrational people. Virginia Law Review. JSTOR: 1025–
1078. 
22.   Farahany, Nita A, and James E. Coleman Jr. 2009. Genetics, Neuroscience, and Criminal Responsibility. In 
The impact of behavioral sciences on criminal law, ed. Nita A. Farahany, 183–240. Oxford University Press. 
23.   Barth, Abram S. 2007. A double-edged sword: The role of neuroimaging in federal capital sentencing. 
American journal of law & medicine 33. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: 501–522. 
24.   Snead, O C. 2007. Neuroimaging and the Complexity of Capital Punishment. NYUL Rev. 82: 1265–1339. 27 
 
25.   Jones, OD, and FX Shen. 2012. Law and neuroscience in the United States. In International Neurolaw: A 
Comparative Analysis, ed. Tade Matthias Spranger, 349–380. Springer. 
26.   Steinberg, Laurence. 2009. Adolescent development and juvenile justice. Annual review of clinical 
psychology 5. Annual Reviews: 459–485. 
27.   Scott, Elizabeth S, Richard J Bonnie, and Laurence Steinberg. 2016. Young Adulthood as a Transitional 
Legal Category: Science, Social Change, and Justice Policy. Fordham L. Rev. 85. HeinOnline: 641–666. 
28.   Grisso, Thomas, and Antoinette Kavanaugh. 2016. Prospects for developmental evidence in juvenile 
sentencing based on Miller v. Alabama. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law 22. American Psychological 
Association: 235–249. 
29.   Scott, Elizabeth, Thomas Grisso, Marsha Levick, and Laurence Steinberg. 2015. The Supreme Court and the 
transformation of juvenile sentencing. New York, NY: Trustees of Columbia University. 
30.   Cohen, Alexandra O, Kaitlyn Breiner, Laurence Steinberg, Richard J Bonnie, Elizabeth S Scott, Kim 
Taylor-Thompson, Marc D Rudolph, et al. 2016. When Is an Adolescent an Adult? Assessing Cognitive 
Control in Emotional and Nonemotional Contexts. Psychological Science 27. SAGE Publications Inc: 549–
562. doi:10.1177/0956797615627625. 
31.   Cohen, Alexandra O, Richard J Bonnie, Kim Taylor-Thompson, and B J Casey. 2015. When Does a 
Juvenile Become an Adult: Implications for Law and Policy. Temp. L. Rev. 88. HeinOnline: 769–943. 
32.   Cauffman, Elizabeth, and Laurence Steinberg. 2012. Emerging findings from research on adolescent 
development and juvenile justice. Victims & Offenders 7. Taylor & Francis: 428–449. 
33.   Shen, Francis X. 2010. The Law and Neuroscience Bibliography: Navigating the Emerging Field of 
Neurolaw. International Journal of Legal Information 38: 352–399. 
34.   Morse, Stephen. 2017. Neuroscience Evidence in Forensic Contexts: Ethical Concerns. In Ethics Challenges 
in Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology Practice, ed. E. H. Ezra and M. D. Griffith. Columbia University 28 
 
Press. 
35.   Vul, Edward, Christine Harris, Piotr Winkielman, and Harold Pashler. 2009. Puzzlingly high correlations in 
fMRI studies of emotion, personality, and social cognition. Perspectives on psychological science 4. SAGE 
Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: 274–290. 
36.   Poldrack, Russell A, John Monahan, Peter B Imrey, Valerie Reyna, Marcus E Raichle, David Faigman, and 
Joshua W Buckholtz. 2018. Predicting Violent Behavior: What Can Neuroscience Add? Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 22: 111–123. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.11.003. 
37.   Bennett, Elizabeth. 2016. Neuroscience and Criminal Law: Have We Been Getting It Wrong for Centuries 
and Where Do We Go from Here. Fordham L. Rev. 85. HeinOnline: 437–451. 
38.   Heydon, John Dyson, and Sir Rupert Cross. 2015. Cross on evidence. LexisNexis Australia. 
39.   Bright, David A, and Jane Goodman-Delahunty. 2006. Gruesome evidence and emotion: anger, blame, and 
jury decision-making. Law and human behavior 30. Germany: Springer: 183–202. 
40.   Morse, S, and W Newsome. 2013. Criminal responsibility, criminal competence, and prediction of criminal 
behavior. In A Primer on Criminal Law and Neuroscience, ed. Stephen J. Morse and Adina L. Roskies, 150–
178. Oxford University Press. 
41.   Satel, Sally, and Scott O Lilienfeld. 2013. Brainwashed: The Seductive Appeal of Mindless Neuroscience. 
Basic Books. New York, NY: Basic Books. 
42.   Sprooten, Emma, Alexander Rasgon, Morgan Goodman, Ariella Carlin, Evan Leibu, Won Hee Lee, and 
Sophia Frangou. 2017. Addressing reverse inference in psychiatric neuroimaging: Meta‐analyses of task‐
related brain activation in common mental disorders. Human brain mapping 38. Wiley Online Library: 
1846–1864. doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23486. 
43.   Shen, Francis X, Emily Twedell, Caitlin Opperman, Jordan Dean Scott Krieg, Mikaela Brandt-Fontaine, 
Joshua Preston, Jaleh McTeigue, Alina Yasis, and Morgan Carlson. 2017. The limited effect of 29 
 
electroencephalography memory recognition evidence on assessments of defendant credibility. Journal of 
Law and the Biosciences 4: 330–364. doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsx005. 
44.   Schweitzer, Nicholas J, Michael J Saks, Emily R Murphy, Adina L Roskies, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, and 
Lyn M Gaudet. 2011. Neuroimages as evidence in a mens rea defense: No impact. Psychology, Public 
Policy, and Law 17. American Psychological Association: 357–393. 
45.   Legrenzi, Paolo, and Carlo Umiltà. 2011. Neuromania: On the limits of brain science. Translated by Frances 
Anderson. Oxford University Press. 
46.   Weisberg, Deena Skolnick, Frank C Keil, Joshua Goodstein, Elizabeth Rawson, and Jeremy R Gray. 2008. 
The seductive allure of neuroscience explanations. Journal of cognitive neuroscience 20. MIT Press: 470–
477. 
47.   Rhodes, Rebecca E, Fernando Rodriguez, and Priti Shah. 2014. Explaining the alluring influence of 
neuroscience information on scientific reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition 40. American Psychological Association: 1432. 
48.   Jones, Owen D. 2013. Seven Ways Neuroscience Aids Law. In Neurosciences and the Human Person: New 
Perspectives on Human Activities, ed. Antonio M. Battro, Stanislas Dehaene, Marcelo Sánchez Sorondo, 
and Wolf J. Singer, 181. Vatican City: The Pontifical Academy of Sciences. 
49.   Page, Ellie A. 2017. The Criminal Mind: Neuroscientific Evidence as a Mitigating Factor in Sentencing in 
New South Wales, Australia. Pac. Rim L. & Pol’y J. 26. HeinOnline: 659–691. 
50.   McSherry, Bernadette, and Bronwyn Glynis Naylor. 2004. Australian criminal laws: Critical perspectives. 
Oxford University Press. 
51.   Tulich, Tamara. 2015. Post-Sentence Preventative Detention and Extended Supervision of High Risk 
Offenders in New South Wales. UNSWLJ 38. HeinOnline: 823–853. 
52.   McSherry, Bernadette. 2005. Indefinite and preventive detention legislation: From caution to an open door. 30 
 
Criminal law journal 29: 94–110. 
53.   Keyzer, Patrick, Cathy Pereira, and Stephen Southwood. 2004. Pre-emptive imprisonment for 
dangerousness in Queensland under the Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders) Act 2003: The 
constitutional issues. Psychiatry, psychology and law 11. Taylor & Francis: 244–253. 
54.   Keyzer, Patrick, and Bernadette M McSherry. 2006. The Preventive Detention of “Dangerous” Sex 
Offenders in Australia: Perspectives at the Coalface. International Journal of Criminology and Sociology 2: 
296–305. 
55.   Glannon, Walter. 2014. The Limitations and Potential of Neuroimaging in the Criminal Law. The Journal of 
Ethics 18: 153–170. doi:10.1007/s10892-014-9169-y. 
56.   Brown, Teneille R, and Emily R Murphy. 2010. Through a scanner darkly: functional neuroimaging as 
evidence of a criminal defendant’s past mental states. Stanford law review 62. 
   
 