 
EXEMPLARY LEGAL WRITING 2016 
• BOOKS • 
SELECTED BY OUR  
RESPECTABLE AUTHORITIES 
(SEE ALSO PAGES 170, 184 & 189) 
FIVE RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Femi Cadmus† 
Richard A. Posner 
Divergent Paths: The Academy and the Judiciary 
(Harvard University Press 2016) 
In Divergent Paths, Judge Posner reflects, from his firsthand perspective 
as a federal judge and former law professor, on the widening gulf between 
academia and the bench. He discusses the challenges and deficiencies of the 
judiciary and the extent to which the legal academy could ameliorate or pro-
vide improvement. At the same time, he acknowledges that the current writ-
ings of law faculty about the judiciary are not always particularly useful to the 
bench and the legal academy supplies law clerks lacking adequate preparation 
to provide helpful insights to judges. Change, he observes, may come from 
the outside with the call for more practice-ready law graduates but challenges  
 
                                                                                                                            
† Edward Cornell Law Librarian, Associate Dean for Library Services, and Professor of the Practice, 
Cornell Law School. Copyright 2017 Femi Cadmus. 
7 JOURNAL OF LAW (ALMANAC EXCERPTS) 176 FIVE RECOMMENDATIONS 
will continue to persist because of the entrenchment of traditions both in the 
judiciary and in law schools which may hinder significant changes. 
Ruth Bader Ginsburg 
My Own Words 
(Simon and Schuster 2016) 
This first and engaging personal biographical account by Justice Ginsburg 
is crafted through her own words as conveyed in speeches, legal briefs, and 
law journal articles, with accompanying narratives from her two authorized 
biographers. The biography covers her journey from childhood through col-
lege, to her work as a law professor and on the bench. Also included are 
tributes to those who influenced her career, and reflections on her fondness 
for opera, the lighter side of life on the Supreme Court, and more serious 
issues like gender equality and judging and justice.  
Nicole Dyszlewski & Raquel Ortiz,  
with illustrations by Liz Gotauco What Color is Your CFR? 
(CALI eLangdell Press 2016) 
Books on legal research are almost never of the coloring book variety. In 
What Color is Your CFR? the authors, two law librarians and an illustrator, 
take  a  decidedly  non-traditional  approach  on  how  to  research  the  law. 
Whimsical animal drawings and accompanying text cover the basic essen-
tials of legal research, including how to find relevant primary and secondary 
sources of the law. Humorous and serious at the same time, the coloring 
exercises end with advice on connecting with the ultimate legal information 
resource: “How to Contact a Law Librarian.” 
Kevin Ring 
Scalia’s Court 
(Regnery Publishing, 2016) 
A selection of memorable opinions by the late Justice Antonin Scalia, 
which the author acknowledges are not necessarily the most important, but 
rather what he describes as “the most powerful, colorful and entertaining 
opinions ever written by an American jurist.” Scalia’s judicial philosophy, 
specifically his textualist and origin-alist approach, are analyzed in the intro-
ductory chapter. Ensuing chapters cover Scalia’s opinions relating to a variety 
of subjects including race, abortion, gun rights, death penalty, illegal immi-
gration, and sexual equality. A brief historical and constitutional background 
of each case with highlights of Scalia’s perspectives precedes a full text of the 
NUMBER 1 (2017)  177 FEMI CADMUS 
opinion. The book concludes with quotes from colleagues on the Supreme 
Court, constitutional scholars, and critics. 
Paul W. Kahn 
Making the Case: The Art of the Judicial Opinion 
(Yale University Press 2016) 
Kahn discusses the essential skills vital to the preparation of students to 
become successful lawyers. Students must be able to analyze the full text of 
opinions and not merely rely on excerpts from casebooks. In order to devel-
op a persuasive case, the entire legal opinion must be examined because the 
law is contextual, embedded in the facts, and does not exist in the abstract as 
legal doctrine. He also discusses other issues of interest to scholars and stu-
dents alike, including legal opinions as self-govern-ment through the law, 
the role of narrative and voice, and the development of doctrine. 
 
178  7 JOURNAL OF LAW (ALMANAC EXCERPTS) 