Associations  and the Constitution: Four Questions About Four
Freedoms'
NELSON TEBBE**
When  should  a  constitutional  democracy  allow  private
associations  to  discriminate?  That  question  has  become
prominent once again, not only in the United States but abroad
as  well.  John Inazu  provides  a  provocative answer  in  his
impressive  Article,  The  Four  Freedoms  and  the  Future  of
Religious  Liberty.  According  to  his  proposal,  "strong
pluralism," associations should have  a constitutional right to
limit  membership  on  any  ground,  including  race.  Strong
pluralism articulates only three limits: It does not apply to the
government, to commercial entities, or to monopolistic groups.
In this Response, I raise four questions about Four Freedoms.
First, I ask why exactly strong pluralism should be preferred to
the  existing  settlement  between  associational interests  and
equality  values.  Second,  I  draw  a  parallel between  strong
pluralism and broaders orting theories, and ask about the choice
of a  level  of generality or social organization on  which  to
promote sorting. Third, I  interrogate strong pluralism's three
limits, and finally I  ask whether extending the theory beyond
regulation to government funding can be defended on a liberty
theory such as strong pluralism. I conclude by commending Four
Freedoms to everyone interested in these pressing questions.
INTRODUCTION  ................................................ 918
I.  THE EXISTING SETTILEMENT  ............................... 922
II.  STRONG PLURALISM AS A SORTING THEORY ............... 929
III.  STRONG PLURALISM'S LIMITS.  .................  ...... 936
A.  Commercial Entities  ............................ 936
*  @ 2014 Nelson Tebbe.
**  Professor of Law, Brooklyn Law School; Visiting Professor of Law, Cornell Law
School. Thanks for help on previous drafts to Chad Flanders, Rick Garnett, Paul Horwitz,
Adam Samaha, Richard Schragger, Micah Schwartzman, Christopher Serkin, participants
at a conference on religious institutionalism at DePaul Law School, and especially to John
Inazu for his generous engagement. I am grateful to Dean Allard and the Dean's Summer
Research Stipend Program at Brooklyn Law School for generous support of this project.918  NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 92
B.  Monopolistic Groups  ....................  ..... 939
C.  Government...............................941
IV.  THE FOUR FREEDOMS AND GOVERNMENT FUNDING...........942
CONCLUSION  ........................................  ..... 947
INTRODUCTION
When  should  a  constitutional  democracy  exempt  groups  from
antidiscrimination  laws?  That  question  has  become  newly
foregrounded  in law and politics, not only in America but abroad as
well.'  Conflicts  invoking  it  often feature  religious  groups,  but the
debates  raise conceptual  issues that  extend  further,  to  all  civic  or
voluntary  associations.  How  should  such  groups  be  treated  by
constitutional  regimes  when  their  convictions  conflict  with
antidiscrimination values?
John Inazu has made a fascinating  contribution to the effort to
answer  this question  in  his impressive  Article,  The Four Freedoms
and the Future of Religious Liberty2  ("Four Freedoms"). Because his
proposal is skillfully defended,  and because  it diverges from current
legal  doctrine,  it  is  well  worth engaging.3  Here, I  put to  one  side
Inazu's  historical  account,  and  I  foreground  instead  his  doctrinal
recommendation and its normative rationales. In brief, he argues that
four basic freedoms rooted in the First Amendment-speech,  press,
religion,  and  assembly-should  be  understood  to  support  "strong
pluralism."'  The  core  of  strong  pluralism  is  easy  to  describe:
Government action should not be permitted to burden civic groups in
their exercise  of the four freedoms,  and, in particular,  it should not
interfere with membership  and leadership decisions.s That principle
1.  See, e.g., Nelson Tebbe, Introduction, in RELIGION AND EQUALITY LAW XX-XXi
(Nelson Tebbe ed.,  2013)  (providing  a conceptual overview  of religious  freedom and
equality law from an international perspective); Douglas Laycock, Religious Liberty and
the Culture Wars, 2014 U. ILL. L. REV. (forthcoming)  (discussing such conflicts in the
United  States  and  France);  Micah  Schwartzman  & Nelson  Tebbe,  Obamacare and
Religion and Arguing off the Wall, SLATE.COM (Nov. 25, 2013, 2:32 PM), http://www.slate
.com/articles/newsandpolitics/jurisprudence/2013/11/obamacarebirth_controlmandate
_lawsuit_how_a_radical-argument  went-mainstream.html.
2.  John D. Inazu, The Four Freedoms and the Future of Religious Liberty, 92 N.C. L.
REv. 787 (2014).
3.  Strong pluralism has predecessors. Koppelman points out that several prominent
scholars have argued for "an  absolute  right of noncommercial  associations to exclude
unwanted members." Andrew Koppelman, Should Noncommercial Associations Have an
Absolute Right to Discriminate?, LAW  & CONTEMP.  PROBS., Autumn 2004, at 27, 27-28
(including  in  this  group  David  Bernstein,  Dale  Carpenter,  Richard  Epstein,  John
McGinnis, Michael McConnell, Michael Paulsen, and Nancy Rosenblum).
4.  Inazu, supra note 2, at 848.
5.  Id. at 794.2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 919
applies not only when the government is acting as regulator, but also
when  it  functions  as  a funder  of general  programs.6  Furthermore,
protection extends not only to membership  and leadership decisions,
but also to employment determinations' and perhaps more broadly to
decisions  about  whether  to  serve  customers,  patients,  clients,  or
students.'  And it applies to associational decisions made on any basis,
including  race.9 Only three limitations  temper the proposal. It does
not  apply  to  government  entities,  to  commercial  concerns,  or  to
monopolistic  groups.o  Otherwise,  strong  pluralism  applies
categorically. For example, it would protect a golf club that wished to
discriminate  in  membership  and  even  in  employment  on  various
grounds,  including  race  and  religion,  as  long  as  the  club  was  not
monopolistic  in  the  relevant  sense.1  Both  membership  and
employment  could  conceivably  be  limited  to,  say,  men  or
nonminorities.  Strong  pluralism's  arguments  would  also  support
protection  for a  homeowners'  association  organized  as  a nonprofit
organization to control housing around the club.
A paradigm case for strong pluralism is ChristianL  egal Society v.
Martinez,12  where  the Supreme Court upheld Hastings Law School's
"all  comers"  policy  for  student  groups.  According  to  the  policy,
groups were required to welcome all students into their membership
and leadership if they wished to qualify for official recognition.14 The
Christian  Legal  Society ("CLS") applied  for recognition  despite its
policy of excluding  students  who failed to  adhere  to its theological
beliefs  on  sexual  morality.'"  Hastings  denied  recognition  to  CLS
6.  Id. at 794, 845-46.
7.  See, e.g., id. at 823 (applying strong pluralism to the employment case of Hosanna-
Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church & Sch. v. EEOC, 132 S.  Ct. 694 (2012)); id. at 825
(considering "whether a Catholic charity can refuse to hire a Muslim social worker").
8.  Whether  the proposal applies to restrictions on the people a group may serve-
customers, patients, students, or clients-is an interesting question not explicitly addressed
in Four Freedoms. The arguments for strong pluralism would suggest protection for this
kind of decision as well, at least in some circumstances.
9.  Inazu, supra note 2, at 794, 828-29.
10.  Id. at 828-29, 851 & n.308. The limitation on protection for "monopolistic"  groups
has been reworded and perhaps expanded in the Article, but it draws on earlier work that
uses the term. See id. at 851 & n.306 (citing JOHN D. INAZU,  LIBERTY'S REFUGE: THE
FORGOTTEN  FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY 166-75 (2012)). If this limitation is interpreted to
be robust, that would substantially narrow the differences between strong pluralism and
existing doctrine. However, Four Freedoms suggests a fairly circumscribed  interpretation.
For further discussion, see infra notes 101-06 and accompanying text.
11.  See Inazu, supra note 2, at 851 n.308 (discussing golf clubs).
12.  130 S. Ct. 2971 (2010).
13.  Id. at 2974.
14.  Id. at 2979.
15.  Id. at 2980.920 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
because the group barred students on the basis of religion and sexual
orientation.16  Strong  pluralism  opposes  the  holding  of  Martinez."
Disallowing  CLS  from  pursuing  its  expressive  and  associational
policies  flattens  social  diversity,  according  to  the  theory,  and  it
thereby harms freedom because it deprives students of robust choices
among groups that are truly distinctive.'"
In this Response, I raise four questions about Four Freedoms. All
of them go to the conceptual  underpinnings of the proposal, rather
than to the historical argument.
First and most simply, I  ask in Part I whether  strong pluralism
has good reasons to depart from a settlement that arguably has been
struck between associational  and equality interests in American  law
and  politics. That settlement  strikes  a provisional  balance  between
the value  of group  association, on  the  one  hand,  and  the value  of
freedom and equality for individual dissenters,  on the other. Both of
these values enjoy  national,  constitutional  status.  When  they  come
into conflict, for instance because groups seek to limit membership in
ways  recognized  as  discriminatory,  current  doctrine  officiates
between them depending on the social significance of the group. I will
describe this arrangement more fully in Part I, but the key points here
are  that  the  settlement  carries  democratic  authority,  because  it
reflects  and  shapes  national  conversations  and  conflicts,  and  that
strong  pluralism  reworks  that  settlement.  If  those  claims  are
convincing, then the question becomes whether there is a compelling
argument for shifting existing law, so that the terms of the settlement
are  more  favorable  to  civic  associations  and  less  favorable  to
dissenting individuals.
In  Part  II,  I  argue  that  it  is  possible  to  understand  strong
pluralism as a sorting approach. Theorists in public law recently have
argued  that both  rights  and  welfare  can be  supported  by  allowing
diversity of values among associations and localities.19  As long as exit
16.  Id.  ("CLS's  bylaws,  Hastings  explained,  did  not  comply  with  the
Nondiscrimination  Policy  because  CLS barred  students  based on  religion  and  sexual
orientation."). There is a factual dispute about whether Hastings really required groups to
accept everyone at the  relevant time,  or whether  it prohibited  discrimination  only on
certain grounds, including religion and sexual orientation. See id. at 2982 (describing the
dispute and concluding that the parties would be bound to their stipulation that Hastings
in fact  had  an "all  comers"  policy).  Because  strong pluralism  opposes  both sorts  of
policies, however, the factual controversy is immaterial here.
17.  Inazu, supra note 2, at 821-23.
18.  See,  e.g.,  id. at  796-97  (describing  the  benefits  of genuine  diversity  among
associations);  id. at  844-45  (arguing  for associational  diversity  in  the  context  of the
Martinez case).
19.  See infra notes 55-65.2014]1 FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 921
and  choice  are  preserved,  freedom  can  be  promoted  by  sorting
because  individuals  then may select  from a diversity of choices  the
social or political associations  that most closely match  their wishes.
Preferences  are revealed, and groups can become more responsive to
them. Strong  pluralism  has a  similar conceptual  structure,  I argue,
and it therefore can profit from sorting approaches. But this analogy
also raises  a  deep question that  all  such approaches  must face:  On
what  level of social organization  should American  constitutionalism
allow sorting among groups, and where should it impose smoothing
instead? A choice may well be necessary, because fostering sorting on
one  level  of society  or  commerce  will  often  entail  smoothing  on
another.  Perhaps,  for  example,  the  four  freedoms  would  best  be
vindicated  in Martinez if diversity  were  protected  on the university
level, so that students could select the school that best promoted their
preferred form of student life. Or perhaps cities and towns should be
able to set such policies for schools within their borders. Even state
government  could  conceivably  be  the right  organizational  level  on
which to promote sorting. Depending on how this conceptual issue is
resolved, the holding of Martinez itself could be compatible with the
very same commitments that drive strong pluralism.
In  Part  III,  I  raise  questions  about  strong  pluralism's  three
limitations.20  Strong  pluralism  mostly  gives  pragmatic  reasons  for
these limits,21 but that seems out of step with an ambitious theory that
refashions  doctrine  and  downplays  practical  obstacles  to  its  main
proposal. Its strength is its argument from principle, in other words,
not its pragmatic appeal. Given that orientation, it seems reasonable
to  press  for  a  defense  of  strong  pluralism's  boundaries  that  is
grounded  in legal  theory. Why  exactly  should  strong pluralism not
extend to commercial entities, to the many private organizations that
enjoy substantial  social power that falls short of a monopoly, and at
least  certain  government  institutions-especially  local  governments
and service providers like public schools, drug treatment centers, and
hospitals?
Finally, I ask in Part IV why strong pluralism applies in the same
way to generally available funding programs as to regulation. Existing
law  works  quite  differently  in  the  two  settings.22  Although  the
doctrine  is  convoluted,  individual  liberty  generally  garners  less
20.  Recall  that  Inazu's  proposal  does  not  protect  commercial  entities,  the
government, or monopolistic groups. See Inazu, supra note 2,  at 828-29,  851  & n.308
("Strong pluralism ... is limited to the voluntary associations of civil society.").
21.  Id. at 828-29 (describing these limits as setting out a "pragmatic middle ground").
22.  See infra Part IV.922 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
constitutional protection from defunding than from regulation, on the
theory  that  while  government  must  refrain  from  burdening  basic
freedoms,  it  need  not subsidize  them. That  distinction  goes  to the
basic  conceptual  structure  of  liberty  guarantees,  as  opposed  to
equality rights. So even if rights against regulation functioned in the
way  that  the  theory  proposes, would  that  mean  that  government
would retain little discretion to fund or otherwise support only those
activities  that are deemed  worthwhile by policymakers  operating in
ordinary politics?
What  unites these four  questions is a concern  over  the  proper
relationships  between individuals,  associations,  and the  government
in a constitutional  democracy, given the range of choices realistically
open to actors operating within contemporary American law, politics,
and society. Healthy subnational associations and cultures are crucial
for the full formation of individual citizens, but those individuals also
deserve  full and  equal membership  in the  political community  and
fair  opportunity in the economic  realm.  Strong pluralism addresses
both of those  concerns  with  power  and  sophistication.  Whether its
solution  is  the  most  principled  and  pragmatic  one  available  to
American  constitutional  actors  is  the  overarching  question  I  will
explore.
I. THE EXISTING SETTLEMENT
An implicit settlement  between individual and group rights can
be  discerned  within  contemporary  law  and  politics.  This  Part
describes that settlement and uses it as a baseline for comparison with
strong pluralism. Although demonstrating it is not possible within the
scope of this Response, I believe that the existing arrangement is the
product  of  historical  conversation  and  conflict  over  the  proper
balance  between  competing  American  values.23  Citizens have  faced
off against each other  in the context  of specific social  and political
clashes, which  have resulted  in commitments  and compromises  that
are  historically  contingent.  Because  that  process  is  ongoing,  the
settlement is never fully settled. Yet to the considerable degree  that
current law on associations is the product of public conversation and
conflict, it has  democratic  force, and to the  degree  that it involves
interpretations  of  the  First  and  Fourteenth  Amendments,  the
23.  Because my characterization of the settlement here has a historical dimension, my
omission of Inazu's own discussion of history is regrettable and perhaps a bit unfair. If I
were to support my view of the history, I would obviously have to confront Inazu's elegant
account, which is quite different from the one that I believe undergirds the law.2014]) FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 923
settlement has constitutional valence as well. My assertion then is that
the compromise I am describing in this Part has normative authority
because of its democratic and constitutional provenance.
I also hold the view that the settlement is somewhat supportable
by a political morality grounded in a commitment to the value of full
and equal citizenship in a free society. A full moral defense (one that
I do not have  the space to  offer here) would map only imperfectly
onto the existing arrangement, which to some degree captures only a
modus vivendi and not a  principled  arrangement.  Nevertheless,  my
sense is that its basic outlines are defensible in terms of basic political
morality.
People  who  do  not  share  these  two  intuitions-that  the
settlement carries democratic and constitutional authority, and that it
is  somewhat  defensible  as  a  matter  of  moral  theory-will  find
departures  from the settlement  less troubling.24  But people who are
inclined toward these two claims will be careful to note how often and
how far strong pluralism takes existing  law in a different  direction.
This Part lays out those departures.
What  is  the  content  of  this  evolving  settlement?  In order  to
answer  that  question,  it  helps  to  characterize  two  principal-and
competing-commitments  that  are  implicit  in its  structure. On  the
one hand, individual citizens have the right to form associations  with
one another, and, on the other hand, they have a right to equal public
status.25   Conflict  between  these  two  commitments  arises,
paradigmatically  although  not  exclusively,  when  groups  wish  to
exclude  or burden dissenters. Discrimination matters most where the
group  at issue  carries  social  power,  especially  in  situations  where
association  with  the  group  involves,  or  can  be  converted  into,
economic or political advantages. For example, powerful groups  can
apportion  prestige,  offer  networking  opportunities,  or  signal
desirability to employers  or voters.  Precise  rationales  for  resolving
conflicts  between  associational  and  egalitarian  interests  differ
depending  on  the  particular  setting-for  example,  employment
discrimination law stresses equality of opportunity while housing law
24.  Inazu  himself would not  be troubled,  and here  my  omission  of his historical
account has real costs. While he would not disagree that existing legal and constitutional
arrangements  are contingent,  he would  find  aspects  of the  current  settlement to  be
unfaithful to the best understanding of American traditions.
25.  For  specific  illustrations  of  these  interests  later  in  this Part,  see  infra text
accompanying notes 28-29 (on the right of intimate association), infra text accompanying
notes 34-37 (on equality rights in employment, public accommodations, and housing). For
a classic articulation of the basic tension, see William P. Marshall, Discriminationa nd the
Right of Association, 81 Nw. U. L. REV. 68,69-70 (1986).924 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
protects  against  geographic  exclusion-but,  stepping  back,  it  is
possible  to  identify  the general contours  of a  compromise  between
the interests  of individuals who wish  to associate with  one  another
and those who dissent or are excluded. This settlement is partly legal
and partly political, it is partly constitutional and partly statutory, and
it  is partly  federal  and  partly  local.  Despite  that diversity,  it  has a
recognizable shape.
In  its  implicit  conceptual  structure,  the  settlement  could  be
understood  to  embody  a  recognition  that protection  of  dissenters
becomes  more important  as  the group  increases in significance  (for
social standing, political membership,  and economic  participation).26
Notice here that interests on both sides of the settlement have liberty
and equality dimensions.27 Organizers of large groups have an interest
in associational freedom, plainly, but they also have an interest in not
being singled out for government  approbation  based on their views.
And individual  dissenters not  only have apparent equality interests,
but  they  also  have  an  interest  in  being  free  to associate  with  the
group.
Three  types  of  groups  or  associations  can  be  distinguished,
although  they  are  better conceptualized  along  a spectrum  than  in
categories.  Intimate  associations  and  small  groups,  first,  enjoy
substantial protection.28  Not only is  the government  not required  to
protect excluded individuals from discrimination by these groups, but
it  is  often  prohibited  from  doing  so.  For  example,  a  citizen  may
choose  his  or  her  spouse  for  reasons  that  would  be  strongly
prohibited  in other settings-he or she may act, for instance,  out of
racial bias or anti-Semitism.29  Group formation enjoys constitutional
protection also in  the family,  in schooling, and in cohabitation  with
relatives."  Constituting such groups has been removed from ordinary
26.  Cf. Roberts v. U.S. Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 620 (1984)  ("Between these poles [of
intimate associations  and large  business enterprises],  of course, lies a  broad range  of
human relationships  that may make greater or lesser claims to constitutional protection
from particular incursions by the State. Determining the limits of state authority over an
individual's freedom to enter into a particular association therefore unavoidably entails a
careful  assessment  of where  that relationship's objective  characteristics  locate it  on a
spectrum from the most intimate to the most attenuated of personal attachments.").
27.  For a discussion of the liberty and equality dimensions of free exercise rights, for
instance, see Nelson Tebbe, Excluding Religion, 156 U. PA. L. REV. 1263, 1267-68 (2008).
28.  See Roberts, 468 U.S. at 617-18.
29.  See id. at 619-20 (noting that the right of intimate association  protects "family
relationships" and citing marriage cases such as Zablocki v. Redhail, 434 U.S. 374 (1978)).
30.  See Bd. of Dirs. of Rotary Int'l v. Rotary Club of Duarte, 481 U.S. 537, 545 (1987)
(including as protected under the category of intimate associations decisions regarding
marriage, having children, raising and educating children, and cohabitating with relatives).2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 925
politics,  at  least  as  a  practical  matter,  and  that  understanding  is
entrenched nationwide.31
At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum,  groups  that  are  socially
significant  are  prohibited  from  discriminating  in  certain  ways  that
would  be  permitted  in  more  intimate  settings.32  A  reasonable
inference is that government initiatives, such as civil rights laws, may
restrict the ability of large organizations to associate not only because
individuals in them are not bound by the same intimate ties, but also
because those groups have significant power, such that membership in
them  can  influence  social  standing,  political  membership,  and
economic  participation.33  Organizations  like  these  are  impactful
allocators  of social capital,  and they are  subject  to regulation  when
they  engage  in  exclusionary  practices.'  Most  obviously,  large
employers may not take adverse action against workers on prohibited
grounds,"  and public accommodations  like restaurants  and theaters
31.  Protection for small groups can be seen not only or primarily in judicial decisions,
but also  in  statutory design  and  a range  of other  government  policies.  For example,
antidiscrimination  statutes often exempt small operations and private clubs. See, e.g.,  42
U.S.C. § 12111(5)(A),  (B) (2006) (providing that the Americans with Disabilities Act does
not apply to entities with fewer than fifteen employees and does not apply to "a bona fide
private membership  club"); id. § 2000e(b)  (providing  that Title VII does  not apply to
employers with fewer than fifteen employees and does not apply to "a bona fide private
membership club"); id. § 3607(a) (exempting from the Fair Housing Act "private  club[s]
not in fact open to the public" under certain circumstances). It would take further work to
demonstrate  that these  statutory  exemptions reflect  constitutional  understandings,  but
they form part of the existing settlement regardless.
32.  See Roberts, 468 U.S.  at 620 (noting that intimate associations do not include
"large business enterprise[s]").
33.  See id. at  624  (recognizing  the  state's  "historical  commitment  to eliminating
discrimination  and assuring  its  citizens  equal  access  to  publicly  available  goods  and
services"); id. at 626 (describing the importance of the Jaycees (a private organization) for
building leadership skills, extending business contacts, and gaining access to employment
opportunities). Although I am not emphasizing it here, the Court also stresses dignitary
harm  that  is  independent  of  equal  opportunity.  See  id.  at  625  (emphasizing  the
"deprivation  of personal dignity" and "stigmatizing injury" occasioned by discrimination
in public accommodations (internal quotation marks omitted)).
34.  See ROBERT D. PUTNAM,  BOWLING ALONE: THE COLLAPSE AND REVIVAL OF
AMERICAN COMMUNITY 18-24 (2000) (articulating a concept of social capital); cf. Simon
Szreter & Michael Woolcock, Health by Association? Social Capital, Social Theory, and
the Political Economy of Public Health, 33 INT'L J. OF EPIDEMIOLOGY 650, 656 (2004)
(distinguishing between forms of social capital that cross social hierarchies and those that
do not, and setting out a role for the state in building up the former). See generally Sidney
Tarrow, Making Social Science Work Across Space and Time: A  Critical Reflection on
Robert Putnam's Making Democracy Work, 90 AM. POL. SCI. REV. 389 (1996)  (arguing
that social disintegration is due partly to structural inequalities and not simply to a decline
of social capital).
35.  See, e.g.,  § 2000e-2(a). The  federal  statutes  referred  to in  this  paragraph  are
supplemented by important state and local antidiscrimination laws.926 NORTH CAROLINA  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
may not exclude people  for discriminatory  reasons.  Landlords  and
lenders  are  subject to similar  restrictions,"  and  so forth.  Across  a
variety  of  contexts,  groups  of  substantial  social  significance  are
limited  in  their  ability  to  associate,  and  individual  dissenters  are
protected. This aspect of the settlement reaches  not just commercial
entities, but nonprofits as well."
Some of these  large groups are state  entities, and against them
individuals  have  rights  that  are  constitutional  in  a  straightforward
way.  But  oftentimes  the  entities  are  not  affiliated  with  the
government in any strong sense. Even so, they can be prohibited from
discriminating by statutory law that may be federal, state, or local.39
Much of this legislation is so basic to American arrangements that we
take it  to be fixed. That is  true, for example,  of antidiscrimination
statutes in the areas of employment, housing, lending, and the like.40
Given  the  practical  entrenchment  of  antidiscrimination  law  for
socially significant  entities,  it  is not outlandish  to say  that equality
rules on this end of the spectrum are required of the government.
In the middle of these two poles fall groups with respect to which
government  is  neither  prohibited  nor  required  to  enact
antidiscrimination measures. State and local lawmakers have applied
antidiscrimination  law  to  such associations  in  various  ways  and  to
various  degrees.41 Prominent  examples  of  organizations  that  still
36.  Id. § 2000a(a)-(b)  (prohibiting "discrimination or segregation in places of public
accommodation").
37.  Id.  § 3604  (prohibiting  discrimination  in  the  sale  and  rental  of  residential
properties under the Fair Housing Act); id. § 3605(a)-(b)  (prohibiting discrimination in
residential loans).
38.  See, e.g., id. § 2000e(b) (exempting only "bona fide private membership club[s]"
from Title VII's prohibitions on employment discrimination but not all entities that qualify
as nonprofits for tax purposes); see also Quijano v. Univ. Fed. Credit Union, 617 F.2d 129,
131-33  (5th Cir. 1980)  (holding that  the term "bona  fide private membership club"  is
narrower than the category of all nonprofit entities).
39.  See, e.g., Roberts v. U.S. Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 615 (1984) (considering application
of the  Minnesota  Human  Rights Act to the  Jaycees, a private  organization).  Racially
restrictive  covenants  for  home  ownership  are  prohibited  by  constitutional  law, even
though the primary actors are private, Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1, 1 (1948), but that
rule is exceptional as a doctrinal matter.
40.  Some  have  concluded  that  law  in  this domain  actually  has  a  constitutional
character, despite its location in statutes, but that argument is not critically important here.
See William N. Eskridge, Jr. & John Ferejohn, Super-Statutes, 50 DUKE L.J. 1215, 1237-42
(2001) (construing the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which concerns public accommodations
and employment, as a "super-statute").
41.  See, e.g.,  CAL. CIV. CODE § 51 (West Supp. 2013) ("All persons ...  are free and
equal, and  no  matter  what  their  sex, race,  color,  religion,  ancestry,  national  origin,
disability, medical  condition, genetic  information,  marital status, or  sexual orientation
condition  are  entitled  to the  full  and  equal  accommodations,  advantages,  facilities,2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 927
openly discriminate can  be found even in jurisdictions that generally
have protective civil rights regimes. The Racquet and Tennis Club on
Park Avenue  in New York City, for example,  still excludes women
from membership.42  Other jurisdictions  are even more permissive  of
such groups, of course, and some are less.43 Underlying the discretion
that  governments  enjoy  in  this  middle  range  may  be  an  implicit
recognition that it can be difficult to balance conflicting commitments
to  the  rights  of group  members  and  dissenters  when  the  affected
entities fall somewhere between intimate groups and groups that are
obviously  public  accommodations.'  Governments  have  greater
leeway on such questions, particularly on the state and local levels.
This overview reconstructs the basic principles implicit in judicial
doctrine and statutory  law, and it makes it possible  to see how that
law negotiates basic commitments that are constitutive  of American
arrangements  in  this  area.  Importantly,  the  settlement  I  have
described can be understood not just as the product of brute political
conflict and compromise, though it certainly is that in part, but also
the result  of  a  national  conversation,  conducted  in  the  context  of
particular historical developments, about the proper balance between
associational  and  equality  interests-a  conversation  that  has  both
political and constitutional dimensions.
Strong pluralism  shifts  this settlement  in  favor  of associations.
Individual  dissenters  must  yield  to  the  group,  with  less regard  for
whether the  group is socially  significant.45  (Again,  strong pluralism
recognizes important exceptions, which are addressed  below in Part
III.) So, again, golf clubs  might  well be able  to discriminate  on the
basis  of race,  religion,  or  gender-they  would  be  constitutionally
privileges or services  in all business establishments of every kind whatsoever.");  CONN.
GEN. STAT. ANN.  § 52-571d (West Supp. 2012) (prohibiting golf clubs from discriminating
even in membership on the grounds of "race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex,
gender  identity  or  expression,  marital  status  or  sexual  orientation,"  under  certain
conditions).
42.  See  Amy Zimmer, Men-Only  Clubs in  NYC:  After Augusta National Allows
Women, Will Big Apple Clubs Follow Suit?, HUFFINGTON POST (Aug. 21, 2012, 1:04 PM),
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/08/21/augusta-national-now-accepts-women-all-male-
nyc-clubs n_1818998.html; see also N.Y. CITY ADMIN. CODE § 8-102 (1986)  ("The term
'place or provider of public accommodation'  ...shall not include any club which proves
that it  is in  its  nature  distinctly  private. A club  shall not be  considered in its  nature
distinctly private if it has more than four hundred members, provides regular meal service
and regularly receives payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, meals or
beverages directly or indirectly from or on behalf of non-members for the furtherance of
trade or business.").
43.  See supra note 41 (citing examples of state prohibitions on discrimination).
44.  But see infra Part II for an alternative explanation based on sorting theory.
45.  See Inazu, supra note 2, at 794, 828-29 (describing the proposal).928 NORTH CAROLINA  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
protected  from  antidiscrimination  laws  in  membership  and  even
employment-as  long  as  they did  not  exercise  monopolistic  social
power.46 Nonprofit hospitals, regardless of their size, would be able to
take  employment  actions  on  grounds  that are  today  prohibited  as
discriminatory,  as  long  as  the  hospitals  did  not  qualify  as
monopolistic. Conceivably, even bar associations  could return to the
age of exclusion.47
If the settlement I have described deserves  any normative force,
perhaps  as  a  consequence  of  its  democratic  or  constitutional
character, then departures from it require justification. Putting to one
side history as an  independent  rationale,  as  I am  doing here  (with
some regret), two main reasons emerge for adopting strong pluralism.
First,  there  is  the  concern  that  modern  civil  rights  laws  are  so
widespread  and powerful that they will  flatten civic diversity so that
individuals  will be deprived  of robust choice.48  This is an important
theme in Four Freedoms, and it rightly emphasizes the importance of
civil  society to  American  conceptions  of democracy.49  The  danger,
however, is that this concern may discount too steeply the other side
of the  existing  compromise-the  interests  of  dissenting  individuals
within or excluded by such groups. Harms to such individuals can be
serious, according to the settlement's implicit values, especially when
the groups  control access  to important  social, political, or economic
resources such as professional networking or employment."o
Second, there is an argument that civic associations  with strong
independence  from the state are necessary for healthy formation  of
the identities and beliefs of individual citizens, who are in turn crucial
to  debate  and  difference  in  a  democracy."  Again,  that  value  is
46.  See supra note 10 and accompanying text.
47.  In another work, Inazu expresses some doubt about whether his theory applies to
professional associations, along with political parties and labor unions. See INAZU,  supra
note 10, at 16.
48.  See Inazu, supra note  2, at  797-98 & n.34 (describing  the benefits of genuine
diversity  among  associations  and  citing  Michael  W.  McConnell,  The  New
Establishmentarianism, 75  CHI.-KENT  L.  REV.  453,  466  (2000)  ("Genuine  pluralism
requires group difference, and maintenance of group difference requires that groups have
the  freedom  to  exclude."));  cf  Roberts  v. U.S.  Jaycees,  468  U.S.  609,  622  (1984)
("According  protection  to  collective  effort  on  behalf  of  shared  goals  is  especially
important  in  preserving  political  and  cultural  diversity  and  in  shielding  dissident
expression from suppression by the majority.").
49.  See Inazu, supra note  2, at 788 (describing  the four freedoms protection of "a
pluralistic civil society that tolerated genuine disagreement").
50.  Inazu makes some room for this concern with his anti-monopolistic principle. See
infra notes 101-02 and accompanying text.
51.  Cf Inazu, supra note 2, at 790 (noting the "culture-forming" function of groups in
civil society); see also Roberts, 468 U.S.  at 619 ("Protecting  [intimate] relationships from2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 929
critical.52 Will formation, however, can and does have multiple inputs,
of which  voluntary  associations  form  only  one.  Family  and  other
intimate communities are primary sites for inculcation of norms, and
that  is  part  of the  reason  that they  are  constitutionally  protected
against legal flattening.53  Government  too can have an influence  on
will  formation,  for  example,  by  expressing  and  inculcating  the
importance  of  equal  citizenship,  among  other  values.  Moreover,
official  involvement  works  only  within  its jurisdiction.  As  I  noted
earlier  in  this  Part,  subnational  governments  are  given  significant
latitude  over  whether  and  how  to  implement  antidiscrimination
norms  when  it  comes  to  civic  associations  of  moderate  size  and
significance.54  That  discretion  creates  diversity  of  a  different  sort:
local and regional.
Given the multiplicity of inputs into the formation of individual
identity and belief, strong  pluralism requires a theory for why civic
organizations  ought  to be  privileged over  intimate  associations  and
political bodies.  Why should  civil society have  a disproportionate-
and constitutionally  mandated-influence  on the social construction
of individual citizens?
This second argument, about will formation, raises an issue with
additional  ramifications,  namely  how  divergent  levels  of  social
organization  interact  in  strong  pluralism.  Given  the  indisputable
value  of  diversity  and  choice,  how  do  we  fix  the  level  of  social
organization  on which to pursue those values? The next Part pursues
that question from the perspective  of theories that focus on exit and
sorting.
II. STRONG PLURALISM AS A SORTING THEORY
One  way  to  think  about  strong  pluralism  is  as  a  pro-sorting
principle. This theoretical  frame  offers a way to think about  strong
pluralism's  benefits  using  a  free  market  analogy,  but it  also  poses
difficulties that require further argument if they are to be overcome.
One of these is the challenge of specifying the proper level of analytic
unwarranted  state interference therefore  safeguards the ability independently  to define
one's identity that is central to any concept of liberty.").
52.  See Seana Valentine Shiffrin, What is Really Wrong with Compelled Association?,
99 Nw. U. L. REv. 839, 873-76 (2005)  (defending a limited right to exclude based on the
value of associations for the formation of beliefs).
53.  I am putting to one side child raising and public education of minors, which raise
complicated  questions  not addressed  directly by  Four Freedoms. Even among  adults,
intimate associations acculturate.
54.  See supra text accompanying notes 41-44.930 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
generalization  or  social  organization  on  which  to  implement  the
proposal.
Sorting  theories  take  their impetus  from  the  work  of  Charles
Tiebout.5  He  and  his  followers developed  a model  that  found  an
early  application  to  local  governments,  although  its  implications
extended much more broadly.  According to the model, it may make
sense to allow  towns  and cities  to offer  diverse  levels  and types  of
taxation and services."  That diversity allows individuals to choose the
municipality  with  the  policies  that  best  match  their  preferences.57
Government will be made more responsive to citizens on this model,
and overall welfare will be increased. For example, towns might elect
to deemphasize  education and lower  taxes, attracting  residents who
do  not  have  children  or  who  prefer  private  schooling.  Moreover,
policymaking without attention to population migration may not be
able to accurately gauge preferences based solely on citizen voting or
voice."  Of  course,  the  model  relies  on  robust  assumptions:  that
citizens have full information  about the mix of taxation and services
that governments  are actually  offering,  that they are fully able  and
willing to move to a community that best matches their preferred mix
of taxation and services, and that a town's decisions in this regard do
not impact neighboring jurisdictions."
Law scholars have long appreciated the explanatory power of the
Tiebout model in the areas of property  and land use, but they have
also  explored  its  utility  in  other  areas  of  public  law,  such  as
federalism,'  nonestablishment,61   immigration,62   and  general
55.  See Charles M. Tiebout, A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures, 64 J. POL. ECON.
416, 416 (1956)  (setting  forth a model  that "yields  a solution for  the level  of public
expenditures for local public goods which reflects the preferences of the population more
adequately than they can be reflected at the national level"); see also Christopher Serkin,
Big Differences for Small Governments: Local Governments and the Takings Clause, 81
N.Y.U.  L. REV. 1624,  1658-59  (2006)  (citing  sources  developing  the Tiebout  model).
Another  important influence  on  sorting theories is  ALBERT 0.  HISRSCHMAN,  EXIT,
VOICE, AND LOYALTY (1970).
56.  See Tiebout, supra note 55, at 422.
57.  See id.
58.  See id. at 423. Revealing citizen preferences through migration turned out to be "a
big selling point for the model." Adam M. Samaha, Endorsement Retires: From Religious
Symbols to Anti-Sorting Principles,2 005 SuP. CT. REV. 135, 151.
59.  See Tiebout, supra note 55, at 419.
60.  See,  e.g.,  Adam  B.  Cox  &  Adam  M.  Samaha,  Unconstitutional Conditions
Questions Everywhere: The Implications of Exit and Sorting for Constitutional Law and
Theory, 5 J. LEGAL ANALYSIS 61, 84 (2013).
61.  See, e.g., Samaha, supra note 58, at 135. For a different approach to local authority
over religious freedom, see generally Richard C. Schragger, The Role of the Local in the
Doctrine and Discourseo  f Religious Liberty, 117 HARv. L. REv. 1810 (2004).2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 931
constitutional  law."  This  work  has  applied  the  model  not just  in
contexts  of geographical  diversity, where citizens may  express their
preferences by relocating, but also in broader situations where people
face  choices  among  employers,  health  providers,  educational
institutions, and so forth.'  Governments offer optional benefits in a
range of contexts, and they commonly package  those programs with
costs or conditions. Citizens then may select among combinations  of
benefits and obligations. In theory, offering a diversity of goods and
attendant duties has the potential to better match government action
with citizen preferences  across a wide range of institutional contexts.
Again,  this  assumes  choices  that  are  real,  and  it  assumes  good
information along with the cognitive and material resources to act on
it.65
Legal theorists have also explored the dangers of sorting and the
places  where  it  consequently  should  be  subject  to  government
regulation. In particular, sorting raises the specter of homogeneity.66
In  the  context of geographic  migration,  homogeneity  can begin  to
track political boundaries, raising a set of concerns about undesirable
forms  of self-segregation.67  Another  challenge  is  that  jurisdictions
may  adopt  policies  without  reflection  or  debate,  so  that
responsiveness  to  policy  preferences  is  apparent  only.68  Negative
externalities  and  spillover  effects  also  must  be  policed  so  that
responsiveness  in  one  community  does  not  impose  costs  on
neighboring  polities.69   Finally,  market-based  approaches  to
government  policymaking  can  have  unfair  distributional  effects  on
62.  See, e.g., Cox & Samaha, supra note 60, at 84 (citing sources).
63.  See, e.g., Daryl J. Levinson, Rights and Votes, 121 YALE L.J. 1286, 1355-61 (2012).
64.  See, e.g., Cox & Samaha, supra note 60, at 81-82 (defining sorting broadly).
65.  Id. at 89.
66.  Id. at 86; Samaha, supra note 58, at 171.
67.  See Gerald E. Frug, City Services, 73 N.Y.U.  L. REv. 23, 28-29 (1998)  ("Tiebout
... assumes that a city is similar to a voluntary association, such as a political organization,
church, or chat group. People are seen as choosing a city the way they choose a country
club: what attracts them is the fact that they share interests in common with others making
the same choice. Indeed, this homogeneity is said to promote efficiency..  .
68.  See Cox & Samaha, supra note 60, at 86.
69.  Cox and Samaha issue several warnings: (1) sorting should involve choices that are
"meaningful  and  beneficial";  (2)  exit  rights  should  be  accompanied  by  entry  rights
elsewhere for true sorting to be obtained; (3) people can be limited in their ability to exit
and sort by poor information, judgment, and resources;  (4) coordination  problems can
yield situations where failure to engage with difference results in anemic choice; and (5)
both positive and negative externalities must be managed. Id. at 87-90. They also allow for
side constraints in the form of universal human rights-interestingly here, including the
right to association. Id. at 91.932 NORTH CAROLINA LAW  REVIEW [Vol. 92
poor and otherwise disadvantaged citizens.70  Once these dangers are
appreciated,  interesting  questions arise concerning  when pro-sorting
measures  should  be  preferred  to  anti-sorting  (or  smoothing)
measures. Oftentimes  the tradeoffs are difficult  to evaluate, but they
are present regardless.
Work on sorting has long recognized,  although it has not often
emphasized,  that  the  model  also  applies  to  situations  of  sorting
among  private actors,  including  associations."  When  government
policy affects such sorting, many similar options are open to officials
with analogous benefits and dangers.
On  the  benefits  side,  allowing  diversity  among  civic
organizations,  including  in  their  membership  policies,  permits
associations to express and implement ideas that give them character.
In particular, they  are not  forced to conform  to egalitarian  notions
favored by the state. That then provides individuals greater freedom
of choice  and  enables better  matches  between  personal  and group
ideologies.  Not  only  do  potential  members  benefit from  enhanced
pluralism,  but  so do existing  ones  who may  wish  to  exercise  their
option to exit.
Strong  pluralism  also presents an argument  for exit  and choice
that  is  not  foregrounded  in  the  sorting  literature,  namely  that  it
fosters groups that have a stronger identity and, therefore, are able to
engage  in  more  robust  and  effective  will  formation.  That, in  turn,
enriches  a  democratic  polity  that  now  includes  a wider  and  more
passionate range of divergent perspectives.
On the cost side, private  groups can promote sorting in a much
starker way than governmental  entities-they can engage in outright
exclusion. For example, when  a town offers a distinct mix of services
and taxes, that decision affects incentives,  but it does not involve an
outright ban  on relocation.72  And the point applies more  generally,
outside  of  political  jurisdictions,  to  government  benefits  and
70.  See Frug, supra note 67, at 31  (arguing  that the consumer-oriented vision of city
services  "has  a  built  in  bias  in  favor  of  the  rich");  Richard  Schragger,  Consuming
Government, 101 MICH. L. REV. 1824, 1826 (2003)  (critiquing the Tiebout  approach to
local government, partly because of its effects on "[t]he losers in the interlocal competition
for  low-cost, high-tax-base homeowners-the  urban  poor, racial minorities, families in
search of affordable housing, [and] the elderly").
71.  In fact, the Tiebout model for local government was partly built on an analogy to
voluntary associations. See Frug, supra note 67, at 28-29.
72.  Cf Shapiro  v. Thompson, 394 U.S.  618, 629-31  (1969) (articulating  a right to
travel in the context of relocation from one state to another by indigent citizens). But see
Frug, supra note 67, at 27 (discussing exclusionary zoning and "fiscal  zoning"); Schragger,
supra note 70, at 1828 (same).2014]1 FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 933
programs.  Although  policymakers  can  place  conditions  on  those
programs  that  impose  strenuous  incentives,  they  generally  are  not
permitted  to  coerce  protected  choices.73  Private  associations,  by
contrast, may flatly exclude.74  Voluntary associations  are allowed  to
reject  members  or  deem  them  ineligible  for  full  membership  or
leadership positions.
Now of course  vigorous sorting can happen  even without clear
membership rules because groups have  other ways of signaling that
some  people  are  unwelcome.75  Still,  sorting  by  actual  exclusion  is
stronger  than what Tiebout  enthusiasts  usually have  in mind  when
they promote  policies  that allow people  to choose  the regimes  that
best serve their interests and ideas. Exit is voluntary in the Tiebout
model, and subsequent choice is not constricted by barriers to entry.76
In  sum,  strong  pluralism  is  strong  indeed-it  represents  a
particularly robust form of sorting in at least two ways. First, it does
not just allow groups to express ideals and interests in ways that allow
individuals  to affiliate with groups they favor, but it allows  them to
erect outright bans. Second, strong pluralism imposes few limits-it is
tempered  by  little in the way of smoothing or anti-sorting. Existing
law recognizes dangers in overly aggressive self-selection with respect
to  non-intimate  associations,  as  I  described  in  Part  I,  but  strong
pluralism would permit and even encourage substantial homogeneity
within civic associations,  including ones that are  large or significant,
so long as they are not commercial entities and so long as they do not
exercise monopoly power, defined in a particular way.
So far, nothing I have said in this Part should be objectionable  to
proponents  of  strong  pluralism.  Yet  the  comparison  to  Tiebout
suggests  that  they  must  face  a  question  that  attends  all  forms  of
sorting  models:  On  what  level  of analytic  generalization  or  social
organization  ought  government  promote  sorting?  After  all,  the
73.  See Shapiro, 394 U.S. at 631 ("If a law has no other purpose ... than to chill the
assertion of constitutional rights by penalizing those who choose to exercise them, then it
[is] patently unconstitutional." (alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
74.  See Roberts v. U.S. Jaycees, 468 U.S.  609, 623 (1984)  ("There can be no clearer
example of an intrusion into  the internal structure or affairs of an  association  than  a
regulation  that forces the group to accept members it does not desire ....  Freedom of
association therefore plainly presupposes a freedom not to associate.").
75.  See Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Information Asymmetries and the Rights to Exclude,
104 MICH. L. REV. 1835, 1837, 1850-57 (2006) (describing the role of "exclusionary vibes,"
chiefly in the property setting).
76.  See Tiebout, supra note 55, at 419 (assuming full mobility).
77.  For more discussion on these limits see infra Part III.934 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
benefits of diversity and individual choice could attach at any number
of levels."
To  see  the  difficulty,  recall  the  example  of  Christian Legal
Society v. Martinez. Strong pluralism  takes this  as a paradigm  case
and argues for allowing CLS to exclude  from both membership  and
leadership  positions  students  who  do  not  agree  with  the
organization's  theological  principles,  including  its teachings  against
homosexual conduct.79  It argues that pluralism in civic society would
thereby be preserved."
But  another  possibility  would  be  to  work  toward  those  same
benefits, only at the  level of the university rather than  the student
club. That way, universities could choose to implement either strong
pluralism  or  a  civil  rights  approach,  and  students  could  select  the
university that best matched  their predilections.  Those interested in
CLS-a nationwide  student organization-could  choose a campus on
which the organization was allowed to restrict its membership, while
students who cared more about gay and lesbian rights could choose a
school  with  an  "all  comers"  policy. That  would promote  pluralism
and diversity, only at the university level rather than the level of the
student  organization."  Would  not  that  approach  vindicate  strong
pluralism?
Understanding  strong  pluralism  as  a  sorting theory thus raises
the question of how to choose the relevant level of analytic generality
or social organization, and it shows that conclusions about core cases
could  turn  on the answer.  Thinking  about  levels  of generality  also
reveals  a  feature  of  strong  pluralism  that  could  otherwise  be
overlooked:  while it promotes  sorting and pluralism  on one level, it
imposes  smoothing  or  flattening  on  others. For  example,  if  strong
pluralism  were  adopted  and  Martinez  were  reversed,  student
organizations  at  Hastings  Law  School  might  well  become  more
distinct from one another. But universities would become less diverse
78.  On the  related question of  levels of government and the Tiebout  model, see
Serkin, supra note 55, at 1661-67.
79.  Cf Christian Legal Soc'y v. Martinez, 130 S. Ct. 2971, 2980-81 (2010) (explaining
CLS's membership policy and the school's decision to deny it official status because of that
policy).
80.  See Inazu, supra note 2, at 822-23.
81.  Spillover effects might increase diversity on the university level. Universities that
make  no change in their policies-that decline to adopt a new "all comers"  policy, for
instance-may experience an influx of students who wish to form CLS chapters and other
organizations  that are  not  open  to  everyone.  All  schools  could  thereby  be  affected.
Interestingly, diversification at the university level could make exclusionary membership
rules by groups like CLS less necessary at any one school.2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 935
because none  of them could offer an "all  comers" policy that would
suit  egalitarian  students.'  And,  moving  the  other  way  on  the
spectrum  of  generality,  membership  within  student  organizations
would  become  less diverse  (because  that, of course,  is  the point  of
exclusionary membership policies).  Therefore,  strong pluralism  may
promote  pluralism  on certain  levels  of social  organization,  but it is
potentially homogenizing on others.
Now, an objection might be that Hastings is a state school and
therefore  bound  to  respect  the  membership  policies  of  student
organizations  in  a  way  that  a  private  university  is  not.  Yet  a
categorical  distinction  between  public  and  private  is  difficult  to
defend  using the  arguments  for  strong  pluralism,  as  I  will  explain
more  fully  in  Part  III.  Drawing  the  line  at  public  entities  is
particularly  puzzling  in  the  context  of  sorting  theory,  since  the
Tiebout model was specifically formulated with local governments  in
mind, along with nongovernmental actors."
In fact, thinking beyond universities suggests broad applications
of  sorting  models to  associational  life.  To  continue  with  the  CLS
example,  it would be  possible to  promote  selection  not just among
universities, but among the towns or cities whose laws regulate them.
College  applicants  could  choose  a  school  in  a  town  whose  legal
atmosphere promoted the student life they preferred. Perhaps  more
realistically, a state legislature could seek to dictate antidiscrimination
laws for public and private universities within its borders. That could
send an even clearer  signal to potential students-they  would know
that  all  the  universities  in  a  particular  state  featured
antidiscrimination rules for student groups, while  schools in another
state allowed greater leeway for CLS and other groups that wished to
limit membership  in  certain  ways.'  That  possibility  is  not entirely
fanciful.  After  Vanderbilt  University  began  to  enforce  an  "all
comers"  rule, the Tennessee legislature passed a bill that would have
82.  Cf. Koppelman, supra note 3, at 53 (arguing that Boy Scouts of America v. Dale,
530 U.S.  640 (2000), actually "induced  uniformity" because  states could not thereafter
choose whether to allow the Boy Scouts to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation).
83.  See Tiebout, supra note 55, at 416 (providing a model unaer which "market-type"
solutions exist for the provision of goods by local governments).
84.  But see Serkin, supra note 55, at 1662-64 (providing reasons why sorting may not
work as effectively on the state level, including the costs of relocating  to another state
(though Serkin is focused on homeowners rather than students), more intense interest-
group  dynamics  that prevent  state legislatures  from  responding  as effectively  to the
revealed  preferences  of  citizens,  and  the  prevalence  at  the  state  level  of  agency
policymaking, which is more insulated from public preferences, compared  to legislative
action).936 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
protected  religious  student  groups, had  it  not  been  vetoed  by  the
governor.  Conceivably,  state  and local governments could become
increasingly  interested  in  determining  university  policy  on  such
matters.
In sum, selecting the right level of social organization on which to
promote  ideological diversity  is a  serious issue for strong pluralism.
Even the policy upheld  in Martinez itself could be supported  by the
very arguments that the proposal features, if they are located  on the
level  of  the  university  rather  than  on  the  level  of  student
organizations. Strong pluralism needs a theory for choosing the level
of analytic generality  or social  organization  on which  constitutional
law should fix the benefits of pluralism and diversity. Without such a
theory, the proposal could miss even its central targets.
III.  STRONG PLURALISM'S LIMITS
Strong pluralism articulates three limits: it has no application to
commercial  entities,"  to  monopolistic  groups,87  or  to  the
government."  Questions surround each of these, and those questions
are  united  by  a  concern  over  whether  the  limits are  grounded  in
arguments  from principle. Pragmatism  alone may not be enough to
support  them,  especially  given  that  strong  pluralism  generally
emphasizes  principled  reasons  for  its  interpretation  of  the  four
freedoms and downplays practical barriers.
A.  Commercial Entities
When  Four Freedoms uses  the  term "commercial  groups,"  it
seems  to mean profit-seeking  businesses."  By  excluding  only  those
groups from its scope, strong pluralism suggests  that it applies to all
nonprofit organizations.90  That category includes the student groups,
85.  Michael  Gryboski,  Tenn.  Governor Vetoes  Bill  Challenging Vanderbilt's All-
Corners Policy, CHRISTIAN POST (May 23, 2012, 5:07 PM), http://www.christianpost.com
/news/tenn-governor-vetoes-bill-challenging-vanderbilts-all-comers-policy-75443/.  I thank
Jacob Levy for bringing this example to my attention.
86.  Inazu, supra note 2, at 794.
87.  See id. at 828-29, 851 & n.308.
88.  Id. at 828-29.
89.  See, e.g., id. (using the term "commercial group").
90.  See id. at 829 & n.206. A possible reading is that noncommercial  does not mean
the same thing as nonprofit. But that opens up questions about what it does mean. From
the examples given, it seems it cannot exclude all entities that provide employment, or
housing,  or  social  services  for  a  fee.  For  instance,  Inazu  relies  on  Hosanna-Tabor
Evangelical Lutheran Church & School v. EEOC for support, implying that a school run
by  a religious organization  counts  as noncommercial  for purposes of the theory, even
though it charges tuition, employs teachers and a staff, and the like. Id. at 824-25 (arguing2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 937
churches, and civic associations that are the primary concerns of the
proposal.  But it  also  seems  to  include  nonprofit  hospitals,  social
service  organizations,  universities,  labor  unions,  homeowners'
associations,  political  parties,  an d  perhaps  professional
organizations.91 Potentially,  the  types  and  numbers  of  entities  are
large.
So  are the  organizations  themselves,  in many  cases. Nonprofit
hospitals can have thousands of employees, serve numerous patients,
and  boast  large  operating  budgets.  Much  the  same  is  true  of
universities  and  labor  unions.  Conversely,  many  profit-seeking
organizations are rather small endeavors involving only a few people.
What  justifies  drawing  the  line  here  for  the  purposes  of  strong
pluralism?
One  possibility,  of  course,  is  that  the  harm  to  individual
customers  or employees  is potentially  much greater when powerful
entities are involved. But nonprofit entities can be powerful in some
of the same ways. Think first of employees. Workers can be affected
in a  dramatic  way  by  exclusionary  hiring  practices,  particularly  if
those practices become widespread  in a society, even if an employer
does not monopolize the relevant labor market. Health care workers
often are employed by  nonprofit hospitals and  clinics,  for example,
and teachers customarily work for nonprofit schools and universities.
Equality of opportunity is one  concern behind the current  doctrinal
settlement  between  associational  and  equality  interests  that  I
described  in  Part  I.  And  opportunity  can  be  dampened  by  large
nonprofit  employers, particularly  in regions  where  they  comprise a
significant part of the local workforce.
Moreover,  the  power  of nonprofit  entities  extends  far beyond
employment.  Think  next  of  housing,  and  in  particular  of
homeowners'  associations,  which  are  typically  set  up  as  nonprofit
that "free exercise and association rights ... should have protected the church"). In fact,
the  case  concerned  employment  discrimination  specifically.  See  Hosanna-Tabor
Evangelical Lutheran Church & Sch. v. EEOC, 132 S. Ct. 694, 694 (2012). Similarly, the
school at issue in Runyon v. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160 (1976), is noncommercial for purposes
of the theory, despite the fact that it charges tuition and employs teachers. Inazu, supra
note 2, at 838-39 & n.251 (discussing  Runyon). Golf clubs are noncommercial  too, even
though they charge for services and employ people. See id. at 851 & n.308. What about
homeowners'  associations that are set up around many golf clubs and are organized  as
nonprofit corporations?  Or associations for lawyers and other professionals? As long as
some of these organizations  are included, the concerns  articulated in this Section  have
traction.
91.  On bar associations, see Inazu, supra note 2, at 829 n.207 (expressing doubts).938 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
entities.'  Much housing in the United States is organized under such
associations,93  and  nothing  in  Four Freedoms prohibits  them  from
setting  up  restrictive  policies.  Put  simply,  the  harms  of  strong
pluralism grow potentially more concerning as the significance  of the
association  increases,  and  that  is  true  of  for-profit  and  nonprofit
entities alike.
Another  possible  justification  for  limiting  strong  pluralism  to
nonprofits is that commercial concerns are less apt to be expressive or
ideological  in  nature.  Hospitals  and  universities  are  organized  as
nonprofits  presumably  because  they  seek  objectives  other  than
increasing  the wealth  of the  organization  and  its constituents.  Yet
even if this is true in general, it surely is not true in every particular.
As we have been reminded from the recent litigation over the Obama
Administration's  contraception  mandate,  many  profit-seeking
corporations have moral objectives as well.94 And that is true not just
of firms  run  or owned  by  religious  people,  but  also  of companies
dedicated to environmental  or social justice concerns such as Ben &
Jerry's and Whole Foods.95 Conversely, homeowners'  associations are
not typically ideological, even if they are not concerned with profits."
92.  See 26 U.S.C.  § 528  (2012)  (exempting  certain homeowners'  associations from
taxation); Robert C. Ellickson, A Reply to Michelman and Frug, 130 U. PA. L. REV. 1602,
1604 n.5 (1982) ("[H]omeowners associations are typically nonprofit organizations.").
93.  As  of  2012,  about  thirty-one  million  Americans  were  estimated  to  live  in
homeowners'  associations. Industry Data, CMTY. ASS'N INST.,  http://www.caionline.org
/info/research/Pages/default.aspx  (last  visited  Feb. 25, 2014); see also Evan  McKenzie,
Common-Interest Housing in the Communities of Tomorrow, 14 HOUSING POL'Y DEBATE
203, 203-04  (2003)  (describing  the  prevalence  and  rise  of common-interest  housing
developments, a term that includes homeowners' associations).
94.  Cf. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. v. Sebelius, 723 F.3d 1114, 1116 (10th Cir. 2013) (en
banc) (holding that corporations are capable of enjoying free exercise rights), cert. granted,
134 S. Ct. 678 (2013);  Conestoga Wood Specialties  Corp. v. Sec'y of the U.S.  Dept. of
Health and Human  Servs.,  724 F.3d  377, 381  (3d Cir. 2013)  (holding that "for-profit,
secular corporations cannot engage in religious exercise"), cert. granted, 134 S. Ct. 678
(2013) (noting that the cases have been consolidated). For important recent work on the
question of whether profit seeking corporations  have free  exercise rights, see generally
James  D.  Nelson,  Conscience, Incorporated, MICH.  ST.  L.  REV.  (forthcoming  2014);
Robert K. Vischer, Do For-ProfitB  usinesses Have Free Exercise Rights?, 21 J. CONTEMP.
LEGAL ISSUES 369 (2013).
95.  See Ronald J. Colombo, The Naked PrivateS quare, 51 Hous. L. REV. 1, 54-55 &
n.352 (2013) (arguing  that many corporations  express values and beliefs, and citing the
examples of Ben & Jerry's and Whole Foods).
96.  Roderick  M.  Hills,  Jr.,  The  Constitutional Rights of Private Governments, 78
N.Y.U.  L. REV. 144, 224 (2003)  (noting in table that homeowners'  associations typically
"do[] not specialize in production  of speech or forums for debate on  public concerns"
(emphasis in original)).2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 939
In  other  words,  centrality  of  a  moral  vision  does  not  effectively
distinguish commercial from noncommercial entities.97
Perhaps  considerations like these  explain why  strong pluralism
offers  pragmatic  rather  than  principled  reasons  for  separating  out
commercial concerns.98 Not much is said about this, but the pragmatic
considerations  probably  include  the  political  obstacles  to
implementing  a rule that protects  associations  from civil rights  laws
all  across  the  American  economy.99  Yet,  as  I  have  noted,  strong
pluralism  would  entail  shifts  in  law  and  politics  even  within  the
bounds  it  sets  for  itself.'  Principle,  not  pragmatism,  is strong
pluralism's  strong suit, in other words. So this turn to practicalities
when  it  comes  to  commercial  entities  is  curious-and  somewhat
unsatisfying  for  a  theory  that  otherwise  deemphasizes  those
considerations.  And  from  a  principled  perspective,  the  limit  for
commercial entities seems both underinclusive and overinclusive.
B.  Monopolistic Groups
Strong  pluralism  similarly  does  not  apply  to  associations  that
enjoy monopoly power in a region or market.101 Here too, a kind of
balancing seems to be powering the analysis under the hood.'" Harm
to  excluded  individuals  would  simply  be  too  great  if monopolistic
entities  were  allowed  to  exclude  them  from  membership,
employment, or consumer  activity. And, on the other hand, people
97.  For other critiques of the distinction between commercial and nonprofit entities in
the  proposal  for  strong  pluralism,  see  Richard  A.  Epstein,  Forgotten No More,  13
ENGAGE  138,  139  (2012),  available at http://www.fed-soc.org/doclib/20120517_Epstein
Engagel3.1.pdf (reviewing INAZU, supra, note 10); Robert K. Vischer, How Necessary Is
the  Right of Assembly?,  89  WASH.  U.  L. REV.  1403,  1414  (2012)  ("If  a for-profit
corporation  dissents from the moral  norms embodied  in a particular  law, and we are
confident that the dissent is not solely related to the avoidance of an economic burden,
why should we not want to protect its right of assembly?").
98.  See Inazu, supra note 2, at 828-29 ("Centering the pluralist vision on civil society
to the exclusion of the marketplace requires a pragmatic and imperfect line drawing....  It
represents a pragmatic middle ground ....").
99.  See id.  (arguing  that  limiting  the  proposal  to nonprofits  provides  a political
compromise between feminists and libertarians); see also John D. Inazu, Factions for the
Rest of Us, 89 WASH.  U.  L. REv. 1435,  1451-52 (2012)  (arguing that  his  distinction
between commercial and noncommercial groups reflects political realities, and cannot be
supported by principle).
100.  See supra Part I.
101.  See Inazu, supra note 2, at 828-29, 851 & n.308; see also Inazu, supra note 99, at
1453 (elaborating on the "anti-monopolistic test").
102.  See INAZU,  supra note 10, at 15 ("Sometimes-albeit rarely-the power exerted
by peaceable, noncommercial assemblies will overreach to such an extent that the right
will give way to the interests of the state.").940  NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 92
who can procure similar benefits from other associations in the region
or market are unlikely to be harmed significantly by the exclusion.
Questions  surround  these  arguments.  First  of  all,  associations
may affect excluded individuals not just by denying them a particular
affiliation,  job,  or  service,  but  by  apportioning  status  or
opportunity.'03  Imagine, for example, that Harvard University begins
denying  college admission  to  applicants  who  (1)  disagreed  with its
particular  brand  of  Christian  theology,  including  its  teachings  on
reproduction  and  sexual  morality,  or  (2)  disagreed  with  its
progressive  stands  on  the  same  issues,  even  if  the  source  of  the
disagreement is religious. No one would argue that Harvard enjoys a
monopoly  within  the  education  market.  Yet  it  does  function  as  a
significant  allocator  of social  standing,  like  other  elite  educational
institutions.  Why  would strong  pluralism  refuse  to  allow a  bowling
club to  exclude  members  of  out groups  if it were monopolistic,  yet
exempt Harvard or similar universities simply because less (or other)
prestigious  alternatives  are  available?  Which  exclusion  imposes
greater harm?0"
Other  associations  can  serve  as  powerful,  if  less  obvious,
distributors  of opportunity  and social  status.  In some  parts  of  the
country,  golf  clubs  work  that  way.  Even  if  a  local  municipality
operates  a  competing  public  course,  the  opportunities  there  for
103.  Ashutosh  Bhagwat has  raised  a similar objection  to  this limitation  on strong
pluralism,  observing  that  "power  does  not  require  monopoly."  Ashutosh  Bhagwat,
Liberty's Refuge, or the Refuge of Scoundrels?: The Limits of the Right of Assembly, 89
WASH. U. L. REV. 1381, 1398 (2012).
104.  Strong  pluralism  sometimes  does not  seem  to  apply  to entities  that  allocate
prestige. "If membership in the Christian Legal Society at Hastings was a prerequisite to
the  most  desirable  legal  jobs,  then  the  Christian  Legal  Society  may  well  lose  its
constitutional protections."  INAZU,  supra note 10, at 15; Inazu, supra note 2, at 851; see
also Inazu, supra note 2, at 851 n.308 (discussing circumstances that could exclude a golf
club from protection, including professional importance and even desirability for playing
golf). If the anti-monopolistic principle is construed broadly, then the present objection to
strong  pluralism  becomes  weaker.  But  Four Freedoms suggests  that  monopolistic
situations are supposed to be "rare."  Inazu, supra note 2, at 851; see also INAZU,  supra
note 10, at 15 (arguing that monopolistic groups will be "rare[]"); Inazu, supra note 99, at
1453 (noting that "the anti-monopolistic test is set intentionally high-it will capture few
groups"). Yet noncommercial entities that apportion social status are commonplace. That
suggests that the limitation  is narrow.  Ambiguities crop up elsewhere  as well.  On one
hand, the theory holds that "[e]quality of opportunity is a crucial part of our constitutional
ethos." Inazu, supra note 2, at 852. But on the other hand, Inazu argues that "[equality of
opportunity] is not self-justifying in all of its applications," id., and that it "ought to focus
on  genuine  access  to power and  resources,"  id.,  suggesting that perhaps  Harvard and
similar associations would be subject to antidiscrimination law. Again, a great deal turns
on how these questions are resolved, and thus on how far the anti-monopolistic limitation
on strong pluralism extends.2014]1 FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 941
business  networking  and  status  improvement  may  not  be  as
promising.  Many  professional  organizations  are  also  organized  as
nonprofits,  and  many  of  them  are  not  monopolists  in  the  strict
sense.'o  Strong pluralism may well protect discriminatory practices by
such professional organizations.1*
In sum, the question is whether focusing on monopolistic groups
captures  all of the harms to excluded individuals, or whether instead
it is underinclusive-a  relatively weak proxy for detriments that are
better captured by the standard legal model, however imperfectly.
C.  Government
Certainly,  the  public/private  distinction  is  deeply rooted  in our
constitutional  understandings  and  therefore  easier  to  defend  as  a
limitation on strong pluralism. Yet its conceptual basis is somewhat
puzzling, as  the vast literature  on the  distinction has emphasized."7
Based on its own arguments, strong pluralism might well push for the
benefits of diversity and choice in the context of a vast array of public
entities. Think, for example, of public universities  and the argument
offered in Part II that allowing sorting among schools could promote
many of the values driving the theory. If the arguments behind strong
pluralism  are  persuasive,  why  not apply  them  to  all institutions  of
higher  education-in  the  absence  of  commercialism  or  monopoly
power-public and private?
My  sense is that although limiting application  of the theory to
nongovernmental  actors  is familiar,  it is  not obviously supported  by
the arguments from legal principle that drive strong pluralism overall.
105.  Think for instance of the New York County Lawyers' Association and the New
York City Bar Association, which are registered nonprofits and coexist in the same legal
market. Compare About NYCLA:  Governance, N.Y. COUNTY L. ASS'N, http://www.nycla
.org/index.cfm?section=AboutNYCLA&page=Governance  (last visited  Feb. 25,  2014)
(noting that the NYCLA  is a nonprofit organization), with About the New York City Bar
Association, N.Y. CITY B., http://www.nycbar.org/about-us/overview-about-us  (last visited
Feb. 25, 2014)  ("The New York  City Bar Association (City Bar), founded in 1870, is  a
voluntary association of lawyers and law students."). In fact, the NYCLA was founded as
an alternative to the only existing bar association in New York City, which discriminated
on grounds of race, sex, religion, and ethnicity. See The Great Democratic Bar Association
of  the  City,  N.Y.  COUNTY  L.  ASS'N,  http://www.nycla.org/index.cfm?page=About
NYCLA (last visited Feb. 25, 2014).
106.  Again,  Inazu  expresses  some  doubts  about  whether  the  theory  applies  to
professional associations. See INAZU,  supra note 10, at 16-17; Inazu, supra note 2, at 829
n.207.
107.  See,  e.g.,  Gregory  P.  Magarian,  The  First Amendment,  The  Public-Private
Distinction, and Nongovernmental Suppression of Wartime Political Debate, 73  GEO.
WASH. L. REV. 101,  144 (2004) (noting the persistence of the public-private  distinction
despite an established literature critiquing it, and citing authorities).942 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
In  sum,  the  question  this  Part  has  posed  is  whether  the
limitations  on  strong  pluralism  are  consistent  with  the  rationales
driving  the  theory.  If  they  are  not  compatible,  or  are  not  fully
compatible  (as  seems  to  be  the  case),  then  the  puzzle  is  why
pragmatic considerations  should be enough to justify the limitations
when  the  core  argument  supporting  strong  pluralism  would  mean
important  changes  to  existing  constitutional  arrangements  and
therefore seems mainly principled rather than pragmatic.
IV. THE FOUR FREEDOMS AND GOVERNMENT FUNDING
A fascinating aspect of strong pluralism is that it not only would
preserve the ability of individuals to form associations that could limit
membership in unlimited ways, but it furthermore would protect their
ability  to  do  so  while  retaining  all  government  benefits  that  they
would otherwise receive under general programs.os Is this part of the
argument  consistent  with  the  conceptual  framework  of  strong
pluralism, given its emphasis on liberty or autonomy?
Constitutional  understandings  often  cut  in the  other direction.
Government is generally permitted to defund private activities, even
when  they  are  protected  against  government  regulation  by liberty
rights."  For example,  policymakers  may  refuse to fund  a woman's
exercise  of  her  right  to  terminate  a  pregnancy,  even  while  they
subsidize carrying the pregnancy to term.110 Free exercise also may be
selectively defunded."' For example, a state may decline to subsidize
students  who  wish to  major  in the  study of theology  from  a  faith
perspective,  despite  the fact  that they have a constitutional  right to
pursue that course  of study.112 Even in the comparatively  protective
context of free speech,  government may elect not to support certain
types of speech,  so long  as  it does  not discriminate on the basis  of
viewpoint. It may, for instance, decline to fund lobbying by nonprofit
organizations,  even  when  it  subsidizes  lobbying  by  veterans'
organizations."'  And  where  "government  speech"  is  found  to  be
108.  See  Inazu, supra note  2, at  845-48 (describing the  threat to the pluralist vision
from "the government's refusal to extend generally available funding and resources to the
full range of groups in civil society" (emphasis omitted)).
109.  For background on the government's latitude to fund or defund constitutionally
protected activity, see Tebbe, supra note 27, at 1271-72, 1282-84.
110.  See Maher v. Roe, 432 U.S. 464, 474 (1977).
111.  See  Tebbe, supra note  27,  at  1267  (defending  the  government's  ability  to
selectively defund religious actors, within limits).
112.  See Locke v. Davey, 540 U.S.  712, 725 (2004).
113.  See Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington, 461 U.S. 540, 550-51
(1983).2014]1 FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 943
involved, tax dollars may be distributed to speakers on a viewpoint-
discriminatory  basis  as  well.114  There  are  important  differences  in
these  doctrines  concerning  funding  of privacy,  speech,  association,
and free exercise-and  there are  contradictions  among them."'  But
together they provide a significant measure of government discretion
concerning support for constitutionally protected freedoms, including
freedoms exercised by civic associations.
Unconstitutional  conditions  analysis  is  implicated  by  the
argument as well. In the typical scenario, the government conditions a
benefit  that  it  is  not  constitutionally  obligated  to  provide  on  an
individual making a choice that is constitutionally protected and over
which  the  person  has  some  type  of  control.116  Although  it  is
notoriously difficult to articulate  a consistent  conceptual framework
in this area, government decisions to fund one sort of constitutionally
protected  activity  and  not  another  are  not  normally  thought  to
amount  to  unconstitutional  conditions.  To  take  the  example  of
reproductive freedom once more, funding childbirth but not abortion
does not amount to an unconstitutional condition, even though both
activities  are  protected  and  even  though  receipt  of  support  is
conditioned  on  foregoing  a  constitutional  right.'  Conditioning
welfare benefits on carrying any pregnancies to term would, however,
amount to an unconstitutional condition on this understanding."8
It is therefore  a familiar doctrine  that government  may defund
liberties that it could not prohibit through regulation. The same is not
true  for  equality  rights,  of  course.  Discrimination  on  invidious
grounds is not permitted even in benefits programs and  even if the
government  had  no  obligation  to  provide  the  benefit  in  the  first
114.  See Legal Servs. Corp. v. Velazquez, 531 U.S. 533, 541 (2001) (interpreting Rust v.
Sullivan,  500  U.S.  173,  203  (1991),  as  an  approval  of  viewpoint  discrimination  in
government speech, although the government in that case delivered its message through
private speakers); Nelson Tebbe, Government Nonendorsement, 98 MINN.  L. REV. 648,
648-50 (2013)  (critiquing the widespread view that government speech is exempted from
almost  all  constitutional  restrictions,  including  the  First  Amendment  rule  against
viewpoint discrimination).
115.  See, e.g.,  Tebbe, supra note 27, at 1266-67 (describing one such contradiction in
the doctrine).
116.  See Cox & Samaha, supra note 60, at 66.
117.  Maher v. Roe, 432 U.S. 464, 474 (1977).
118.  For a general statement of this understanding of the rule against unconstitutional
conditions,  see Eugene  Volokh,  Freedom of Expressive Association and Government
Subsidies, 58 STAN.  L. REV.  1919, 1942 (2006)  ("This is what the Court has in practice
roughly meant by the 'unconstitutional  conditions'  doctrine: While the government  may
generally place conditions  on the use of benefits that it provides, it generally may not
control the use of the recipient's other assets as a condition of providing the benefit.").944 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
place.119 A  right to equal treatment  at the hands of the government
applies  to  all  official  action,  whereas  a  right  to  liberty  from
government does not normally entail a right to government assistance
in that activity.120
Strong  pluralism goes  further  than  commonplace  doctrine  and
political morality surrounding  funding or unconstitutional conditions.
Two  cases  seem to  drive the  theory  here. First,  again,  is Christian
Legal  Society  v.  Martinez.  Several  judges  and  scholars  have
characterized access  to official status as  a student organization  as a
benefit-it entailed  advantages that unaffiliated organizations  would
not  have  enjoyed,  including  access  to  university  buildings  for
meetings,  use  of  electronic  resources,  participation  in  the  student
activities  fair, and a small  amount  of cash.121  Viewed  that way,  the
university  simply  decided  which  sorts  of  student  organizations  it
wished  to fund  or  support  (i.e.,  ones  open  to all).22  After  all, the
organization  remained  free  to continue  its  activities,  including  its
exclusionary  practices,  after  the  ruling  came  down-just  without
support.123 And in fact, CLS did operate for one academic year on an
independent  basis  while  the  dispute  was  ongoing.124  When  strong
pluralism opposes the result in Martinez, it therefore demands more
than  the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine,  as  conventionally
understood.
Second,  and  more  important  to  the  argument,  is  Bob  Jones
University v.  United States.125  There, the IRS enforced  a rule denying
119.  Brown is the canonical  example. Brown  v. Bd. of Educ., 347 U.S.  483 (1954).
There, states were prohibited from  segregating public schools even though they had no
constitutional obligation to provide public education in the first place. Id. at 495.
120.  For an argument that equal  protection applies even to mere expression by the
government, see Tebbe, supra note 114, at 650.
121.  See  Inazu, supra note  2,  at  845  n.280  (citing  authors  who  have  made  that
argument).
122.  See id. at 844-46 (addressing such arguments).
123.  Inazu argues that Martinez involved not only denial of support but also regulatory
exclusion from a public speech venue, id. at 844-45, but his extension of strong pluralism
to benefits  makes  that point  immaterial. Even if Martinez concerned  the provision  of
benefits, rather than regulation of access to a public forum, it would still violate strong
pluralism.
124.  Christian Legal Soc'y v. Martinez, 130 S. Ct. 2971, 2981 (2010). During this period,
Hastings allowed CLS to use law school facilities for its meetings and activities and told
the group it would "have access to chalkboards and generally available campus bulletin
boards to announce its events." Id.
125.  461 U.S. 574 (1983).2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 945
tax-exempt status to organizations engaged in racial discrimination.126
Bob  Jones  University  fell  afoul  of  the  rule  because  it prohibited
interracial  dating  among students,  for theological  reasons.127  Strong
pluralism  would reverse  that  decision,  without  disagreeing  that tax
exemption  is a form of government  subsidy.128  According to strong
pluralism,  it  is  constitutionally  problematic  to  deny  government
support to associations that limit membership on the basis of race and
other socially significant characteristics, just as it is unconstitutional to
prohibit the exclusion outright.
This is a puzzling sort of claim for a theory grounded in liberty or
autonomy  to  make,  at  least  according  to  familiar  constitutional
thinking  about  the  relationship  between  government  funding  and
constitutional liberties.129 Note that the  claim by  strong pluralism  is
not that the IRS violated  equality principles  by excluding  an entity
from support rather than the offending activity. Rather, it is that Bob
Jones exercised its freedom of association or assembly in a particular
way-by deciding which students were  eligible to attend the school,
based on their willingness to abide by school rules-and that conduct
was what the government decided not to support.
Where  is the  stopping point for that line of argument? Inazu is
careful  to  say  that  his  constitutional  rule  only  applies  to  general
funding and benefit schemes, but that limit leaves open the possibility
that groups like the Boy Scouts would have a constitutional claim not
only  when  the  state  prohibited  them  from barring  gay  men  from
membership,  but  when  it  defunded  their  activities  for  the  same
reason.'30  Is  the  principle  restricted  to freedom  of  association  and
assembly,  or does it extend to other constitutional liberties  as well?
Would  Congress  now  be  prohibited  from  directing  funds  only  to
women in childbirth and not to women terminating their pregnancies
126.  Id. at 579 (setting out the IRS rule that "a  [private] school not having a racially
nondiscriminatory policy as to students is not 'charitable' within the common law concepts
reflected in sections 170 and 501(c)(3) of the Code" (alteration in original)).
127.  Id. at 580-81 (recounting that "[t]he sponsors of the University genuinely believe
that the Bible forbids interracial dating and marriage" and reproducing the school's rule
that "[s]tudents who date outside of their own race will be expelled").
128.  See Inazu, supra note 2,  at  846 ("Bob  Jones is wrongly  decided because  the
government  cannot  coherently  engage  in  viewpoint  discrimination  with  respect  to  a
generally available benefit.").
129.  See supra text accompanying notes 113-22.
130.  See Boy Scouts  of Am. v.  Dale, 530 U.S.  640, 659 (2000).  In his book, Inazu
questions whether the Boy Scouts should be protected by strong pluralism or whether they
are too monopolistic or public. See INAZU, supra note 10, at 251 n.36. But the point here is
simply that a concededly civic group would not only be protected from anti-discrimination
laws but also be able to claim government funding.946 NORTH CAROLINA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 92
before  the  end of their  terms?  Although  some  of the  argument  is
limited to viewpoint discrimination in government creation of public
forums, some  of its logic would seem  to extend to defunding  these
other  liberty-based  rights  as  well.  If  that  is  correct,  then  the
ramifications would be significant. Decisions  regarding a wide range
of welfare-state  funding programs  could  be removed  from ordinary
politics.
Moreover,  the  precedent  it  would  unsettle  goes  somewhat
further  than  strong  pluralism  explains.  Government  defunding  of
discriminatory  practices  has  been seen by  the Court not only to be
constitutionally  permitted,  as  strong  pluralism  assumes,  but
sometimes  to  be  constitutionally  required.  During  the  Second
Reconstruction, the Court decided not only Runyon v. McCrary3'2
which allowed Congress to pass a regulatory ban on racial segregation
by private schools"'-and Bob Jones-which allowed the government
to defund private schools engaged in racial discrimination'34-but  also
Norwood  v.  Harrison1.35  In  Norwood,  the  Justices  held  that
Mississippi  was  constitutionally  prohibited  from  supporting  private
schools that discriminated on  the basis of race,  as it had been doing
through a state program that provided  free textbooks to public  and
private schools alike."'  And in another case  from the same era, the
Court prohibited  a  local government  from providing grants so that
students  could  attend  racially  discriminatory  private  schools.137
Therefore, when the Court has interfered with ordinary politics in the
area of funding, it has sometimes done so in the opposite direction-it
has limited  the ability of government to support private associations
that discriminate  in  their membership.  Admittedly, it  is  difficult  to
imagine  either of these  decisions  being  handed  down  today  under
changed  social and political  circumstances.  Yet they underscore  the
distance  that strong pluralism  must move  constitutional law in order
131.  It could even have  implications for government speech,  if the  same reasons  for
limiting government decisions on financial support extend also to government decisions
about which associations to endorse in its communications. Cf. Tebbe, supra note 114, at
650 (arguing that government endorsement is limited by a range of constitutional rules).
132.  427 U.S. 160 (1976).
133.  Id. at 169; see Inazu, supra note 2, at 838-40 (criticizing Runyon).
134.  Bob Jones Univ. v. United States, 461 U.S. 574,603-04 (1983).
135.  413 U.S. 455 (1973).
136.  Id. at 466-67.
137.  Griffin v. Cnty. Sch. Bd. of Prince Edward Cnty., 377 U.S. 218, 234 (1964). The
vouchers were  part of a move to close the public schools  rather than comply with  a
desegregation order. Id. at 221. All the private schools in the jurisdiction were restricted to
whites. Id. at 223. So these were admittedly special circumstances.2014] FOUR FREEDOMS REVIEW 947
to limit government discretion over funding decisions concerning the
freedom of individuals to associate.
Existing law does set some constitutional limits on the ability of
government  to  defund  constitutional  freedom.  For  example,  it
prohibits animus in the religion area,'  viewpoint discrimination with
regard to speech,'39 and  unconstitutional conditions.40 I have argued
that  inside  these  limits,  government  discretion  should  include  the
ability to target religious activity for denial  of support.14' But even if
that argument fails, it is difficult to imagine  compelling reasons for
constitutional  law  to  limit  the  discretion  of  policymakers  further
without  altering  the  longstanding  view  that  private  actors  cannot
demand government  support even for the exercise of constitutional
liberties.
CONCLUSION
Four Freedoms takes  a  fascinating  look  at issues  of profound
importance.  I have  taken this Response  as  an  opportunity to offer
four questions that implicate the relationship between individuals and
associations in American constitutionalism  more generally. Everyone
seriously interested in such matters will benefit from reading not only
Four Freedoms, but the rest of John Inazu's evolving work on these
issues.
138.  See Tebbe, supra note 27, at 1327-31.
139.  Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U.S. 819, 828-31 (1995).
140.  See Tebbe, supra note 27, at 1322-27.
141.  See id. at 1339.