DEBATE
THE ARGUMENT FOR SAME-SEX MARRIAGE
Perry v. Schwarzenegger, in which a federal district court held
California's ban on same-sex marriages unconstitutional, is set for
expedited review in the Ninth Circuit; many argue that the case will
ultimately be decided by the Supreme Court.  The arguments for and
against the constitutionality of such statutes are thus at a fever pitch.
In an article published earlier this year, Professors Nelson Tebbe and
Deborah Widiss argued that marriage rights are best conceived of as
an issue of equal access, rather than one of equal protection or
substantive due process.  Nelson Tebbe & Deborah A. Widiss, Equal
Access and the Right to Many, 158 U. PA. L. REV. 1375, 1377 (2010).
In The Argument for Same-Sex Marriage,P rofessors Tebbe and
Widiss revisit the arguments they made in Equal Access and the Right to
Mary and emphasize their belief that distinguishing between
different-sex marriage and same-sex marriage is inappropriate.  They
lament the sustained emphasis on the equal-protection and substantive-
due-process challenges in the Peny litigation and suggest that an equal-
access approach is more likely to be successful on appeal.
Professor Shannon Gilreath questions some of the
fundamental premises for same-sex marriage in Arguing Against
Arguingf or Marriage. He challenges proponents to truly reflect on
"what there is to commend marriage to Gay people," and points to his
own reversal on the question as evidence.  Though he stands fully in
opposition to critics of same-sex marriage who use the stance to veil
attacks on equality generally, Gilreath argues that marriage can be
seen as a further institutionalization of gays and lesbians that risks
"assinrilationist erasure of Gay identity."  Gilreath concludes by noting
that to the extent that marriage is assumed to be normatively good,
the Tebbe-Widiss equal access approach to same-sex marriage
recognition may be the most successful; still, he invites those on all
sides of the debate to vigorously challenge that assumption.22  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159: 21
PENNumbra
OPENING STATEMENT
The Right Way to Argue for the Right to Many
Nelson Tebbet  and Deborah A. Widiss~t
How  should  courts  think about  the  right  to  marry?  This  is  a
question  of principle,  of  course,  but  it  is  also  a  key  question  of
litigation strategy.  In August, district court Judge Vaughn Walker held
California's  ban  on  same-sex  marriage  unconstitutional.  Perry v.
Schwarzenegger, No.  09-2292,  2010  U.S.  Dist.  LEXIS  78817,  at  *217
(N.D. Cal. Aug. 4, 2010).  The Ninth Circuit has announced that it will
hear the appeal on an expedited  basis; it is widely expected  that the
Supreme  Court  will  ultimately  decide  the  case.  It  is  therefore
especially important right now to craft arguments  that can appeal to
moderate judges.
David Boies and Ted Olsen, who surprised  the legal world when
they teamed up to bring the case, are extremely skilled lawyers.  They
built a very strong factual record in Perry, and they deserve credit for
winning a big victory in the trial court.  But we believe  that the legal
arguments  they have been  emphasizing, and which serve as the basis
for the  trial court decision,  are vulnerable  on  appeal.  In an article
published earlier this year in the University of Pennsylvania Law Review,
we argued  the right to marry is best conceived  as a matter of "equal
access"  to  government  support  and recognition,  and  that the  best
doctrinal  vehicle  for  that  conception  is  the  fundamental-interest
branch of equal protection law.  Nelson Tebbe & Deborah A. Widiss,
Equal Access  and the Right to Mary, 158  U. PA.  L.  REV.  1375,  1377
(2010).  Our approach  offers a sensible, moderate  way for judges to
strike  down bans  on  same-sex  couples'  marriage rights  and a more
satisfying way to conceptualize the right to marriage generally.
I.  CIVIL MARRIAGE AND DUE PROCESS
Two  other  arguments  have  been  the  focus  of  the  California
litigation, as well as prior challenges of other state provisions limiting
marriage to different-sex couples.  The first is that everyone  has a due
process  right  to  get married  in  a  state-recognized  ceremony.  This
claim relies on precedents, like Loving v.  Virginia, 318 U.S. 1 (1967),  in
Associate Professor, Brooklyn Law School.
Associate Professor, Indiana University Maurer School of Law.2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  23
which the Supreme Court has referred  to marriage as "fundamental."
Judge Walker found a due process violation in the California case, but
almost every  other federal  and  state  court  addressing  the  issue has
rejected  this claim.  Those courts have concluded  that "marriage" is
"deeply  rooted"  in  American  "history  and  traditions"  under  the
traditional  due  process  test,  but  that  "same-sex  marriage"  is  not.
Hernandez v. Robles, 855 N.E.2d 1, 9 (N.Y. 2006)  (quoting Washington v.
Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 703 (1997)).
We  disagree with  the  line  that courts  draw between  "marriage"
and "same-sex marriage."  If there is a due process right to marriage, it
should  be  understood  as  a  fundamental  right  to  choose  one's
spouse-a freedom that same-sex couples should share.  But we see a
deeper flaw with this argument:  there may be no due process right to
civil marriage at all, even for different-sex  couples.  The cases typically
cited to support a due process-protected  right to marry link marriage
to a due process-protected interest in procreation.  See, e.g.,  Loving v.
Virginia, 388  U.S.  1,  12  (1967)  (citing  Skinner v.  Oklahoma ex.  rel.
Williamson, 316 U.S. 535, 541  (1942)).  While this link may have made
some sense  in an earlier era when  many state laws  made marriage a
prerequisite  to  legal  childbearing,  today  having  children  outside
marriage is accepted, both socially and legally.
In  fact,  civil  marriage-that  is,  a  marriage  that meets  state  law
requirements  and  thus is recognized  by the  state-is different from
other  family-related  rights,  such  as  the  right  to  make  choices
regarding  child  rearing,  sexual  intimacy,  contraceptive  use,  or
termination  of a  pregnancy.  These  other  rights  can  be  exercised
without  any  state  involvement,  and  due  process  protects  against
burdensome  government  regulations  that  could  unduly  limit
individual  choices.  Civil  marriage,  by  contrast,  is  a  government
program  that  provides  both  material  and  expressive  benefits  and
imposes  certain  obligations.  In  this  respect,  civil  marriage  is  also
different from private or religious marriage.  Civil  marriage requires
government  sanction-a marriage license-while  private  or religious
marriage does not.
To see this more clearly, imagine a state that chose to abolish civil
marriage  altogether,  leaving marriage  to  religious  groups  or other
private  organizations.  Although state  and federal courts  assert  that
marriage  is  "unquestionably"  a  fundamental  right,  they  also
sometimes suggest that states could simply stop performing marriages.
Commentators  sometimes propose this as a "solution" to the same-sex
marriage debate.  Dorian Solot & Marshall  Miller,  Taking Government24  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159:21
PENNumbra
Out of the Marriage Business, in MARRIAGE  PROPOSALS  70,  71  (Anita
Bernstein  ed.,  2006);  Edward  A.  Zelinsky,  Deregulating Marriage, 27
CARDOZO  L. REv.  1161,  1163  (2006).  Such  a state  could decide  to
offer  civil  unions  or domestic  partnerships.  Or  it could  designate
some  other  form  of family  relationship,  such  as  the  parentchild
relationship,  as  the  basis  for  government  benefits  or  recognition.
While these reforms are probably not politically viable, we agree with
other  scholars who  have concluded  that they would  not violate  any
constitutional  rights.  See,  e.g.,  Patricia  A.  Cain,  Imagine  There's No
Marriage, 16 QTINNIPIAC L. REV. 27, 40-43 (1996); Cass R. Sunstein, The
Right to Many, 26 CARDOzO L. REv. 2081, 2083 (2005).  Yet getting out
of the marriage business would impose the maximum possible burden
on  access  to  civil  marriage.  If  the  Due  Process  Clause  really  did
guarantee  a right to  marry civilly, a law ending civil marriage would
almost  certainly  be  unconstitutional.  This  helps  illustrate  the
weakness in the due process argument:  a right to enter a private or
religious  marriage  may  indeed  be protected  by  due process,  but a
right to civil marriage is likely not.
II. CLASSIFICATION-BASED EQUAL PROTECTION
The second argument emphasized in the California litigation, and
other similar  challenges,  is  that all  government  distinctions  on  the
basis of sexual orientation  should be subject  to  heightened scrutiny
under  the Equal  Protection  Clause.  This  approach  has  had some
success.  Several state supreme courts have held that classifications on
the basis of sexual orientation are presumptively unconstitutional and
have, under this more rigorous standard,  struck down state laws  that
exclude same-sex couples from civil marriage.  Moreover,  in the Perry
case,  the trial  court held that the proponents  of Proposition  8  had
failed to establish that there was even a rational basis for the law.  This
was likewise true in Massachusetts.  Goodridge v. Dep't of Public Health,
798  N.E.2d 941,  961  (Mass. 2003).  However, courts  in several states
have held that classifications on the basis of sexual orientation do not
raise special concerns and therefore  do not prompt any presumption
of invalidity.  Courts in  New York, Washington,  Maryland,  Indiana,
and  Arizona  have  all  upheld  different-sex  marriage  laws  under
ordinary scrutiny, as have several lower federal courts.
We agree that there is probably not even a rational basis for bans
on same-sex marriage.  The primary justification offered in litigation
today-that  legislatures  may limit  marriage  to  different-sex  couples2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  25
because  they are the only ones who may accidentally  procreate  and
thus need  to be encouraged  to form stable families-strikes  us, and
many others, as far-fetched.  We also agree that classifications  on the
basis of sexual orientation should be presumptively suspect.  But there
is a widespread sense that the Supreme Court is unlikely to announce
a new suspect class  comprised of gay men and lesbians.  Indeed, the
Court  may  be  moving  away  from  the  tiers  of scrutiny  framework
altogether.  And  while  there  are  instances  in  which  the  Supreme
Court  has been willing to  strike down  laws  even  under  the rational
basis  standard, see,  for example,  Romer v. Evans, 517  U.S.  620,  635
(1996),  courts generally are quite deferential  to legislative judgments.
As a practical matter, therefore,  a classification-based  equal protection
argument  may be  unlikely  to succeed  in  higher  federal  court  or in
many state courts.
III.  EQUAL ACCESS
Equal  access  holds  that, once  conferred, the  right  to  marry  in  a
legally  recognized  ceremony  is  fundamental.  In  other words,  if a
government decides to recognize and support civil marriage, it cannot
exclude same-sex couples without providing an adequate justification.
There is a particular harm when the material and expressive benefits
of a fundamentally  important government  institution,  such  as  civil
marriage,  are  not  extended  evenhandedly.  This  approach  differs
from both the due  process theory  and the classification-based  equal
protection theory.  It recognizes a harm may exist even if the relevant
conduct  is not protected  by due process and even if the exclusion is
not based on a suspect classification.  Independent analysis is required
to  determine  whether  a different-sex  marriage  requirement violates
equal access.
Even  though  our  approach  has  been  sidelined  in  same-sex
marriage cases, equal access is well grounded in longstanding case law.
In  fact,  the  Supreme  Court  has  already  applied  this  reasoning  to
marriage  itself.  In an  important decision,  the Court  struck down a
Wisconsin  law that prohibited parents who owed child support from
marrying.  Zablocki  v.  Redhail, 434  U.S.  374,  389-91  (1978).  It
concluded  that access  to civil marriage was too important to exclude
people  simply  because  they  couldn't  pay.  Although  the  Court
referred to the full range of precedents that spoke to the fundamental
importance  of  marriage,  the  decision  was  ultimately  grounded
squarely  in  equal  protection.  Id.  Strict  scrutiny  was  applied  not
because singling out scofflaw fathers was particularly suspect, nor even26  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159: 21
PENNumbra
because  the law placed  a particularly heavy burden on poor people,
but  instead  because  the  government  differentiation  impacted  a
fundamentally important institution, civil marriage.
The Court has applied similar reasoning in  other areas of law as
well.  For example,  the Justices  struck down the poll tax on an equal
access  theory.  Harper v.  Va. Bd. of Elections, 383 U.S. 663, 666  (1966).
States  are not constitutionally required to  establish elections at all-
but  if they  decide  to  do  so,  voters  cannot  be  turned  away  simply
because  they  are  poor.  Id.  Another  example  concerns  access  to
courts.  The Constitution does not require states to administer appeals
from criminal convictions-but if they decide  to do so, they generally
must ensure that poor defendants are not shut out because of court
costs.  Douglas v.  California,3 72 U.S. 353, 355-57  (1963).  Neither due
process  nor equal  protection alone  can wholly explain  the result  in
these cases-instead,  the overlapping interests at play deserve special
consideration.  See Pamela S. Karlan, Equal Protection, Due Process, and
the Stereoscopic Fourteenth Amendment,  33 MCGEORGE  L. REV.  473, 474
(2002)  (proposing that looking "stereoscopically" through the lenses
of equal  protection  and  due  process  can  have  synergistic  effects).
Civil  marriage  is  similar:  because  of its  findamental  importance,
selective  exclusion  from  legal  marriage  should  be unconstitutional  in
most situations.
This  equal  access  theory  captures  the  most  important
constitutional  considerations  surrounding  same-sex  marriage.  It
recognizes  that access  to civil marriage  is partly about liberty-here,
the ability  of individuals  to  choose  a  spouse  and  to  form a legally
recognized  family-and  that  it  is  partly about  a type  of equality-
namely,  the right  to  be free  from governmental  discrimination.  It
combines considerations  of liberty and equality in a way that matches
the harm  that many couples  feel.  Moreover,  equal  access  is  both
backward- and forward-looking.  On the one hand, it recognizes  that
civil  marriage has played  an important role  in American  history and
traditions.  On  the other  hand, however,  it challenges  the  way  that
many officials have drawn lines around that institution-and in that way
it looks to the future, like the best of American equal protection laws.
Importantly,  a  decision  on  equal  access  grounds  would  only
concern  civil marriage.  Religious congregations would remain free to
determine  who  could marry in  accordance with their own  precepts.
Nor would it commit the Court to a rule that the government could
not differentiate on the basis of sexual orientation in other contexts,2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  27
such  as  the  military's  "Don't Ask,  Don't Tell"  policy.  And  finally,
under our approach, states could also decide to simply stop providing
civil marriages at all-moving instead, for example, to a system of civil
unions for all couples, gay and straight.  Constitutional problems arise
only when states selectively deny access to marriage.
In  short, equal  access  offers real,  practical  advantages  over  the
arguments  that have dominated  earlier litigation.  It stands  a better
chance  of success  in  the Ninth Circuit and in  the Supreme Court-
and it better reflects our longstanding connitment to ensuring equal
access to fundamentally important government programs.28  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159: 21
PENNumbra
REBUTTAL
Arguing Against Arguingf or Marriage
Shannon Gilreatht
In  an earlier, well-written  article,  Professors  Nelson  Tebbe  and
Deborah  Widiss  urged  Gay  advocates  to  pursue  an  "equal  access"
argument, which they believe could be effective  in securing marriage
for  Gays  and Lesbians.*  Tebbe  & Widiss,  supra, at  1377.  In  the
Opening  Statement of this Debate,  they reiterate  their argument in
light of the recent decision in Perry v. Schwarzenegger, which  declared
unconstitutional California's ban on same-sex marriage.  No. 09-2292,
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 78817, at *217 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 4, 2010).  Tebbe
and Widiss do not wish to quibble with Judge Walker's conclusions in
Perry that marriage  is a fundamental  right and that a differentiated
system of partnership recognition for Gays and straights violates equal
protection.  Instead, taking issue with the durability of Judge Walker's
analysis  on  appeal,  they  offer  an  eminently  practical,  alternative
analysis  they believe would  be more likely  to survive legal challenge.
Their  approach  is  not  grounded  in  equal  protection,  thus  not
engaging  the problematic  classification-based  framework at the core
of the  Supreme  Court's current  (and flawed)  conceptualization  of
equality.  Nevertheless, their equal access approach advances  equality
(at  least  by  the  formal  definition).  Their  contribution  to  the
conversation  on  litigation  strategy,  therefore,  is  one  to  which  pro-
marriage advocates might do well to listen.  Surely, it fits nicely within
the  current  liberal  discourse  on  same-sex  marriage,  assuming  as  it
does  that marriage is normatively good, and strategizing ways  to get
Gays into it.
But for me to participate in this Debate on my own terms, I have
to begin at a prior point in the discourse altogether, asking what there
is to commend marriage to Gay people.  In other words, I'm asking to
what  are we  trying  to  get  "equal  access,"  exactly.  Those  readers
Professor for the Interdisciplinary  Study of Law & Professor of Women's and
Gender Studies, Wake Forest University.
* As is my convention, I capitalize Gay and Lesbian to emphasize the social and
political  identities  the  terms  connote.  For  the  sake  of brevity,  unless  otherwise
specified, the term "Gay" used alone is meant to be inclusive of Gay men and Lesbians.2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  29
familiar with my previous work bearing on  the marriage controversy
may  receive  this  announcement with  some  surprise.  See SHANNON
GILREATH,  SEXUAL POLITICS: THE GAY PERSON IN AMERICA TODAY 139-
40 (2006)  (identifying Gay marriage as a "way to advance gay rights in
a way no other action can").  Some of the "sweetness"  (for lack of a
better  descriptor)  of  my  discussion  of  marriage  there  has  been
replaced  by a  deeper understanding  of the  reality of Gay  people's
lives.  But I believe  the following is entirely consistent with my prior
work  to  the extent  that  my criticism  of the  Gay  rights  movement's
current obsessive focus on marriage is not a criticism of the pursuit of
equal rights.
I  still believe  that Gays are entitled to the same rights as straights
when it comes to tax treatment, rights of access to children, or access
to one's partner in  times  of ill health  or other crises.  The impulse
towards  these legal rights is completely understandable.  This is also
not  an  attack  on  the  argument  that  the  Constitution  guarantees
marriage  for  Gays  in  every  sense,  including,  probably,  the  word
"marriage."  Thus, the reader should not confuse my argument here
as commensurate with the current religionist  assault on Gay equality
in the name of marriage.  I stand firmly against it.  Shannon Gilreath,
Not a Moral Issue: Same Sex Marriagea nd Religious Liberty, 2010 U. ILL. L.
REV. 205, 209-214 (2010).  Nevertheless, I think the millions of dollars
(not  to  mention the  emotional  cost)  invested  in  the  ongoing fight
over the word "marriage" in California is a tragic waste.  And I think
the general shift in strategy from the pursuit of equal legal rights and
status to litigation over a word is liberalism run amok.
I  would also like to note that the utter practicality  of the Tebbe
and  Widiss  analysis  leaves  me  nonplussed.  Their  equal  access
argument  short-circuits  the  larger  equality  question.  I  have  been
saying for some time that Gays would be better off if equal protection
were  reconceptualized.  Shannon  Gilreath,  Some  Penetrating
Observations on  the  Fifth Anniversary  of Lawrence  v.  Texas:  Privacy,
Dominance, and Substantive Equality Theory, 30 WOMEN'S  RTS.  L. REP.
442, 459  (2009)  [hereinafter Substantive Equality].  But this discussion
cannot be had if Gay advocates abandon the equality dialogue, in the
way that Tebbe and Widiss do, in favor of the path of least resistance
to  marriage.  This strategy privileges marriage  over everything else and
discriminates against those among its who, for whatever  reason, are not
rushing to the altar.
But because  the Perry decision  and Tebbe  and Widiss  focus  on
marriage per se, I will bracket that discussion and concentrate instead30  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159:21
PENNumbra
on a Gay liberation analysis  of marriage as an end goal.  I elaborate
two  major  points  about  marriage  and  the  Gay  rights  movement's
pursuit of it:  (1) marriage is dangerous for Gays conceptually, in its
patriarchal  and  heteroarchical  foundations, and as a furtherance  of
an alarming movement toward assimilationist erasure of Gay identity
and community; and (2)  marriage is dangerous to Gays physically.  As
will become clear, my ground  for this critique  is not liberalism,  but
Gay  liberationism-much  influenced  by  the  liberationist
understandings  that emerged  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  which  were
linked  to  women's  liberation  and  to  the  early  Gay  movement's
acknowledgement  of  the  importance  of  destroying  gender
conventions and disestablishing the family.
I. MARRIAGE AND HETERONORMATIVITY AS ERASURE
(CONCEPTUAL/  EXISTENTIAL VIOLENCE)
In  2004,  Professor  Katherine  Franke  presciently warned  of an
increasing  domestication  of Gay  rights  in  the  wake  of Lawrence v.
Texas, 539 U.S. 558  (2003),  with a view toward the normative project
Lawrence  galvanized,  namely  marriage.  Katherine  M.  Franke,  The
Domesticated Liberty of Lawrence  v. Texas,  104  COLUM.  L.  REv.  1399,
1407-09  (2004).  Like Franke, I  am alarmed by Lawrence's removal of
the Gay litigants  into the heteronormative  project of monogamous,
familial  coupling.  This  follows  the  "like-straight"  logic  of the  Gay
groups  that intervened  in  the  case  as  amici,  principally asking  the
Court  to  extend  the  presumptive  value  of  heterosexual  sexual
relationships  to  Gay  sexual  relationships  that, according  to  the Gay
amici,  are  like  straight  relationships  in  every  way.  See  Gilreath,
Substantive Equality, supra, at 448-58 (noting that the Lawrence Court and
Gay amici  advocated an assimilationist  approach  in which  "equality is
defined in terms of equivalence to the heteronormative standard").
The  Lawrence majority  thus  transformed  what,  for  all  we  really
know, was sex between friends or simply no-strings-attached sex into a
relationship  in  the romanticized, straight tradition,  which  made  the
sex acceptable.  In other words, the domesticity of the sex involved-
indeed,  the  Lawrence  majority's  compulsory  domestication  of
Lawrence  and  Garner-sufficiently  inoculated  the  Gay-ness  of
Lawrence  and Garner's  claim to sexual  liberty by replacing it with a
claim for relationship-based intimacy.  What is most important here is
that by domesticating  the sex in  Lawrence, indeed  one  might say by
disappearing  it,  the  majority  accomplished  the  domestication  and2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  31
disappearance  of the  Gay men  involved, assimilating  them into  the
relationship-oriented  model  on  which  patriarchy  rests.  Having
established this as the normative framework for arguing for Gay rights,
Lawrence thus catalyzed the marriage craze.  Lawrence dangled the bait,
signaling  that  marriage  was  the  door  to  acceptance  and  legal
protection  through  heteronormative  assimilation  (while  explicitly
disavowing it as such),  and Gays swallowed it.  Goodridge v. Department
of Public Health, 798 N.E.2d 941  (Mass. 2003), followed, and ultimately,
so did Perry.
The  result  of Lawrence and  the  marriage  model  has  been  the
transfiguration  of  Gay  liberation  into  the  universalities  of  "Gay
Rights."  The metaphysics of formal equality transfigures marriage, the
institution, into the gateway to ontic happiness and freedom.  This is
paradoxical  considering  that  the  history  of Gay  identity  is  one  of
institutionalization  as a means  to essentialize and ultimately erase  us.
Our first institution was the psychiatric ward, where we, medicalized as
psychotics,  were  electroshocked,  lobotomized,  and  murdered.  See
generally  SHANNON  GILREATH,  SEXUAL  IDENTITY  LAW  IN  CONTEXT:
CASES AND MATERIALS  141-48 (2007).  Then we were criminalized and
institutionalized in the prison.  Having only recently emerged, we rush
to marriage for its value as an institution.  This is what,  according to
Judge Walker,  equality demands;  it is what Tebbe  and Widiss say we
are entitled to access;  and it is a reversal  that perhaps  only Foucault
could really appreciate.
Consider the politics of marriage expounded by Marriage Equality
California and Lambda:
[There]  is no other way for gay people  to be filly equal  to  non-gay
people-both  in the  eyes  of the  law,  and  in  the  eyes  of the  larger
community-than to participate in the same legal institution using the
same  language....  Any  alternative  to  marriage  is  not  marriage.
Anything less, is less than equal!
Franke,  supra, at  1415  (quoting Marriage  Equality  California  &
Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, Roadmap to Equality:  A
Freedom  to  Marry  Educational  Guide  (2002)  (no  longer  available
online))  (emphasis omitted).  We see that, unlike the first two phases
of institutionalization,  in which Gays who were demonstratively non-
normative  (either because they were caught, self-identified,  or could
not  otherwise  hide  their  sexual  orientation)  were  medicalized  and
criminalized, it is non-normative Gays-those who do not acquiesce in
patriarchal  notions of monogamous coupling and childrearing-who
are said  to  fail  to  appreciate  the good of institutionalization  in  the32  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159: 21
PENNumbra
form of marriage.  It is also the non-normative  Gays who, by virtue of
their  dissent,  are  pushed  outside  the  ever-shrinking  Gay  political
universe.  This is the political  project that finds its voice  in cultural
criticism  from  the  likes  of  Bruce  Bawer  and  Andrew  Sullivan,  see
BRUCE  BAWER,  A  PLACE  AT  THE  TABLE:  THE  GAY  INDIVIDUAL  IN
AMERICAN  SOCIETY  (1993);  ANDREW  SULLIVAN,  VIRTUALLY  NORMAL:
AN ARGUMENT ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY  (1995),  and in law from neo-
con-liberals  like William  Eskridge.  See WILLIAM  N.  ESKRIDGE,,  THE
CASE  FOR  SAME-SEX  MARRIAGE:  FROM  SEXUAL  LIBERTY TO  CIVILIZED
COMMITMENT  (1996).  Indeed,  the  politics  and  law  of  the  Gay
movement  have  become  univocal  in  their  supplication  to  straight
power:  Look at me!  I'm like you!  Having thus set the parameters of
Gay  rights  organizing,  the  leadership  has  narrowed  the  focus  of
community resources nearly exclusively to marriage.
Relatedly, there is something even more disturbing about the case
for  marriage  reflected  in  its  propaganda.  Consider,  again,  the
admonition  that "[there]  is no other way  for gay  people  to be fully
equal  to  non-gay  people ...  than  to  participate  in  the  same  legal
institution."  Franke, supra, at 1415.  This reveals marriage as a safety
strategy.  In  other  words, marriage  is  a way  to legitimate  behaviors
otherwise  illegitimate,  a way of avoiding  discrimination  and second-
class  citizenship  and of achieving  civic  safety.  If Gay marriage  boils
down to a desperate attempt at assimilation  in an effort to avoid  the
lethal  attentions  of heterosexuals,  can we  honestly talk  about Gays
entering marriage in anything resembling a condition of freedom?  In
this  realization,  same-sex  marriage-supposedly  this new and game-
changing  thing-looks  a lot like old  patriarchal  marriage  in  which
women "consented" to marriage as a way to achieve safety in a world
that was nothing short of murderous for a woman without the "bonds
of matrimony"  as  her  shield.  When  William  Eskridge  argues  that
marriage is a way for Gays to become "civilized," I wonder if he wants
Gays  to  be  "civilized"  in  the  same  ways  that  women  have  been
"civilized" by marriage.  ESKRIDGE,  supra, at 8-13.  Institutionalization
out of desperation  hardly seems much like  freedom to me.  Neither
does becoming heterosexualized ghosts of ourselves.
II.  MARRIAGE AND PHYSICAL VIOLENCE
It is often noted that approximately fifty percent of heterosexual
marriages end in divorce.  THE NAT'L MARRIAGE PROJECT AT THE UNIV.
OF VA.  & THE  INST.  FOR AM.  VALUES,  THE  STATE  OF OUR  UNIONS,2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  33
MARRIAGE  IN  AMERICA,  2009:  MONEY  &  MARRIAGE  77  (2009),
litt)://www.virginia.edu/marriageproject/annialrel)orts.htl.  It  is
less  frequently  remarked,  certainly,  that  the  other  fifty  percent
probably  should.  But despite  the  existence  of no-fault divorce,  the
legal  entanglement  that  is  marriage  is  still  difficult  to  escape.
Economic  dependence  (which  marriage  encourages  on  the part  of
one  spouse-most often  the woman)  and  the presence  of children,
coupled with legal strictures that make exit difficult, often keep bad
marriages  intact.  This  is  most  alarming  because,  for women,  the
marital  home  is  often  violent.  See  PATRICIA  TJADEN  &  NANCY
THOENNES,  U.S. DEP'T OF JUST.,  NCJ  181867, EXTENT, NATURE,  AND
CONSEQUENCES OF INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE,  at iii (2000),  available
at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/pubs-sum/181867.htm  (noting  that
twenty-five percent of women were raped or physically assaulted by a
current or former spouse or cohabitating partner).
There is strong evidence suggesting that Gay relationships mirror
the violence of their heterosexual counterparts.  Gay relationships are
violent  precisely  because  the  only  model  Gays  have  for  what  a
relationship  should  look like is  the straight  model.  The dominant
structure  of  sexual  inequality  inherent  in  heterosexual  marriages
bleeds  over into  the Gay  model, so  that Gay  relationships  reaffirm
those social conditions to the detriment of the people involved.  Some
reports speculate that domestic violence among Gay men may occur at
rates  greater  than  those  of  domestic  violence  in  the  straight
community.  One study indicated that 23.1%  of cohabiting Gay men
said they were  raped or physically battered by a spouse or cohabiting
partner  at  some  time  in  their  lives,  compared  to  7.7%  of  men
cohabiting with opposite-sex partners.  L. KEVIN HAMBERGER  & MARY
BETH PHELAN,  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SCREENING AND INTERVENTION  IN
MEDICAL  AND  MENTAL HEALTHCARE  SETTINGS  301  (2004).  Another
study  showed  that men who  have  sex with  men are six times  more
likely to suffer an assault as an adult.  GILLIAN C. MEZEY & MICHAEL B.
KING,  MALE VICTIMS  OF  SEXUAL ASSAULT  9  (2d  ed. 2000).  I  think
there  are very important sociological reasons for this.  We inevitably
strike out against the thing we are conditioned to hate.  In the case of
cohabiting Gay men, that target is readily accessible in the home.  It is
a form  of internalized  and then  externalized  queer  bashing in  the
most intimate dimensions of the Gay community itself.
Knowing  what  we  know,  do  we  really  want  to  make  our
relationships harder  to exit than we  need to?  There is certainly no
reason  to  believe  that  the  legal  entanglements  of marriage  would34  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159:21
PENNumbra
affect  battered  Gays  differently  than  they  have  affected  battered
women.  Recall that when one of Jeffery Dahmer's victims escaped-
dazed,  nearly  naked,  and  understanding  nearly  no  English-and
made it to police, those police returned  him to Dahmer, despite  the
fact that his head was obviously bleeding from Dahmer's attempts to
drill  holes  in  his skull.  Reportedly,  the officers joked  that it was a
lover's spat.  Milwaukee Panel Finds Discriminationb y Police, N.Y. TIMES,
Oct.  16,  1991,  at B8,  available at 1991 WLNR 3035625.  The obvious
violence  was  somehow  rendered  consensual  in  the  minds  of these
(ostensibly  heterosexual)  officers  because  it  took  place  within  the
parameters  of an  assumed  relationship.  Interesting  how the  officers
made basically the same reductionistic assumptions about Gay men that
the majority did in Lawrence.
The anticonnunitarian  nature  of marriage  puts  Gays at risk of
violence  from  outside  of  our  relationships,  too.  One  of  the
preconditions to violence is that the victim is usually alone and cut off
from systems of support.  This is one reason that marriage has been so
dangerous  for  women.  But  the  anticommunitarian  nature  of
marriage may be even more dangerous for Gays because,  historically,
a  woman  has  traded  (sometimes  violent)  bondage  to  one  man  in
marriage for safety from the danger of violence from many men if she
were  not  married.  The  respect  of patriarchs  for  one  another  has
generally meant some safety for women in marriage relative to the rest
of  the  patriarchal  world.  Not  so  for  Gays.  Marriage,  because  it
privatizes  energies into  the family unit, results in  the dismantling of
support systems found in the community.  'hen  Gays recognize other
Gays,  we  often say they are "family."  The Gay  liberation  movement
has  abandoned  this comnnitarian  conception  of family  in favor of
the heterosexualized,  privatized, monogamous family model found in
marriage.
The marriage  craze is  also  driven  in  large part  by an emerging
obsession  by  Gays  with  procreation-an  enterprise  that  further
privatizes energies.  Arguably, this retreat into the nuclear family unit
leaves  us  even  more  vulnerable  to  outside  attack,  as  political
consciousness  recedes  in  favor  of  the  romanticized  family  ideal.
Monogamy,  definitionally,  is  the anticommunitarian  privatization  of
sexual energies, and with those energies comes the privatization of the
very sexual politics of conmmunity building.  Richard Mohr, notably,
has argued that marriage ought to be reformed to allow for the often
open,  communitarian  nature  of  Gay  multipartner  relationships.2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  35
Richard D. Mohr, Essay, The Case for Gay Marriage,9  NOTRE DAMEJ.L.
ETHICS  & PUB.  POL'Y  215,  233  (1995).  But  there  seems  to  be  no
interest  on  the  part  of  the  Gay  leadership  in  pursuing  this  path
instead  of the  fetishized,  heterosexual  ideal.  In  the  closed,  like-
straight liberal universe,  anything not approximating  the (fictionally)
monogamous  heterosexual  union  is  valueless.  Consequently,  since
there is no special safety in  Gay marriage  in  the same way that it is
built  into the  heterosexual  marriage  racket  for  the preservation  of
patriarchy, marriage leaves us more vulnerable to outside violence.
CONCLUSION
I  have  likely  taken  the question  presented  by the  "right way to
argue  for  the  right  to  marry"  in  an  unexpected  and  unwanted
direction.  Most liberals are not interested in a discussion of marriage
that  does  not  make  that  most-heterosexual  of presumptions  that
marriage is a priori good.  I was struck recently when rereading  "The
Speech  of  Aristophanes"  from  Plato's  Symposium-that  antique
defense of same-sex love still widely regarded as the best exposition of
the self-actualizing  and legitimating power of Gay relationships-that
marriage  nowhere  figured.  PLATO,  THE  SYMPOSIUM  22-27  (M.C.
Howatson  &  Frisbee  C.C.  Sheffield,  eds.,  M.C.  Howatson,  trans.,
Cambridge  Univ.  Press  2008).  Maybe  the  Gay  rights  movement's
leadership  and the lawyers who theorize  to support them could use a
refresher  course  in  the  classics.  Otherwise,  I  fear  that  when  the
history  of the  Gay  movement  itself is  written  it  will  read  more  as
epitaph  than epilogue:  Once upon a time there was a Movement ...
then there was Marriage.36  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159: 21
PENNumbra
CLOSING STATEMENT
Nelson Tebbe and Deborah A. Widiss
On  the whole,  Professor  Gilreath  does  not  take  issue with  our
argument  that,  given  existing  law  and  the  full  range  of practical
contingencies,  equal  access  presents  the best approach  for securing
access  to  civil  marriage  for  gay and lesbian  couples.  He  tells  pro-
marriage advocates that our proposal is worth heeding.
Instead of directly engaging with our project, he uses the occasion
of this Debate to argue that advocates for gay and lesbian rights have
erred  in  deciding  to  pursue  (or  go  along  with)  a  campaign  for
marriage  equality.  Professor  Gilreath  claims  that  marriage  is
unattractive conceptually because it has unavoidable  heteronormative
implications,  and  that  it  is  a  troubling  goal  practically  because  it
brings an  increased risk of trapping gay men and lesbian women  in
physically abusive relationships.
Professor  Gilreath  is not alone  in  questioning whether gays  and
lesbians  should  seek the  right to  marry.  Rather, as  Nancy Polikoff
explores  in  detail in  a  recent  book, this  has  long  been  a point  of
debate within  the gay and lesbian community.  NANCY D. POLIKOFF,
BEYOND  (STRAIGHT  AND  GAY)  MARRIAGE:  VALUING  ALL  FAMILIES
UNDER THE LAW 28 (2008).  Some commentators  and advocates,  like
Professor  Gilreath,  have  been  concerned  that seeking  marriage  is
harmful  because  it  accepts  the  status  quo  privilege  awarded  to
marriage  and  could undermine  more egalitarian  aspects  of gay and
lesbian  relationships.  Paula L.  Ettelbrick,  Since When Is Marriage the
Path  to  Liberation?,  in  LESBIAN  AND  GAY  MARRIAGE:  PRIVATE
COMMITMENTS,  PUBLIC  CEREMONIES  20-21  (Suzanne  Sherman  ed.,
1992); Nancy D. Polikoff, We Will Get What We Ask For:  Why Legalizing
Gay and Lesbian Marriage Will Not "Dismantlet he Legal Structure of Gender
in Every Marriage," 7 9 VA. L. REV. 1535, 1549 (1993).  Other prominent
voices within the gay and lesbian community have argued, by contrast,
that permitting  same-sex  couples  to  marry is  not  only  a  necessary
component  of  achieving  true  equality  and  securing  important
practical  benefits,  but  would  also  have  the  separate  advantage  of
helping  undermine  gender  norms within  marriage  more  generally.
Thomas  Stoddard,  Why  Gay People Should Seek  the Right to Marry, in
LESBIAN AND GAY MARRIAGE,  supra, at 13,  19; Nan D. Hunter, Marriage,
Law, and Gender:A  Feminist Inquiry, 1 LAW & SEXUALITY 9, 17 (1991).
Our reply is simply that we have not taken a position on the broad2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  37
question of whether marriage,  either private or civil, is a worthy goal
for advocates of gay and lesbian rights.  Tebbe & Widiss, supra, at 1405
n.134.  We have our own reactions  to Professor Gilreath's  points, of
course, but they are generally irrelevant to our equal access proposal.
We take as a given  that at least some members  of the gay and lesbian
community would like to marry in a civil ceremony and that they have
decided  to  bring  litigation  designed  to  win  them  that right.  Our
argument  addresses those  individuals,  the lawyers  and organizations
that represent  and  support  them, and  the judges  who  may  decide
their  cases.  We  believe  that equal  access  offers the best pathway to
legal success.
Professor  Gilreath's  Rebuttal  may  have  one  challenging
implication for our argument, although lie does not fully develop it.
If civil marriage is not an institution that is or should be important to
gay  and  lesbian  couples,  then  our  claim  that  civil  marriage  is
"fundamental," as  that term is used in cases within  the flundamental
interest branch  of equal  protection  law, could seem  weaker.  Three
responses  occur  to  us.  First,  whether  an  institution  or  activity  is
fundamentally important is a matter of social meaning, not individual
perspective or opinion.  And as a matter of social meaning, it seems to
us  that civil  marriage is indeed central to American  law and society.
Id. at 1415-16.  Second,  the Supreme Court itself has often said  that
marriage is "flndamental," albeit sometimes in passing or in dicta.  See
id. at 1388-91.  Finally, members  of the gay and lesbian  community
who  are advocating  for equal  access  to civil  marriage  have  imbued
their  own  arguments  with the  force  of passionate  conviction.  One
need only recall the moving scenes that have unfolded on courthouse
steps or outside legislative chambers in states where couples have won
official recognition of their commitment.
We  do  disagree  with  a  couple  of minor  points  that  Professor
Gilreath  makes about our proposal.  First, we do not believe  that we
have abandoned  equality arguments.  As we make clear in our print
article,  one  of the  most attractive  features  of equal  access  is that it
combines  liberty  concerns  with  a  strong  commitment  to
evenhandedness.  Id. at  1421-24.  Moreover,  we  do  not think our
argument  privileges marriage-it simply offers a strong argument for
couples  that  wish  to  pursue  access  to  civil  marriage,  possibly  in
combination  with  other goals that  may be  given higher priority.  In
fact,  one  benefit  of our  approach  is  that a  state  could  decide  to
abolish  civil  marriage  for  all  couples,  gay  and  straight,  without
violating constitutional principles.  Id. at 1405-06.38  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159: 21
PENNumbra
A  day  may  come  when  advocates  for  gay  and  lesbian  rights
abandon  the fight for marriage equality and move on to other goals.
If that happens,  our argument would  lose  some  of its  relevance,  a
development  that  would  cause  us  n1o  distress.  Until  that  time,
however, we believe that our equal access approach has a valuable role
to play in the ongoing debate.2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  39
CLOSING STATEMENT
Shannon Gilreath
As  Professors  Tebbe  and  Widiss  emphasize,  I  do  not  have  a
technical  quarrel  with  their  equal  access  strategy  for  litigating
marriage.  They are, I suspect, right in suggesting that their proposal
would make it easier for judges to decide in favor of Gay marriage  (or
to  uphold it  on  appeal)  than would  asking  them  to  engage  equal
protection  squarely.  In  my  experience,  if  you  give  judges  an
opportunity to avoid making a legal decision based on equality-or the
lack of it-they will take it, especially when Gay people are concerned.
It  is  this  overwhelming  conceptual  flaw  in  Tebbe  and Widiss's
argument  that  makes  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  tinker  with  its
technicalities.  Given  the  potential  result  of  the  argument's
application,  its  mechanics  don't  much  concern  me.  What  does
concern  me  is  what we  might get  if Tebbe  and Widiss  were  to  be
successful:  marriage  in its unaltered heteronormativity.  Tebbe  and
Widiss evidently consider my concerns in this regard to be something
other  than  "directly engaging  with  [their]  project."  But  any  legal
proposal  that  purports  to  advance  a  Gay cause-like  the  quest for
marriage-is an invitation to think about the role the law plays in the
future of Gay rights.  Thus, I think it is important to ask whether the
result Tebbe and Widiss say they can produce via "equal access"-that
is, access to marriage-  is a good thing for Gay liberation.
Tebbe and Widiss say they take no position on the good or ill of
marriage;  rather they offer a strategy of access for those who want it.
In  this  announcement  they  both  miss  my  point  and  inadvertently
reinforce it.  The Gay movement's posture of not evaluating critically
the meaning of marriage as a social institution and yet strategizing to
access it is what I think makes the movement's emphasis on marriage
so frightening.*  Demanding  that we  engage  in  the kind of critical
inquiry about marriage that I sketch in my Rebuttal is a big part of the
* Tebbe  and Widiss point out that some such evaluation has taken place in the
context of the debate over same-sex marriage, generally among academics.  I agree
that the union of two people of the same sex, for whom, from the straight perspective,
no gender inequity could be presumed, might do something to destabilize  gender.
I'm  all  for  that.  But I  think the costs  of marriage, as  explained  in  my Rebuttal,
outweigh the likely benefits.  And, anyway, the same destabilizing effects on gender in
coupling  could be  had via  Gays  coupling  in visible  ways  that do  not insist  upon
patriarchal  constructions  or labels.  Perhaps  even  greater  destabilization  could be
achieved in this way.40  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 159:21
PENNumbra
social  and  legal  project  that  is  Gay  liberation.  Gay  liberation,  by
definition, is the effort to empower Gay people on Gay people's terms.
Thus  a demand for access  to marriage  (such as  the demand  Tebbe
and Widiss  make)  without  a  concomitant  demand for change  is of
limited  utility-and  indeed  may  be  dangerous-to  Gay  liberation.
Straight  society's  existing  attitudes  about  what  constitutes
personhood, including marriage as a precondition to self-fulfillment,
have never encompassed Gay experience.  We have never had access
to  their definitions  on  our terms.  Seeking access  to marriage  is  the
quintessence  of seeking affirmation  by straight people  on their terms.
And it is  important for Gay people-after  all,  this  is our legal  and
political struggle-to  remember that Gay liberation  never  aspired to
this kind of access.  If the movement,  its leadership,  and its lawyers
have changed the mission in this very costly way, I think they owe it to
the rest of us to explain why they think access to marriage is a good
idea-not just how they plan on getting it.
In  closing,  let  me  clarify  my  criticisms  of  the  equal  access
argument  that Tebbe  and  Widiss  believe  are  direct  but  based  on
misapprehensions.  In their Closing Statement, Tebbe and Widiss say
that their proposal has not "abandoned equality arguments."  Indeed,
the professors  explain  that, "one of the  most attractive  features  of
equal  access  is  that  it  combines  liberty  arguments  with  a  strong
commitment  to  evenhandedness."  But  evenhandedness  is  not
equality,  except by  the most formal  definition.  Access  to  marriage
advances  equality  to  a  degree,  but  it  does  not  engage  the  more
meaningful,  substantive  question  of equality in  terms  of dominance
and caste.  See Gilreath, Substantive Equality, supra, at 460  (proposing a
substantive  equality  approach  in  which courts  ask "whether the  law
promoted  the  dominance  of one  group  with  the  consequence  of
subordination  of the target group").
Tebbe  and  Widdis  confessedly  write  for  the  many  Gay  rights
advocates who seem to believe that marriage is a panacea.  It isn't.  In
fact,  granting  access  to  marriage  based  on  arguments  other  than
substantive equality may create a roadblock to future legal and social
gains.  If we get marriage, the likely result will be that straight people
will say:  "Look what we gave you.  What more do you want?"  My fear
is  that the Gay leadership, having demonstrated  a myopic  obsession
with marriage at the expense of nearly everything else, might respond:
"Very little."  In any event, the refusal to engage class-based  equality
theory at every opportunity now may haunt us if we decide to press a2010]  Same-Sex Marriage  41
more expansive rights campaign in the future.
Tebbe  and  Widiss's  argument  also  privileges  marriage  without
regard  to  equality  because  it  purports  to  craft  a  way  of accessing
marriage  without asking judges  (and the  general  public)  to engage
directly the class- and caste-based  theory of straight dominance or the
reality of Gay life lived under this dominance.  Thus, those Gays who
are most likely to benefit from an equal access argument are the few
Gays who already live in relative social and legal security. Litigating in
order to gain  access to a word-"niarriage" as a term-as opposed to
the bundle of rights associated with state subsidized coupling  (which
is what was at stake in the California cases since Gay couples already
had the rights) is the indulgence of litigants who have already escaped
the  caste system  to  some degree.  See In Re Marriage Cases, 183  P.3d
384,  397-98  (Cal.  2008)  superseded by  constitutional amendment, CAL.
CONST.  art  1,  7.5  (noting  that California's  domestic  partnership
legislation  "affords ...  virtually  all  of  the  same  substantive  legal
benefits and privileges ...  that California law affords to ...  a married
couple").  A focus on accessing marriage in  this way means that one
takes public, straight acknowledgment  of a relationship between Gay
people  as  an affirmation,  not a  threat; and  that worldview  classifies
one, in  Gay  terms,  as part  of the privileged  few.  The  politics  that
benefits from  this type  of litigation  is thus the  politics of those at the
top-those who can afford to fantasize about marriage per se and who
can afford to devise legal stratagems to get marriage at any and all cost.
Indeed, they may feel that such stratagems are highly desirable.  I don't.
No movement for real social change can be successful if it is not
based  on  empowering  the  most powerless.  I'm worried  about  the
many  Gay  Americans  who  cannot  yet  afford  to  daydream  about
marriage  and  its  romance  because  they  can't  even  be  out  on  an
individual basis-let alone  as a couple-because  they fear reprisal  at
work, worry  about  being  rejected  by their  families,  or dread being
stalked by the law.  For these Gays,  any legal argument that purports
to  show  the  route  to  victory  without  squarely  confronting  the
monstrous  legal  caste  system  in  this  country  (a  system  largely
buttressed  by  formal  conceptions  of  equality  and  based  on  class
distinctions justified as such)  is, in a word, dangerous.  An argument
that gives  conservative judges  (usually  code-worded  as  "moderates")
an opportunity to  afford some few Gays some rights  piecemeal  may
well be taken by these same judges to the long-term detriment of Gays
who have less security and who generally ask for less in terms of equal
rights.  Tebbe and Widiss's argument, admittedly, provides judges withUniversity of Pennsylvania Law Review [Vol. 159:21
PENNumbra
just  such  an  opportunity;  indeed,  they  believe  this  is  one  of their
argument's greatest strengths.
In  sum,  Tebbe  and Widiss's  equal  access  strategy  is  simply  an
unsettling continuation  of the Gay movement's rush to marriage over
the  increasingly  marginalized  warnings  of Gay  liberationists.**  See
generally  Ettelbrick,  supra.  In  keeping  with  the  endgame  of  this
heteronormative  project, equal  access  gives courts  a way  to  rule in
favor of marriage without facing equality in  any material way.  Thus,
while, as I said, some Gay advocates might find it fruitful  to listen to
Tebbe and Widiss, I hope they won't.
Preferred Citation:  Nelson Tebbe, Deborah Widiss & Shannon
Gilreath, Debate, The Argument for Same-Sex Marriage,1 59 U. PA. L. REV.
PENNUMBRA 21 (2010),  httl)://www.pennumbra.com/
debates/ pdfs/ Marriage.pdf.
** As  for  the  unlikely  outcome  that Tebbe  and Widiss  say their  scholarship
supports-that  states could abolish  marriage-I certainly wouldn't get in the way of
trying.