COMING TO GRIPS WITH THE ETHICAL CHALLENGES FOR
CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION REPRESENTATION POSED BY
MARTINEZ V  RYAN
John H Blume* and W Bradley Wendel
Abstract
In its groundbreaking decision in Martinez v. Ryan, 556 U.S.  1 (2012),
the Supreme Court of the United States held that inadequate assistance of
post-conviction  counsel  could  be  sufficient  "cause"  to  excuse  a
procedural  default  thus  allowing  a  federal  court  in  habeas  corpus
proceedings  to  reach the  merits  of an otherwise  barred  claim that an
inmate  was  deprived  of his  Sixth  Amendment  right to  the  effective
assistance of counsel at trial. The upshot of Martinez is that, if state post-
conviction counsel unreasonably (and prejudicially) fails to raise a viable
claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel, then there is "cause" (and
likely also prejudice), and thus a gateway to merits' review of the claim
in federal habeas corpus proceedings. This is potentially a good thing for
many habeas petitioners, but creates a serious and as-yet unappreciated
ethical problem for federal habeas counsel who also served as state post-
conviction  counsel.  In  capital post-conviction  cases,  the  pre-Martinez
preference and practice was for continuity of counsel from state to federal
court.  Now  that  ineffective  representation  in  state  post-conviction
proceedings can serve as a basis for review of otherwise defaulted claims,
however, a lawyer may  be materially  limited in her ability  to provide
ongoing  representation  by  the  client's  interest  in  asserting  an
ineffectiveness claim.
Lawyers who practice in the area of civil litigation or transactional
representation  are  familiar  with  these  "prior  work"  conflicts  and  the
solution to them, which is to obtain the informed consent of the affected
client after full disclosure of the facts that give rise to the conflict and of
the  available  alternatives.  In  the  capital  habeas  context,  however,  the
usual apparatus of professional responsibility law, including the informed
consent  doctrine  and  the  potential  of malpractice  liability  for  mis-
handling a conflict, are ill-suited to dealing with the problem thrust upon
petitioners' counsel by Martinez. Ironically, even though the tort doctrine
of malpractice and the rules of professional conduct are both intended to
*  Samuel F. Leibowitz Professor of Trial Techniques, Cornell Law School.
**  Professor of Law, Cornell Law School. The author gratefully acknowledges the research
funding provided by the Judge Albert Conway Memorial Fund for Legal Research, established by
the William C. and Joyce C. O'Neil Charitable Trust to honor the memory of Judge Conway,
Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals from 1954 to 1959 and his son, Hewitt A.
Conway,  a member of the Comell Law School Class of 1949. We are grateful to Bruce Green,
Joe Margulies, Dana Remus, Keir Weyble, and participants in the Comell Law School faculty
retreat for helpful comments on this Article.
765766 SFLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
protect clients, the rules allow the possibly negligent lawyer to decide
whether  client protection  requires  disclosure  and  consent,  or possibly
withdrawal  from  representation.  Given the  significance  of ineffective
assistance  of counsel  in  capital  cases,  however,  this  kind  of  self-
monitoring  would  be  intolerable.  Hence,  the  puzzle  presented  by
Martinez, which recognizes  the inability of lawyers to self-monitor, but
fails  to provide  a mechanism  for ensuring that  the  client's  rights are
adequately protected.
This Article suggests, therefore, that petitioners' counsel cannot bear
the  sole  responsibility  for  solving  the  Martinez dilemma.  The  other
systemic and repeat players-States'  attorneys and judges-also have to
do their part. After all, it is the invocation of procedural defenses in an
effort  to  preclude  merits'  review  of the  habeas  petitioner's  federal
constitutional  claims  that  creates  the  procedural  morass  we  have
described.  This  in turn  leads  to  both  inefficient  litigation and  unjust
results. Thus, in most instances, if attorneys for the state agreed-either
on their own or after being "leaned on" by the court-to waive procedural
default and allow the court to proceed to the merits, then litigation would
proceed expeditiously and without the ethical taint of potential and actual
conflicts of interest. If the claims are not bonafide, they will be rejected.
On  the  other  hand,  if the  issues  not  previously  raised  are  in  fact
meritorious, then there are no true "losers" unless one believes that death
sentences resulting  from a trial  infected with prejudicial  constitutional
error should be carried out. Without some cooperative solution, courts
will be faced with motions for substitution of counsel or the appointment
of independent  counsel  to  evaluate  the  performance  of state  post-
conviction  counsel;  state  attorneys  general  will have  to  deal with  the
possibility of further delay while the conflict issue is adjudicated.  Thus,
the tentatively hopeful conclusion to this exploration of the conundrum
of Martinez is that the institutional actors with a stake in procedures and
outcomes will work together to create an avenue for credible claims of
inadequate  state  post-conviction  representation  to  be  investigated
competently, for clients to be fully informed and involved in the decision-
making process, and ultimately the client's wishes respected.
INTRODUCTION  ............................................. 767
I.  THE SIXTH AMENDMENT  AND THE LAW OF
PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY  ........................ 776
II.  "PRIOR WORK" CONFLICTS IN THEIR NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT  .................................  ..... 792
A.  Theory of Conflict..........................798
B.  Waivability......................  ......... 8022016] CAPITAL POST-CONVIC170N  REPRESENTATION 767
C.  Informed Consent and Its Limitations. .................. 803
D.  Clients with Diminished Decision-Making
Capacity.  ................................ 807
1II.  WHY CRIMINAL DEFENSE, AND PARTICULARLY
CAPITAL DEFENSE, Is DIFFERENT.........................810
CONCLUSION  ..................................................... 817
INTRODUCTION
In its  groundbreaking  decision  in Martinez v.  Ryan,' the Supreme
Court held that  inadequate  assistance  of state  post-conviction  counsel
could satisfy the "cause" requirement necessary to allow a federal court
in  habeas  corpus  proceedings  to  reach  the  merits  of an  otherwise
procedurally  barred  claim alleging that an inmate was deprived  of his
Sixth Amendment right to the effective assistance  of counsel  at trial.2
That was quite a mouthful, but what does it actually mean? This Article
first attempts to "unpack" the terms, its content,  and then explores the
ethical  issues  the  Court's  decision  poses  for  attorneys  representing
prisoners in federal habeas corpus actions.
A person charged with a crime in state or federal  court has a Sixth
Amendment  right  to  the  assistance  of counsel.3  If the  defendant  is
indigent,  then  under  most  circumstances,  she  is  entitled  to  court-
appointed  counsel.4  A  defendant  is not just entitled  to  a lawyer;  the
lawyer  must  be  competent,  or  in  the  Supreme  Court's  terms,  the
defendant  (theoretically)  has  the  right to  the  "effective  assistance  of
counsel."5  In  most jurisdictions,  a  defendant  who  pleads  guilty  or is
1.  132 S. Ct. 1309 (2012).
2.  Id at 1319-20 ("[Aln attorney's negligence in a postconviction proceeding does not
establish cause ....  ).
3.  The Sixth Amendment provides, in relevant part, that "[i]n all criminal prosecutions,
the accused shall enjoy the right to . ..have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence."  U.S.
CONST. amend. VI.
4.  Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 340, 345 (1963).  In Gideon, the Supreme Court
held that indigent defendants are entitled to court-appointed counsel in criminal cases but did not
specify the precise scope of the right. Id. Subsequently, in Scott v. Illinois, the Court held that a
court cannot sentence a criminal defendant to a term of actual imprisonment "unless the State has
afforded  him the right to assistance of appointed counsel." 440 U.S.  367,  373-74 (1979).  A
suspended sentence is considered to be "actual" imprisonment. See Alabama v. Shelton, 535 U.S.
654, 657-58, 674 (2002).
5.  Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 686 (1984) (quoting McMann v. Richardson,
397 U.S. 759, 771 n. 14 (1970)).  A lawyer is not "effective" for Sixth Amendment purposes if the
attorney's  performance was both "deficient"  (i.e., objectively unreasonable) and "prejudicial"
(i.e., there is a reasonable probability that had the lawyer performed adequately, the result of the
proceeding would  have been  different).  See id.  at 687-88,  694.  This Article uses  the word768 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
convicted at trial and wishes to assert a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel must do so in state post-conviction proceedings.6 Every state has,
by  one  name  or  another,  a  post-conviction  procedure  for  persons
adjudicated guilty of a crime to present additional evidence as to why the
court should vacate the conviction or sentence.7  That is where, for the
most part, defendants assert claims of ineffective or inadequate assistance
of counsel.  If the inmate is unsuccessful in the state courts, she can ask
the federal courts, via the "great writ" of federal habeas corpus,9 to review
federal constitutional challenges to the conviction or sentence, including
a Sixth Amendment  claim  of ineffective  assistance  of trial  counsel.'0
However,  among other obstacles to a federal court vacating a state court
conviction,  if the defendant did not present a federal claim to the state
courts  during state post-conviction proceedings,  then the federal courts
will not entertain the issue due to principles of comity and federalism, or
more  simply,  respect  for  state  court judgments  and  the  finality  of
"theoretically"  advisedly.  The  Strickland standard  is  widely-and  correctly--criticized  for
tolerating grossly incompetent representation. See, e.g., John H. Blume & Sheri Lynn Johnson,
Gideon Exceptionalism?, 122 YALE L.J. 2126, 2138-39 (2013).
6.  See generally John H. Blume, An Introduction to Post-convictionR  emedies, Practice
and Procedure in South Carolina,4 5 S.C. L. REv. 235, 239, 242 (1994) (illustrating that a post-
conviction proceeding can pertain to the right of counsel).
7.  See, e.g., id. at 238, 245 (tracing the history and development of South Carolina's state
post-conviction procedures).
8.  The writ of habeas corpus is still sometimes used in South Carolina to challenge the
validity of a conviction or sentence. See id. at 262. The Sixth Amendment does not require states
to appoint counsel in state post-conviction  proceedings (but many do); however, an inmate has
the right-if he can afford to do so-to retain counsel. See U.S. CONST. amend. VI (providing an
accused the right "to the Assistance of Counsel for his defence" in criminal prosecutions). But see
Blume  &  Johnson,  supra note 5,  at 2138  (noting  the  difficulties  for defendants  alleging
deprivation of the Sixth Amendment right to the effective assistance of counsel). For the most
part, state courts push adjudication of ineffective assistance claims to post-conviction proceedings
because, by and large, a court cannot decide such assertions of attorney incompetence simply by
reviewing the "cold" trial record. See Eve Brensike Primus, Effective TrialC  ounsel After Martinez
v. Ryan: Focusing on the Adequacies of State Procedures, 122 YALE L.J.  2604, 2609 (2013)
("Because ineffective assistance of trial counsel claims are often predicated on what trial attorneys
failed to do, they frequently require extrarecord  development.").  Additional evidence is often
needed, such as counsel's reasons for pursuing (or not pursuing) certain courses of action or lines
of defense. See id
9.  See Fay v. Noia, 372 U.S. 391, 401 (1963).
10.  See 28 U.S.C.  § 2254(b) (2012) (mandating when a court may grant an application for
a writ of habeas corpus). Before seeking federal review, the inmate must first present to the state
courts any alleged federal constitutional defects in her conviction or sentence. Id. This is referred
to as the exhaustion-of-state-remedies  requirement. See Rose v. Lundy, 455 U.S.  509, 513, 516
(1982) (discussing the development and scope of the "exhaustion doctrine"). The general purpose
of the  rule is to provide-as  a matter of comity and federalism-state  courts with the first
opportunity to consider claims that call into question the constitutional validity of one of its
criminal convictions. Id. at 518.2016]1 CAPI7AL POST-CONVIC770N  REPRESENTATION 769
convictions."  In the  habeas  corpus  taxonomy,  the claim  is generally
considered to be "procedurally defaulted" because it was not raised in the
right  court  at the  right time.12  Procedural  default  precludes  a  merits'
review of the  claim by the federal  courts unless  the inmate can  show
"cause" and "prejudice" for failing to present the claim to the state courts
or  a  manifest  miscarriage  of justice  (i.e.,  actual  innocence  of the
offense).13 "Cause" is generally a reason not attributable to the inmate for
failing to raise the claim earlier,14  and "prejudice" in this context means
that the failure to raise the claim earlier (or adequately) had an effect on
the prior proceedings that may have changed the outcome of the trial.'5
Prior to Martinez, the Court had rejected arguments that failings of
state post-conviction counsel, even shockingly poor representation, could
serve as "cause" for failing to raise a claim properly in state court.'6  The
Court rejected these arguments primarily because it had concluded that
there was no Sixth Amendment right to counsel in state or federal post-
11.  See id. at 518-19 (holding that a total exhaustion rule will encourage state prisoners to
first seek full relief, including relief for federal claims, from the state court).
12.  See Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U.S. 72, 83-85 (1977). Other common examples of state
procedural defaults include failing to lodge a contemporaneous objection at trial and failing to
raise a properly preserved claim on direct appeal. See id. at 83 n.8 (citing Henry v. Mississippi,
379 U.S.  443 (1965)); Gray v. Netherland, 518 U.S. 152, 161 (1996).
13.  Gray, 518  U.S.  at  162;  Wainwright, 433  U.S.  at 90-91.  It is actually  a bit more
complicated than what this Article presented above. The claim could be "unexhausted" (and not
procedurally defaulted) if the state courts allow a state prisoner to file more than one application
for post-conviction relief. The exhaustion-of-state-remedies doctrine requires inmates who file a
federal habeas petition to first present claims of constitutional error to the state courts. 28 U.S.C.
§ 2254 (2012); Rose, 455 U.S. at 516, 518 ("[O]ne court should defer action on causes properly
within its jurisdiction until the courts of another sovereignty ...  have had an opportunity to pass
upon the matter." (quoting Darr v. Burford, 339 U.S. 200, 204 (1950))).  But because most states
have a "one bite at the apple" rule for persons seeking post-conviction relief, in most instances,
the claim will be "exhausted" because the inmate does not have a currently available state remedy
and procedurally defaulted because the defendant did not present the claim to the state courts in
post-conviction proceedings.  See, e.g., Williams v. State, 98 So. 3d 484, 487 (Miss.  Ct. App.
2012) (quoting Dobbs v. State, 18 So. 3d 259, 298 (Miss. Ct. App. 2009)).
14.  Murray  v.  Carrier,  477 U.S.  478,  488 (1986)  (explaining  that the defendant  must
ususually establish "cause" by showing that an "objective factor external to the defense impeded
counsel's efforts").
15.  See Strickler v. Greene, 527 U.S. 263, 289, 291  (1999) (finding that the petitioner did
not show prejudice, which would have excused a procedural default, because the prosecution's
failure to disclose favorable information did not give rise to a reasonable probability of a different
outcome at trial).
16.  See, e.g., Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U.S. 722, 727, 750, 757 (1991) (holding that post-
conviction counsel's negligent failure to file a timely notice of appeal in a capital post-conviction
proceeding, which  led to the procedural default of all of the death-sentenced  inmate's claims,
failed to satisfy the "cause" requirement).770 FLO RIDA LA W REVIEW [Vol. 68
conviction proceedings.17  Thus, if there is  no right to counsel, then, a
fortiori, there  is no right to the  effective  assistance  of counsel.'8  The
Court then fell back to the default principle that lawyers  are generally
regarded  as  the  client's  agent.19  Therefore,  counsel's  mistakes  are
deemed attributable to the defendant.20 Although the Court did not make
this reasoning explicit, it could have relied upon the role assigned by rules
of  professional  conduct  to  defense  counsel  to  monitor  his  own
performance,  ensure  that  there  are  no  conflicts  of interest,  and  do
whatever  additional  work is necessary  to acquire  the skill  required to
render competent performance.21
But in Martinez, the Court changed tack and recognized for the first
time  that-as  a  matter  of  equity-inadequate  assistance  of post-
conviction  counsel  could,  under  some  circumstances,  be  "cause"  for
failing to raise claims in state post-conviction proceedings.22 Under what
circumstances  though?  First,  the  exception  applies  only  to  claims  of
ineffective assistance of trial counsel.23 If state post-conviction counsel
fails  to  identify  and  present  other  types  of common  post-conviction
claims, e.g., prosecutorial misconduct in failing to disclose exculpatory
information or juror misconduct-no  matter how meritorious  the issue
might be-Martinez's equitable exception does not apply.24 Second, the
17.  Id. at 754-55. Every state has state post-conviction procedures,  although federal law
does not require them. See Blume, supra note 6, at 241, 258 n.169 (explaining how state courts
chose to expand the scope of post-conviction  proceedings in response to the Supreme Court's
expansion  of the  availability  of habeas  corpus).  The  basis  of the  Court's  rejection  of a
constitutional right to counsel  post-trial lies in the language of the Sixth Amendment,  which
guarantees counsel to an "accused" for his "defence." U.S. CONST. amend. VI. In the Court's view,
after an adjudication of guilt, either by trial or plea, a defendant is no longer an "accused" person
presenting a defense.  Rather, he is a convicted person attempting to overturn a presumptively
lawful determination of guilt. See Ross v. Moffitt, 417 U.S. 600, 610-11 (1974).
18.  Coleman, 501 U.S. at 752.
19.  See id. at 753-54.
20.  See id.
21. MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 6.2 cmt. 2 (AM. BAR Ass'N 2015).
22.  132 S. Ct. 1309, 1320 (2012).
23.  See id. at 1317-18.
24.  Justice  Kennedy  was quite  explicit  about  this.  Id.  at  1317 (noting  that effective
assistance of counsel at trial is a "bedrock principle in our justice system").  However, as the
dissent  noted, there is no principled  basis for limiting the exception to trial-level  ineffective
assistance of counsel claims. See id. at 1321 (Scalia, J., dissenting). For example, claims that the
prosecution withheld exculpatory, material information (commonly referred to as Brady claims)
are also generally not available on direct appeal because the suppression of evidence has not yet
come to light. See, e.g., Banks v. Dretke, 540 U.S.  668, 675, 693, 698 (2004) (granting a new
penalty phase to a death-sentenced inmate based on the suppression of information discovered for
the first time in federal habeas corpus proceedings). The same is also true in many cases involving
juror misconduct. See, e.g., Williams v. Taylor, 529 U.S. 420, 440 (2000) (finding that there was
"cause" in a state post-conviction proceeding for petitioner's failure to raise the claim that a juror2016] CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTATION 771
exception only applies to jurisdictions that, either explicitly or as a matter
of practice, require claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel to be
asserted in state post-conviction proceedings.25  In the Court's view, if a
defendant  cannot  challenge  trial  counsel's  competency  on  direct
appeal-a proceeding in which she would have the right to the effective
assistance of appellate counsel-then the state collateral review process
constitutes the first opportunity for review.26 Thus, this process is akin to
an appeal "as of right," in which the defendant is guaranteed the right to
the effective assistance of counsel.27
Returning  to  the  bottom  line,  if  state  post-conviction  counsel
unreasonably (and prejudicially) fails to raise a viable claim of ineffective
assistance  of  trial  counsel,  then  there  is  "cause"  (and  likely
"prejudice")-and  thus a gateway to  a merits'  review of the claim  in
federal  habeas  corpus  proceedings.  So  far,  so  good.  But,  in  many
instances,  state  post-conviction  counsel  is  also  federal  habeas  corpus
counsel.  In  fact,  in  capital  post-conviction  cases,  the  pre-Martinez
preference and practice was for continuity of counsel from state to federal
court.28  For  obvious  reasons,  having  state  post-conviction  counsel
represent  the  inmate in  federal  court  was believed  to promote  higher
quality  and  more  cost-effective  representation.  State  post-conviction
counsel will also be familiar with the trial and post-conviction records
and the issues in the case (and thus will not need additional time to "get
up to speed"), but will also-in most instances-have a positive working
relationship with the client. And, given the paucity of funding for counsel
(and experts) in many states in state collateral proceedings,29  state post-
lied on voir dire when evidence was not discovered until completion of direct appeal and state
collateral review).
25.  See Trevino v. Thaler, 133 S. Ct. 1911, 1918, 1921 (2013) (finding that Texas law, as a
matter of course, requires defendants to assert ineffective assistance of trial counsel claims in state
post-conviction  proceedings because the "Texas  procedural  system  . . . does not offer most
defendants a meaningful opportunity to present a claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel
on direct appeal").
26.  See Martinez, 132 S. Ct. at 1315-16.
27.  See id. at 1319. While the Court analogized post-conviction proceedings in this context
to an appeal of right, it did not hold that there is a constitutional right to counsel in post-conviction
proceedings;  instead,  the Court relied  upon principles  of equity to create the  exception for
otherwise procedurally barred claims. Id.  at 1319-20.  Presumably,  it did so in an attempt to
"cabin" the exception-limit it to ineffective assistance of trial counsel claims, which would have
been  impossible had the Court recognized a constitutional right to counsel in post-conviction
proceedings. See id Perhaps it also did so to limit the fiscal burden on the states that would follow
from creating a constitutional right to counsel.
28.  See Guide to the Appointment and Compensation of Counsel Under the Criminal Justice
Act, section *.28. See 7A ADMIN.  OFFICE OF THE U.S.  COURTS, GUIDE  TO JUDICIARY POLICY
§ 220.25(c) (2015), http://www.uscourts.gov/file/2793/download.
29.  Benjamin H. Barton & Sephanos Bibas, TriagingA  ppointed-Counsel Fundinga nd Pro772 FLORIDA LAWREVIEW [Vol. 68
conviction counsel may have taken the case through the state collateral
appeals system hoping to recoup some of their investment in federal court
given the relatively better compensation  system for counsel in federal
habeas corpus cases.30
Yet this common and preferred practice developed in a legal regime
in which inadequate assistance of state post-conviction counsel was of no
significance.  That is no longer true; it is now a means of having federal
courts adjudicate procedurally defaulted claims, and thus-in any given
case-could literally be the difference between a client rotting in prison
or being released and, in some instances, lives or dies.31 Given this shift
in the  relevance of the  quality  of state post-conviction  representation,
what  are  the  implications  of Martinez's recognition  of inadequate
assistance of post-conviction counsel as "cause" for a procedural default
for cases currently pending in (or about to enter) federal habeas corpus
proceedings where counsel who are appointed (or seek to be appointed)
represented  the  inmate  in  state  post-conviction  proceedings?  The
question  becomes  more  complicated  when  considered  in  light  of a
defense  attorney's obligations under both the Sixth Amendment's  right
to effective assistance of counsel and the rules of professional conduct
generally applicable to all lawyers.32 Although criminal defense lawyers
Se Access to Justice, 160 U. PENN. L. REV. 967, 972-73 (2012); see also Ira P. Robbins, Toward
a More Just and Effective System of Review in State Death Penalty Cases, 40 AM. U. L. REV. 1,
76-77 (1990) (noting that many states pay attorneys virtually nothing to defend in capital cases).
30.  It is not always the case that state post-conviction counsel also represents the inmate in
federal habeas corpus proceedings. Sometimes, the client may want new counsel, or the lawyer
may conclude she is not competent to represent the client in federal court given the complexity of
federal habeas corpus. In other cases, the state collateral appeals lawyer may work for a state
defender organization that cannot appear in federal court, or the jurisdiction may have a unit in a
Federal Public Defender's Office (generally referred to as Capital Habeas Units) that is staffed
and funded to represent persons only in federal habeas proceedings.  See, e.g., Capital Habeas
Unit, FED. PuB. DEFENDER: DISTRICT ARIZ..  http://www.fpdaz.org/#!capital-habeas-unit/bgm64
(last visited Feb.  10, 2016). But, prevailing national practice, especially in active death penalty
jurisdictions  such  as  Alabama,  Texas,  South  Carolina,  and  Virginia,  is  for continuity  of
representation from state to federal court.
31.  For example, the State of Virgina executed Roger Coleman after denying him federal
habeas review because his state post-conviction attorneys filed a notice of appeal three days late.
See  Subcommittee  on  Civil  and  Constitutional  Rights,  Innocence and the Death Penalty:
Assessing the Danger ofMistaken Executions, DEATH PENALTY INFO. CTR. (Oct. 21, 1993), http://
www.deathpenaltyinfo.org/innocence-and-death-penalty-assessing-dangermistaken-executions.
32.  All lawyers are subject to professional discipline, with sanctions ranging from a private
reprimand up to suspension from practice or disbarment, which courts of the state of the lawyer's
admission mete out. See CHARLES W. WOLFRAM, MODERN LEGAL ETHICS § 3.2, at 82, § 3.5, at
118 (student ed.  1986).  The power to impose discipline is theoretically reposed in the state's
supreme  court,  although  investigation  and  prosecution  of disciplinary  matters  is generally
delegated  to an  agency of the court.  See  I GEOFFREY C. HAZARD, JR. ET AL., THE LAW OF
LAWYERING § 1.16, 30-31 (3d ed. Supp. 2014). Discipline is based on evidence of a violation of2016]1 CAPTIAL POST-CONVIC7ION REPRESENTATION 773
and  prosecutors  quite  understandably  tend  to  think  first  in  terms  of
constitutional  principles,  they  must  also  comply  with  the  lawyer
disciplinary rules of the state of their admission. Under these rules, a state
post-conviction lawyer who failed-unreasonably and with prejudice-
to raise an ineffective  assistance of counsel claim with respect to trial-
court  representation likely has a material-limitation  conflict of interest
under state versions of the concurrent conflicts rule.33
Lawyers who practice  in the area of civil litigation or transactional
representation are familiar with "prior work" conflicts and the solution to
them, which is to obtain the informed consent of the affected client after
full disclosure of the facts giving rise to the conflict and the available
alternatives.34  As this Article  discusses below,  however,  the  standard
response  within the  law of professional responsibility-relying  on the
informed  consent  doctrine-is  ill  adapted  to  the  circumstances  of
criminal defense, particularly capital defense representation.35
Martinez further complicates the standard approach by significantly
increasing  the  stakes  around  the  evaluation  of an  attorney's  own
malpractice and potential conflicts of interest.  In the ordinary  case, an
attorney is constantly making judgment calls, and maybe some of them
are mistakes. Most of these mistakes, however, will not end up amounting
to much, and even if they do, they are unlikely to subject the attorney to
liability for  malpractice.  Only  in the  unusual  event of a mistake  that
creates a substantial likelihood of subjecting the attorney to civil liability
will there be a conflict of interest requiring the attorney  to obtain the
client's informed consent. Significantly, the rules of professional conduct
allow attorneys  to make this judgment call  as well.  Attorneys  decide
when  they  have  made  a  mistake  sufficiently  serious  to  constitute
malpractice, when potential malpractice constitutes a conflict of interest,
whether  that conflict is waivable, and what disclosure is adequate as a
ground for the client's informed consent.36  Ironically,  even though the
state rules of professional conduct. This Article uses the terms "rules of professional conduct" and
"disciplinary rules" interchangeably here (with the latter term invoking the familiar "subject to
discipline" standard used on the Multistate Professional Responsibility Exam).
33.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.7(a)(2) (AM. BAR ASS'N 2015) ("[A] lawyer
shall not represent  a client if the representation  involves a concurrent conflict of interest. A
concurrent conflict of interest exists if: .. .there is a significant risk that the representation of one
or more clients will be materially limited . .. by a personal interest of the lawyer.").
34.  See id. r.  1.0(e) (defining "informed  consent" as  "the agreement by a person to a
proposed  course  of conduct after the  lawyer  has  communicated  adequate  information  and
explanation about the material risks of and reasonably  available alternatives to the proposed
course of conduct").
35.  See infra Section II.C.
36.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.7, cmt. 2 (giving the lawyer responsibility
for determining the existence of a conflict, whether it is waivable, and what disclosure is required774 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
tort doctrine of malpractice and the rules of professional conduct are both
intended to protect clients, the rules allow the possibly negligent lawyer
to decide whether client protection  requires disclosure and consent,  or
possibly  withdrawal  from  representation.37  Given  the  significance  of
ineffective assistance of counsel in capital cases,  however, this kind of
self-monitoring  would be  intolerable.  Hence,  the puzzle  presented  by
Martinez, which recognizes the inability of lawyers to self-monitor, but
fails  to provide  a mechanism  for ensuring that the  client's  rights are
adequately protected.
The difficulty of the Martinez problem is illustrated by a recent case
decided  by  the  Supreme  Court,  Christeson v.  Roper.38  In Christeson,
counsel  appointed  to  represent  a  death row  inmate missed the  filing
deadline for their client's federal habeas petition, leading to its dismissal
as untimely under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of
1996 (AEDPA).39 Although the Court did not rule on the issue, counsel's
inexplicable  errors,  including  not  only  miscalculating  the  limitations
period  but  also  failing  to  communicate  with  their  client  after  being
appointed at a particularly time-critical period, were likely the types of
"serious  ...  attorney misconduct" that could equitably toll the statute of
limitations.40 For the attorneys to argue for equitable tolling, however,
would be to admit their own incompetence, creating a conflict between
the attorneys' duty to provide competent and diligent representation and
their interest in preserving their professional reputations.41 The conflict
created  by their prior  incompetence  rendered  the attorneys  unable  to
represent the petitioner in the ongoing litigation, involving as it would the
attempt  to  equitably  toll  the  AEDPA  statute  of limitations.42  But
Christeson only highlights the Martinez problem; it does not point toward
in order to satisfy the informed consent standard). We are grateful to Bruce Green for emphasizing
this aspect of the usual relationship between malpractice and conflicts of interest.
37.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.7  cmt. 4.
38.  135 S. Ct. 891 (2015).
39.  Id. at 892.
40.  Id. at 892, 894 (quoting Holland v. Florida, 560 U.S. 631, 651-52 (2010)).
41.  Id at 894. The Court gives the attorneys some credit for recognizing this conflict, but
the attorneys actually missed the point completely. They noted that a hearing on whether they had
abandoned their client (and thus created grounds for equitable tolling) would involve them as
essential witnesses. Id. This would involve a violation of the advocate-witness rule. See MODEL
RULES  OF PROF'L CONDUCT  r.  3.7(a).  The  advocate-witness rule,  which is  really aimed at
preventing jury confusion and is in any event waivable if disqualification would work substantial
hardship on the client, id. r. 3.7(a)(3) cmt. 2, was the least of the attorneys' problems. A substantial
likelihood  that  the  attorneys  would  make  arguments  that  "manifestly  served  their  own
professional and reputational interests," to the direct detriment to their client's interests, is a
serious and  non-waivable conflict under Rule  1.7(a)(1)  of the Model  Rules of Professional
Conduct. Christeson, 135 S. Ct. at 895.
42.  Christeson, 135 S. Ct. at 895.2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTATION 775
a solution. The attorneys' conflict of interest came to the attention of the
district  court  through  the  efforts  of independent  lawyers  who  had
examined the case and immediately spotted the conflict.43  If this second
pair of lawyers  had  not injected themselves  into the  case (as  there  is
currently  no  mechanism  to  ensure  the  involvement  of conflict-free
substitute  counsel),  the petitioner  would  have  lost the  opportunity  to
argue for equitable tolling and file a federal habeas petition.
This Article's analysis begins  in Part I by attempting to disentangle
the  relationship  between  the  Sixth  Amendment's  guarantee  of the
effective  assistance  of counsel  and the  rules  of professional  conduct
adopted by state courts for the regulation of lawyers in that state. Courts,
including  the  Supreme  Court,  sometimes  talk  as  though  a  lawyer's
obligations  under the rules  of professional  conduct  are  some  kind of
lower-order law that is less important than the Sixth Amendment. While
of course the Constitution is the supreme law of the land and state courts
may  not impose  duties  on  counsel  that  contravene  it,  lawyers  quite
understandably are concerned with complying with all the standards that
govern  their  professional  conduct.  As  a  criminal  procedure  and  a
professional  responsibility  scholar,  respectively,  we  speak  somewhat
different languages when talking about the duties of a criminal defense
attorney-but  this  Article  indicates  that  these  perspectives  must  be
integrated when considering the Martinez dilemma. Accordingly, Part II
takes a  step back from the  specific  context of state and federal  post-
conviction representation  and looks  at prior-work  conflicts  of interest
more  generally,  as  they  would  be  handled  under  the  state  rules  of
professional  conduct.  In  an  ideal  case,  as  noted  above,  it would  be
possible for a lawyer to handle this problem by providing full disclosure
to  the  client and obtaining the  client's informed  consent to  continued
representation.44 As is so often the case, however, "death is different,"45
and there  are features  of capital  defense  representation  that make the
problem of prior-work conflicts much more difficult to deal  with. The
insidious nature  of entrusting an  attorney  to  self-monitor  conflicts  of
interest, even when there are reasons to question the attorney's capacity
for exercising independent judgment, may be tolerable in ordinary civil
malpractice cases and is certainly tolerable in those frequently litigated
cases  involving  sophisticated,  repeat-player  clients.  But  in  the
representation of individual, disempowered clients-often suffering from
mental illness or cognitive disabilities-there must be an alternative to
the usual approach. Finally, Part III considers the contextual features that
make  conflicts  of  interest  particularly  difficult  in  federal  habeas
43.  See id. at 892-93.
44.  See supra text accompanying note 37.
45.  See, e.g., Simmons v. South Carolina, 512 U.S.  154, 185 (1994) (Scalia, J., dissenting).776 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
representation  and  suggests  some  approaches  to  resolving  Martinez
conflicts in the inherently non-ideal world of capital litigation.
I.  THE SIXTH AMENDMENT  AND THE LAW OF PROFESSIONAL
RESPONSIBILITY
The  norms  governing  criminal  defense  lawyering,  including  post-
conviction representation, are an amalgam of several different bodies of
law that stand in an uneasy relationship to one another. However, they all
create duties on the part of lawyers, despite the tendency of some lawyers
to ignore them.  In particular,  criminal  defense  lawyers  accustomed  to
thinking  in  terms  of the  Sixth  Amendment's  right  to  the  effective
assistance  of counsel  may sometimes  overlook  the  disciplinary  rules
governing conflicts of interest. Civil litigators and transactional lawyers
live and die by the conflicts rules because they can make the difference
between the ability to accept a long-lasting, lucrative representation of a
client  and  the  obligation  to  decline  such  representation.  Litigating
motions to  disqualify is an expensive  headache  even  if the  motion is
ultimately  unsuccessful,  so  lawyers  spend  a  great  deal  of energy  on
prevention  strategies  designed  to  head  off  the  possibility  of
disqualification.  Criminal defense lawyers, by contrast,  tend to analyze
conflicts exclusively in terms of the Sixth Amendment right to effective
assistance of counsel, which has the relatively unusual remedy of a new
trial, as seen in Sixth Amendment cases such as Cuyler v. Sullivan46 and
Mickens v.  Taylor.47  While all lawyers  are in principle  subject to state
rules of professional conduct, many criminal defense lawyers  overlook
these  professional  responsibilities  and  focus  only  on  the  Sixth
Amendment standards.
While there is plenty of ignorance of the law governing lawyers to go
around, among both civil and criminal litigators, many civil lawyers at
least practice in large law firms with in-house counsel to advise them on
the  technical  aspects  of conflicts  of interest.48  These  firms  are  also
generally very sensitive to the possibility of civil liability for malpractice
or breach of fiduciary  duty, and they are often  subject  to malpractice
insurance  guidelines  that  limit  potential  liability  exposure.  Criminal
defense  lawyers,  by  contrast,  may  work  in  large  public  defender
46.  446 U.S.  335, 342-43 (1980).  Sullivan, in turn, was based on earlier cases such as
Holloway v. Arkansas, 435 U.S. 475, 484 (1978),  and Glasser v.  United States, 315 U.S. 60, 76
(1942). See Sullivan, 446 U.S. at 349-50. Sullivan, Holloway, and Glasser differ from the now-
standard Sixth Amendment framework subsequently established in Stricklandv . Washington, 466
U.S. 668, 697 (1984), in that Strickland requires an additional showing of prejudice.
47.  535 U.S. 162, 164 (2002).
48.  Elizabeth Chambliss, The Scope of In-Firm Privilege, 80 NOTRE DAME L. REv.  1721,
1721 (2005).2016] CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESEN7A77ON 777
organizations  but  are  frequently  solo  or  small-firm  practitioners  and
therefore  do  not  have  the  same  kind  of compliance  infrastructure.49
However,  they do consider potential claims for ineffective assistance of
counsel,  which  becomes  the  primary  framework  for  understanding
conflicts  of interest  in  criminal  defense  representation.  Courts  also
sometimes  overlook  the  duties  imposed  by  the  rules  of professional
conduct, perhaps unaware that a defense lawyer who raises a conflict of
interest is not playing games or stalling for time but trying in good faith
to comply with her  obligations  under the  disciplinary  rules.  This  Part
analyzes the Martinez dilemma by considering the relationship between
the federal and state  systems of regulating  the professional  conduct of
lawyers.
It  is  admirable  for  defense  lawyers  to  aim  at  representation  that
satisfies the minimum guarantees of the Constitution, but it is a serious
mistake,  analytically  and  as a  matter  of ethical  lawyering,  to  fail  to
consider duties that go beyond the constitutional floor established by the
ineffective  assistance of counsel cases.  Concerns  over the remedy that
follows  from  a  finding  of ineffective  assistance  pervade  many  Sixth.
Amendment ineffective assistance of counsel cases; if there is a finding
of ineffective assistance of counsel, the court must hold a new trial, this
time  with  representation  free  from  constitutional  error.50  Courts  are.
reluctant  to  set  too  high  a  threshold  for  the  minimum  standard  of
representation, fearing a flood of new trials would follow. Lawyers may
therefore  infer erroneously that they are obligated  to do no more  than
avoid a conflict that would lead to a new trial. As the Supreme Court has
emphasized  repeatedly,  however,  another  reason  for  not,
constitutionalizing the law of professional responsibility is that the legal
profession  is  an  independent,  self-governing  institution.51  If defense
lawyers are thankful that federal courts  applying the Sixth Amendment
are not micromanaging their conduct in representing clients, they must
understand the basis for that deference,  which is the courts' expectation
that lawyers will comply with norms established by the profession itself.
49.  This is true even if the defense lawyer is a public defender in a large office. Due to large
caseloads and systemic under-funding of the indigent defense, even large defender organizations
do not have anything approaching the conflict-compliance procedures used in the civil litigation
context. See, e.g., Barton & Bibas, supra note 29, at 972-77.
50.  See RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § 6(12) (AM. LAW INST.
2000) (listing "granting a new trial" as a potential remedy for a lawyer's breach of a duty to a
client).
51.  See, e.g., Nix v. Whiteside, 475 U.S. 157, 165 (1986) (holding that constitutionalizing
the Rules of Professional Conduct would be "intrud[ing] into the state's proper authority to define
and apply the standards of professional conduct applicable to those it admits to practice in its
courts").778 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
As  discussed  below,52  those  norms  are  embodied  in  state  rules  of
professional conduct, based in every jurisdiction (except California) on
the American Bar Association's (ABA)  Model Rules.53 They apply to all
lawyers, regardless of the context in which they practice,  and not only
provide  the  grounds  for potential  professional  discipline  (disbarment,
suspension, reprimand, etc.), but also state the profession's own vision of
what constitutes ethical conduct.54
Courts, in turn, need to be aware of the mess they make when they fail
to consider the interaction among seemingly separate, but in fact related,
sources  of professional  guidance.  For example,  the  Court in Mickens
created considerable uncertainty over the application of the presumption
of prejudice  in Cuyler to  conflicts  of interest  other than  concurrent-
representation  conflicts.  Writing for the  Court,  Justice  Antonin  Scalia
observed:
The purpose of our Holloway and [Cuyler] exceptions from
the ordinary requirements of Strickland, however, is not to
enforce  the  Canons  of Legal Ethics,  but to apply  needed
prophylaxis in situations where Strickland itself is evidently
inadequate  to  assure  vindication  of the  defendant's  Sixth
Amendment right to counsel.  In resolving this case on the
grounds on which it was presented to us, we do not rule upon
the need for the Sullivan prophylaxis in cases of successive
representation.
Never mind that the "Canons of Legal Ethics" have not been in effect
in any jurisdiction since the adoption of disciplinary rules based on the
ABA's Model Code of Professional Responsibility  (Model Code) in the
early  1970s.56  Justice  Scalia  blurred  the  distinction  between  the
52.  See infra p. 17 and note 84.
53.  See infra note 84.
54.  Because the Model Rules are intended to apply to all lawyers, further specification of
duties may  be  required  in  specialized  areas  of practice.  Under  the auspices  of the  ABA,
committees of experienced lawyers, judges, and law professors produce commentary or guidelines
that show how the general duties stated in the Model Rules apply in particular contexts. See, e.g.,
Lawrence J. Fox, CapitalG  uidelines and Ethical Duties: Mutually Reinforcing Responsibilities,
36 HOFSTRA  L. REV.  775,  776 (2008)  (explaining  how the  ABA's capital  defense  counsel
guidelines are derived from duties stated in the Model Rules).
55.  Mickens v. Taylor, 535 U.S.  162, 176 (4th Cir. 2002) (citation omitted).
56.  See HAZARD, supra note 32, § 1.11, at 1-21. The ABA promulgated the Canons of Ethics
in 1908. Id § 1.10, at 1-20. They had only precatory effect, except to the extent they overlapped
with the common law governing lawyers. Id. § 1.10, at 1-20 to -21. "[Tlhey were not adopted or
re-promulgated by the courts as law." Id. The most charitable interpretation of Justice Scalia's
dismissal of the rules of professional conduct, supported by his reference to the Canons, is that he
was thinking of this long-outdated list of aspirations. It is perfectly clear today, however, that the2016] CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION REPRESENIATION 779
successive-representation conflicts rule, which itselfis a prophylactic rule
designed  to  protect  the  client's reasonable  expectation  of the  former
lawyer's loyalty and confidentiality,5 7 and the prophylactic application of
the  presumption  of  prejudice.  It  may  be  that  there  was  no  Sixth
Amendment violation because the conflict of interest had no effect on the
representation.58 That does not mean, however, that Mickens' lawyer did
not have a conflict of interest. He had previously represented the victim
in an unrelated criminal matter59 and, as a result, almost certainly learned
confidential  information  that he was  professionally  obligated to  keep
secret. He also may have  felt a residual  sense of loyalty to his former
client, which might have made it more difficult to pursue certain avenues
in defense of his present client. The effect on the representation may not
have risen to the level of an "actual conflict of interest [that]  adversely
affected  [the]  lawyer's  performance,"  as  required  to  trigger  the
presumption  of prejudice  under  Cuyler60  (although  there  are  strong
arguments that it did), but it may nevertheless  have been a sufficiently
serious interference with the lawyer's duties to require him to withdraw
from the  representation  and permit  the defendant to  secure  substitute
counsel.
All  lawyers  are subject  to  discipline  for violations  of the  rules  of
conduct  adopted  in the  state  or  states in which  they are  admitted  to
practice.61  State courts enact these rules pursuant to the inherent power
of the  state judiciary to  regulate  the  practice  of law in  the territorial
jurisdiction  of the  state.62  They  not  only  represent  the  views  of the
Model Rules are "set forth in the manner of a true code-mandatory conduct rules, without the
'softening'  addition of hortatory provisions that were meant to inspire rather than coerce." Id.
§ 1.12, at 1-21.
57.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.9 cmt. 1 (AM. BAR Ass'N 2015).
58.  See Mickens, 535 U.S. at 179 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Specifically, Mickens involved
a defense attorney assigned to represent a minor on assault and concealed-weapon charges. Id. at
164 (majority opinion). The appointed attorney met with the client one time for between fifteen
and thirty minutes. Id. Within the week, the minor client was murdered. Id. at 164-65. The minor
defendant's initial lawyer was subsequently appointed as defense counsel for the man accused of
the forcible sodomy and murder of his former client. Id.
59.  See id. at 164.
60.  See Cuyler v. Sullivan, 446 U.S. 335, 348 (1980).
61.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 8.5(a).
62.  See RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS  § 1 cmt. b (AM. LAW
INST.  2000). The Restatement  is a significant source  of authority in the law of professional
responsibility because it attempts to unify the principles expressed in the state rules of professional
conduct with generally applicable norms of tort, contract, agency, procedure, and other law that
bear on the conduct of lawyers. For example, provisions respecting conflicts of interest take into
account not only cases imposing discipline for representing a client while subject to a conflict,
but also cases involving disqualification  by a court from the representation of a client due to
conflicts of interest, which is technically an aspect of a different inherent power of a tribunal-780 7L ORIDA -AWR EVIEW [Vol. 68
organized profession concerning the ethical obligations of lawyers, but
also  are  enforceable  through  state  disciplinary  procedures.63  As  the
Supreme  Court  explained  in  Strickland6,4  defense  lawyers  are  also
obligated by their clients'  Sixth Amendment rights to provide effective
assistance  of counsel.65  A lawyer owes the client a duty of objectively
reasonable performance, as measured by prevailing professional norms.66
Justice  Sandra  Day  O'Connor,  writing  for  the  Court  in  Strickland,
suggested that rules of professional conduct adopted by state courts are
one source of guidance for determining the content of these norms.67 At
the  same  time,  however,  she  cautioned  against  a  per  se  equivalence
between  the constitutionally guaranteed  effective assistance  of counsel
and conduct that was mandatory under state disciplinary rules:
No particular set of detailed rules for counsel's conduct can
satisfactorily take account of the variety of circumstances
faced by defense counsel or the range of legitimate decisions
regarding how best to represent a criminal defendant. Any
such set of rules would interfere  with the  constitutionally
protected  independence  of counsel  and  restrict  the  wide
latitude counsel must have in making tactical decisions.68
The ideal of the bar as an independent institution,  to which  Justice
O'Connor appeals, has deep historical  roots,69  and it is understandable
that at the time she authored Strickland she did not wish to involve the
Court in establishing  detailed  guidelines for competent representation.
However,  the  language  in numerous  ineffective  assistance  of counsel
the power to regulate the conduct of litigation in that court. See id. § I cmt. c; WOLFRAM, supra
note 32, § 2.2.4, at 31-32 (distinguishing a trial court's inherent authority to regulate the conduct
of lawyers appearing before the tribunal from the inherent power of the judiciary more broadly to
regulate the legal profession). Disqualification is an equitable remedy imposed by courts to protect
the integrity of its proceedings. Because it is an equitable remedy, however, and because not all
participants in a litigated matter may have standing to raise a conflict of interest in a motion to
disqualify,  disqualification  cases  may  diverge  in  important  ways  from  cases  imposing
professional discipline or, for that matter, from cases involving lawsuits by clients for malpractice
or breach of fiduciary duty arising out of a conflict-burdened  representation. The Restatement
does an admirable job of unifying these diverse sources of normative authority into a relatively
coherent body of law-the law governing lawyers.
63.  RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § 5(1).
64.  466 U.S.  668, 685 (1984).
65.  Id.
66.  Id. at 688.
67.  Id.
68.  Id. at 688-89.
69.  See Robert W. Gordon, The Independence of Lawyers, 68 B.U. L. REV. 1,  6 (1988)
(chronicling the historical meaning of professional independence and how lawyers have "pursued
their vision of independence in their practices").2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPIESENTATION 781
cases decided  since Strickland has created unnecessary confusion with
respect to the relationship between the rules of professional conduct and
the  constitutional  minimum  for  competent  performance  by  defense
counsel.  In particular,  some  Justices  seem  to  have  contributed  to  an
attitude  among judges and lawyers  that the  state rules of professional
conduct are inferior to other sources of guidance for lawyers. At the very
least, the Court has not been consistent in the attitude it expresses toward
state  disciplinary  rules, which may have  had the  unfortunate  result of
tacitly suggesting to defense lawyers that the rules are unimportant.
Consider Nix v.  Whiteside.70 In that case, after the defendant suddenly
changed his account of how a killing took place, the defense lawyer told
his client  that if the  client  insisted on taking the  stand  and testifying
falsely, it would be counsel's  duty to inform the court that he felt his
client  was  committing  perjury  and  to  seek to  withdraw.71 The  client
subsequently filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus claiming that his
lawyer's refusal to allow him to testify to the second version of events
deprived  him  of the  effective  assistance  of counsel.72  Applying  the
performance  prong  of Strickland, the  Court reiterated  that prevailing
professional  norms  are  the  yardstick  for  measuring  competent
representation.73 Significantly, it distinguished between what state rules
of professional conduct  might require,  on the  one hand,  and what the
Sixth Amendment might require on the other:
Under the Strickland standard, breach of an ethical standard
does  not  necessarily  make  out  a  denial  of  the  Sixth
Amendment  guarantee  of  assistance  of  counsel.  When
examining attorney conduct, a court must be careful  not to
narrow the wide range of conduct acceptable under the Sixth
Amendment so restrictively as to constitutionalize particular
standards of professional conduct  and thereby intrude  into
the state's proper authority to define and apply the standards
of professional  conduct  applicable  to  those  it  admits  to
practice in its courts.74
70.  475 U.S.  157 (1986).
71.  Id. at 161.
72.  Id. at 162.
73.  Id. at 165.
74.  Id.  The Court's use of the term  "ethical  standard"  here, while familiar  enough,  is
potentially misleading because state rules of professional conduct are legally enforceable rules of
positive law, not merely statements of what a good lawyer ought to do. See LIAM MURPHY, WHAT
MAKES LAW: AN INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF LAW 23-24 (2014) (defining positive law
as that which can be ascertained without moral deliberation about what the law ought to be). There
are many different ways to understand the word "ethics." The ABA Model Code distinguished
between statements of best practices that were not intended to constitute enforceable rules, called782 FLORIDA LAWREVEW [Vol. 68
The Court then set out a summary of the duties of counsel, as a matter
of the state rules of professional conduct, for when a criminal defendant
announces  the intention to testify falsely.75  Here is where the Justices'
discussion of the  applicable  standards  of professional  conduct  subtly
diverge,  showing  the  importance  of the  Court's  attitude  toward  the
disciplinary rules.
Chief Justice Warren Burger, writing for the majority, stated that "an
attorney's revelation of his client's perjury to the court is a professionally
responsible and acceptable response to the conduct of a client who has
actually  given  perjured  testimony."76  That  would  be  true  today.  The
Model Rules arguably permit the lawyer's conduct in Whiteside-sternly
admonishing the client to tell the truth and informing him of counsel's
duties to inform the court and withdraw from representation in the event
of perjury.77  The  defense lawyer's  conduct  would therefore  be within
Ethical Considerations (ECs), and enforceable, black-letter rules, called Disciplinary Rules (DRs),
stating minimum standards  of conduct,  the violation of which would subject  an attorney to
discipline. See MODEL CODE OF PROF'L RESPONSIBILITY PRELIMINARY  STATEMENT (AM. BAR
Ass'N 1980). This distinction corresponds with what Professor Lon Fuller called the "morality of
aspiration" and the "morality of duty," respectively. See LON L. FULLER, THE MORALITY OF LAW
5-6 (1964).  As Professor David Luban  points out, this is an idiosyncratic use of the idea of
morality. See DAVID LUBAN, Natural Law as ProfessionalE thics: A Reading ofFuller, in LEGAL
ETHICS AND HUMAN DIGNITY 99, 105 (2007). Philosophers generally use "ethics" and "morality"
interchangeably, although a few philosophers have attempted to argue for a distinction. See, e.g.,
BERNARD WILLIAMS, ETHICS AND THE LIMITS OF PHILOSOPHY 6 (1985). The important distinction
for the purposes of the ethics and conduct of lawyers is between (1)  norms that take the form of
enforceable standards, potentially subjecting lawyers to some form of legal sanctions, including
professional discipline (disbarment, suspension, reprimand, etc.),  civil liability, or a finding of
constitutional ineffectiveness, and (2) norms that make rational demands on any moral agent,
including those acting in a professional capacity, and thus establish standards for the evaluation
of conduct as right or wrong irrespective of law. For example, one might contend that it is wrong
in ethical terms to dedicate one's skill and training as a lawyer to prevent the extradition to Israel
of an accused concentration camp guard, while conceding that there is no legal prohibition on
doing so. See Monroe H. Freedman, Must You Be the Devil's Advocate?, LEGAL TIMES, Aug. 23,
1993, at  19, reprinted in MONROE H. FREEDMAN & ABBE SMITH, UNDERSTANDING  LAWYERS'
ETHICS app. A,  at 371  (4th ed.  2010). While  the term  "legal  ethics" is often understood  as
equivalent to the law governing lawyers or the state rules of professional conduct, to preserve
analytical clarity, this Article does not use it in this way.
75.  Whiteside, 475 U.S. at 166-68.
76.  Id. at 170.
77.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 3.3 cmt. 6 (AM. BAR ASS'N 2015) ("Ifa  lawyer
knows that the client intends to testify falsely . . .the lawyer should seek to persuade the client
[and] ...[ilf the persuasion is ineffective .. .the lawyer must refuse to offer the false evidence.").
The lawyer may have misapplied the rules, however, by concluding that the client intended to
testify falsely, based on the client changing his story and saying that, based on other cases that
argued self defense, "If I don't say I saw a gun, I'm dead." Whiteside, 475 U.S. at 161. The duties
imposed on lawyers with respect to false testimony are triggered only when the lawyer knows the
testimony will be false. MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 3.3 cmt. 6. Knowledge is a defined2016] CAPITAL POST-CONVICNTON  REPRESENTA TION 783
prevailing norms of professional conduct under the Model Rules, which
are now the basis for the rules of professional conduct in forty-nine states
and  the  District  of Columbia.71  Complicating  the  analysis,  however,
Chief Justice  Burger  apparently  misunderstood  the  Model  Code,  a
version of which was then in effect in Iowa.79  The Model Code handled
the problem of perjury in an awkward, roundabout way. In contrast with
the Model Rules, which have a specific rule for witness perjury and an
explicit priority of duties between candor to the tribunal and maintaining
client confidences,80 the Model Code treated the professional response to
client perjury  as an instance  of the general problem of assisting client
crimes  and  of disclosing  confidential  information  to  prevent  future
crimes.81 Because it handled the problem in this way, it created ambiguity
term in the Model Rules and refers to actual (subjective) knowledge. Id. r. 1.0(f). Court decisions
occasionally  underscore  that  knowledge  really  does  mean  knowledge.  See,  e.g.,  State  v.
McDowell, 681 N.W.2d 500, 518-19 (Wis.  2004) (defining knowledge of intended perjury as
knowledge "based on the client's expressed admission ofi ntent to testify untruthfully") (emphasis
added).
78.  See  CTR.  FOR PROF'L RESPONSIBILITY,  MODEL RULES  OF PROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT,
http://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional-responsibility/publications/model  rulesof pr
ofessionalconduct.html (last visited Feb. 12, 2016). California remains a holdout, with a hybrid
system based on its own rules of professional conduct and various provisions of the California
Business & Professions Code. See CALIFORNIA RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1-100(A)  (STATE
BAR OF CAL. 2014).
79.  See Whiteside, 475 U.S. at 167-68. Additionally, lawyers sometimes misunderstand the
lack of authority of the ABA Model Code and Model Rules. The word "model" is not used for
nothing. Committees of the ABA,  consisting of lawyers, judges, and academics, propose rules of
professional conduct that states can be adopt, but the ABA models have no force until the highest
court of a state adopts them. See RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § I
cmt. b (AM. LAW INST. 2000). Professional responsibility scholars may speak informally of duties
under the Model Rules, but it is well established that the binding rules are those adopted by the
state's highest court. See id This is not merely a pedantic distinction, as state courts may vary the
content of the rules from the ABA versions. As a general rule, the more controversial an issue is
in the law of lawyering, the more state-by-state variation can be expected.
80.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 3.3(c) (stating that the duties in Rule 3.3 apply
even  where compliance  would require  disclosure  of information  protected  by the  duty  of
confidentiality in Rule 1.6). The rule requires the lawyer to refuse to offer evidence known to be
false and to take "reasonable remedial measures" if the lawyer later comes to learn of the falsity
of evidence previously offered. Id. r. 3.3(a)(3). Those remedial measures include first trying to
persuade the witness not to testify falsely or to correct previously given false testimony but may
ultimately include disclosure to the tribunal of the perjury. Id. r. 3.3 cmt. [10].
81.  See MODEL CODE OF PROF'L RESPONSIBILITY  DR 7-102(A)(4) (AM. BAR Ass'N 1980)
("[A] lawyer shall not ...  [k]nowingly use perjured testimony"). As compared with the Model
Rules, this provision is troublesome because it does not provide guidance to a lawyer confronted
with a client, such as Emanuel Whiteside, who is apparently determined to testify falsely. The
attorney's duty of confidentiality would cover the communication from the client to the lawyer in
which the client expresses an intention to lie on the stand. In Whiteside, the client stated that he
believed that if he did not testify to having seen a gun, he would not be successful in claiming
self-defense. 475 U.S. at 161. What should the lawyer do in that case? The Model Code did allow784 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
concerning the permissibility of revealing false testimony after the fact,
as  permitted  by  the  Model  Rules.82  Chief  Justice  Burger  seemed
unimpressed with this technical distinction-which of course  would be
highly significant to a lawyer seeking to avoid professional discipline-
and relied instead on the proposition that a lawyer's permissible actions
are limited to "legitimate, lawful conduct compatible with the very nature
of a trial as a search for truth."83
Justice  William  Brennan  wrote  separately  to  emphasize  that  the
decision established only the proposition that if a lawyer complies with
the state rules of professional conduct regarding client perjury, then the
lawyer's  representation  could not be constitutionally ineffective.84  The
case does not stand for the rule that a lawyer is constitutionally required
to dissuade a client from committing perjury, disclose it to the court, or
take  any  other  specific  steps  if he  knows  a  client  intends  to  testify
falsely.85  Justice  Brennan  reminded  lawyers  that  "the  Court's  essay
regarding  what  constitutes  the  correct  response  to  a  criminal  client's
suggestion that he will perjure himself is pure discourse without force of
law."86
a lawyer to disclose "[t]he intention of his client to commit a crime and the information necessary
to prevent the crime." MODEL CODE OF PROF'L RESPONSIBILITY DR 4-101(C)(3). Because perjury
is a crime, Whiteside's lawyer would have been permitted to disclose the client's stated intention
to testify falsely. The lawyer would also have been permitted, and perhaps required, to withdraw
if the continued representation would result in a violation of a disciplinary rule or would constitute
an illegal course of conduct; perjury, a crime, would satisfy those requirements. See id  DR 2-
1 10(B)(2), (C)(1)(b),  (C)(2).
82.  On its face the Model  Code seemed to require, not merely to permit, after-the-fact
revelation  of client perjury. See MODEL CODE OF PROF'L RESPONSIBILITY  DR 7-102(B)(1)  ("A
lawyer who receives information clearly establishing that . . .[h]is client has, in the course of
representation, perpetrated a fraud upon a person or tribunal shall promptly call upon his client to
rectify the same, and if his client refuses or is unable to do so, he shall reveal the fraud to the
affected  person  or  tribunal,  except  when  the  information  is  protected  as  a  privileged
communication.").  Note  the  last  clause  - "except  when  . . . protected  as  a privileged
communication." Lawyer  knowledge  of client perjury  is likely to come from a confidential
attorney-client communication and thus be within the protection of the attorney-client privilege.
But the ABA Committee on Professional Ethics, in Formal Opinion 341 (1975),  stated that the
"except"  clause  should  be  read  more  broadly,  as  emcompassing  both  "secrets"  (that  is,
information  protected  by  the  duty  of confidentiality)  as  well  as  attorney-client  privileged
communications. What DR 7-102(B)(1)  seemed to create as a retrospective duty to disclose client
perjury was thus completely undercut by the "except" clause and its interpretation by the ABA
Committee. See MONROE H. FREEDMAN & ABBE SMITH, UNDERSTANDING  LAWYERS' ETHICS 133-
44 (2d ed. 2002) (recounting this history).
83.  Whiteside, 475 U.S. at 166.
84.  See id. at 177 (Brennan, J., concurring).
85.  See id.
86.  Id.2016] CAPITHAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTATION 785
It is important to see that  Whiteside does not stand for the principle
that  there  is  no  relationship  between  the  state  rules  of professional
conduct and the Sixth Amendment. It is true that not all violations of the
rules of professional conduct give rise to a claim for ineffective assistance
of counsel, just as not all conduct in violation of the rules gives rise to a
malpractice  claim.  It  could  be  the  case,  however,  consistent  with
Whiteside, that a violation of the state disciplinary rules also violates the
performance  prong  of  Strickland.  That  is  an  open  question  after
Strickland  and  Whiteside.  What  is  remarkable  about  Whiteside,
considered  in the  context of subsequent  Supreme  Court cases,  is how
seriously some of the Justices took the state rules of professional conduct.
Justice Burger's majority opinion traced the history of the rule on client
perjury from the 1908 Canons of Ethics, through the  1969 Model Code,
to the  1983 Model Rules, noting that the disciplinary rules had always
imposed some duty on counsel to avoid introducing perjured testimony
or other false evidence.87 The majority analyzed a lawyer's  duty under
the Model Rules and Model Code and stated without hedging that "under
no circumstance  may  a lawyer  either advocate  or passively tolerate  a
client's giving false testimony."88 The Court seems to have been saying
that the disciplinary rules-the then-existing Iowa Code of Professional
Responsibility-are consistent with the defense lawyer's duties under the
Sixth  Amendment,  and  therefore  there  can  be  no  constitutional
ineffectiveness in a representation in which the lawyer follows rules that
apparently coincide with a plausible constitutional vision of the defense
lawyer's role.89
Justice  Harry  Blackmun was, if anything,  more  deferential  to state
rules  of professional  conduct.90  He  saw  the  problem  of the  proper
professional response to client perjury as a difficult one, calling for the
exercise  of judgment and consideration of a number of factors that are
likely to  differ case-by-case.91 A  "blanket rule"  adopted by the  Court
would unnecessarily limit the flexibility states have to adopt rules that
reflect  differing  approaches  to the perjury  problem.92  For that reason,
Justice  Blackmun thought  the primary source  of norms  governing  the
conduct  of criminal  defense  lawyers  ought to be the state  disciplinary
rules.93  Federalism  concerns  substantially  drove  Justice  Blackmun's
opinion, leading him to conclude that the Sixth Amendment is, in a sense,
87.  Id. at 166-68 (majority opinion).
88.  Id at 171.
89.  See id at 175.
90.  See id. at 189-90 (Blackmun, J., concurring).
91.  Id. at 188-89.
92.  Id. at 189.
93.  See id at 189-90.786 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
subordinated to the inherent authority of state courts to regulate the legal
profession.94
In subsequent  cases, however, some Justices have sought to drive a
wedge between the Sixth Amendment and other norms of professional
conduct,  implicitly subordinating the latter. For example,  in Holland v.
Florida9,5  a lawyer was appointed to  represent a death row inmate in
filing a federal  habeas  corpus petition.96  The lawyer  failed to  file the
petition  within  the  one-year  statute  of limitations  prescribed  by  the
AEDPA.97 The Court held that the statute was equitably tolled due to the
extraordinary  circumstance of the  lawyer's failure  to satisfy applicable
professional  standards of care.98 As a matter of state law, the lawyer's
misconduct went far beyond "garden variety" negligence and constituted
a  violation  of fundamental  standards  of professional  responsibility.99
Ironically, Justice Scalia, who was ordinarily inclined to give states room
to regulate without excessive intrusion by federal courts,'00  dissented in
Holland, arguing that the majority had failed to identify a standard under
which the lawyer's performance was grossly negligent.'0' Justice Scalia
stated,  "The  only  thing  the  Court  offers  that  approaches  substantive
instruction is its implicit approval of 'fundamental canons of professional
responsibility,'  articulated  by an  ad hoc  group  of legal-ethicist  amici
consisting  mainly of professors  of that  least analytically rigorous  and
hence most subjective of law-school subjects, legal ethics." 02
The sources relied upon by the Court majority-the Model Rules and
the Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers, which were in
effect  in  Florida and  applicable  to  the  lawyer's  representation  of the
petitioner 103-self-evidently  do  not  state  subjective  standards.  A
subjective  standard would approve  of a lawyer's  conduct as long as he
94.  See id.
95.  560 U.S. 631 (2010).
96.  Id. at 635-66.
97.  Id. at 635, 643 (quoting 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(l)-(2) (2012)).
98.  Id. at 649.
99.  Id. at 652-53 (citing Brief of Legal Ethics Professors et al. as Amici Curiae in Support
of Petitioner, Holland v. Florida, 560 U.S. 631 (2010) (No. 09-5327),  2009 WL 5177143). One
of the authors of this Article was a signatory on the amicus brief.
100.  See, e.g., State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Campbell, 538 U.S. 408,429 (2003) (Scalia,
J., dissenting) (stating that the Due Process Clause does not provide substantive protection against
excessive  punitive damages awards);  United States v. Virginia,  518 U.S.  515, 576-78  (1996)
(Scalia, J., dissenting) (urging deference to state policy in favor of single-sex education at Virginia
Military  Institute); BMW of N.  Am., Inc. v.  Gore, 517  U.S.  559,  598-99 (1996)  (Scalia, J.,
dissenting)  (stating  that the  Due Process Clause  is not a "secret  repository  of substantive
guarantees against 'unfairness'").
101.  Holland, 560 U.S. at 670 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
102.  Id.
103.  Id at 652-53 (majority opinion).2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION REPRESENTATION 787
"acted honestly and bona fide to the best of his own judgment." 04 An
objective standard, on the other hand, requires lawyers to measure up to
the standards  set by others within the profession.  These  standards are
objective to the extent there is something other than the lawyer's own
best  efforts  that  can  be  used  to  determine  whether  the  lawyer's
performance was adequate. 05  Indeed, the brief brushed aside by Justice
Scalia  discussed  objective  duties of competence,  communication,  and
loyalty grounded in tort,  agency,  and constitutional  law,  as well as the
rules of professional conduct.106
Justice Scalia knew the difference between objective and subjective
standards, and he was perfectly well acquainted with the use of custom
to establish standards of care in other contexts, so his dismissal reflected
either  a  substantive  disagreement  with  the  content  of the  standards
established by the rules or an annoyance  that state courts have adopted
standards  of professional  conduct  that  require  lawyers  to  take  their
fiduciary duties to clients seriously. But the opinion also reflects a reverse
of the subordination described by Justice Blackmun in Whiteside. Rather
than  federal  courts  deferring  to  state  disciplinary  rules  to  preserve
flexibility and a variety of responses to a problem of professional ethics;
Justice Scalia wished to oust the authority of state courts and disciplinary
rules and to replace them with a blanket federal constitutional rule that
licensed  gross  negligence  by  defense  counsel.  The  trouble  with this
reverse-subordination  move is that it is inconsistent with the principle in
Strickland that the  legal profession's prevailing norms set the  standard
for  effective  assistance  of  counsel.  Justice  O'Connor's  opinion  in
Strickland cautioned  courts  not to  create  rigid  guidelines  for defense
lawyers and also warned against judging in hindsight, but it did so while
emphasizing that courts should look to the profession to  flesh out the
required standard of care:
104.  Cf Vaughan v. Menlove (1837),  132 Eng. Rep. 490, 493; 3 Bing. (N.C.)  468, 474-75
(rejecting this approach to duties of reasonable care in tort law).
105.  Every first-year torts student is familiar with the distinction drawn by then-Judge Oliver
Wendell Holmes between a person doing the best he is able and the standard of conduct that the
law requires:
If. ..a man is born hasty and awkward, is always having accidents and hurting
himself or his neighbors, no doubt his congenital defects will be allowed for in
the courts of Heaven, but his slips are no less troublesome to his neighbors than
if they sprang from guilty neglect. His neighbors accordingly require him, at his
proper peril, to come up to their standard ....
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, JR., THE COMMON LAW 108 (1881).
106.  See Brief of Legal Ethics Professors et al. as Amici Curiae in Support of Petitioner,
supra note 99.788 FLORIDA LA W REVIEW [Vol. 68
Prevailing norms of practice  as reflected  in American Bar
Association standards and the like are guides to determining
what is reasonable, but they are only guides. No particular
set of detailed rules for counsel's conduct can satisfactorily
take  account  of the  variety  of circumstances  faced  by
defense  counsel  or  the  range  of  legitimate  decisions
regarding how best to represent a criminal defendant. Any
such  set of rules  would interfere  with the constitutionally
protected  independence  of counsel  and  restrict  the  wide
latitude  counsel  must  have  in  making  tactical  decisions.
Indeed,  the  existence  of  detailed  guidelines  for
representation  could  distract  counsel  from the  overriding
mission of vigorous advocacy of the defendant's cause.107
It  is  clear  that  the  Strickland analysis  is  intended  to  protect  the
independence  of the  legal  profession  to  define  its  own  standards  of
conduct,  not to  deny  the  practical  authority  of rules  of professional
conduct for lawyers. 08
Other  Justices  devalue  the  rules  of professional  conduct  through
benign  neglect.  In  Maples v.  Thomas,'09  for example,  two  pro  bono
lawyers at Sullivan & Cromwell simply stopped working on their client's
state post-conviction review case, leading to a procedural default on the
ineffective  assistance  of counsel  claim  he  subsequently  brought  in  a
federal habeas corpus petition.'10 Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg noted that
by not seeking the permission of the trial court to withdraw as counsel of
record,  the lawyers violated  an Alabama rule of criminal procedure."'
Their  conduct  also  violated  the  state  disciplinary  rules,  which  allow
withdrawal  of an attorney only if the withdrawal "can be accomplished
without material adverse effect on the interests  of the client"  or if the
attorney otherwise has good cause, and if the attorney obtains the court's
permission." 2  This  is  not  merely  a  technical  quibble,  but  rather  a
distinction that could make a difference in the evaluation of the attorneys'
conduct. The lawyers were first required to satisfy themselves that one of
seven  alternative  grounds  for  permissive  withdrawal  existed.1 3  As  it
happens,  there  was no basis for permissive  withdrawal-the  attorneys
107.  Id. at 688-89 (citations omitted).
108.  See id. at 688 ("These basic duties neither exhaustively define the obligations of counsel
nor form a checklist for judicial evaluation of attorney performance.").
109.  132 S. Ct. 912 (2012).
110.  Id. at 916-18.
111.  Id. at 919.
112.  See  ALA.  RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT  r.  1.16  (2015)  ("When  a lawyer  has been
appointed  to represent  a client,  withdrawal  ordinarily  requires  approval  of the  appointing
authority.").
113.  See ALA. RULES r. 1.16(b).2016] CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTATION 789
simply disregarded their obligation under the disciplinary rule. It may be
that this violation did not rise to the level of constitutionally ineffective
representation under the first prong of Strickland1,14 but an obvious point
sometimes gets overlooked: the petitioner would not have defaulted on
his federal habeas petition if his attorneys at Sullivan & Cromwell had
complied  with  their  obligation  under  the  state  rules  of professional
conduct.
In other cases, the Court has stressed that it relies on defense lawyers
to  comply  with  their  obligations  under  the  disciplinary  rules.  For
example, with regard to conflicts of interest,
Defense  counsel  have  an  ethical  obligation  to  avoid
conflicting representations and to advise the court promptly
when a conflict of interest arises during the course of trial.
Absent  special  circumstances,  therefore,  trial  courts  may
assume either that multiple representation entails no conflict
or that the lawyer and his clients knowingly accept such risk
of conflict as may exist."
As the Court rightly noted, lawyers are in a better position to detect
and handle conflicts of interest, either by obtaining the informed consent
of their clients  or by informing the court and seeking release from the
representation.116 If courts are going to rely on lawyers' compliance with
the  rules,  for understandable  reasons  such  as minimizing  information
costs, then they should be careful not to send mixed messages about their
importance.
Regardless  of whether  the  Court's  treatment  of the  state  rules  of
professional conduct reflects neglect or outright hostility, it is worrisome
that criminal defense lawyers  may hear the  message that the rules are
lower-status  law  and  can  be  ignored  whenever  compliance  is
inconvenient.  One may certainly criticize the content of some rules for
being  self-serving or insufficiently  rigorous.  Critics of the ABA  have
long contended that the rules do more to protect the legal profession's
114.  See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687 (1984) ("First, the defendant must
show that counsel's performance was deficient. This requires showing that counsel made errors
so serious that counsel was not functioning as the 'counsel' guaranteed the defendant by the Sixth
Amendment.").
115.  Cuyler v. Sullivan, 446 U.S. 335, 346-47 (1980) (footnote omitted).
116.  Id. at 346-47 ("An 'attorney representing two defendants in a criminal matter is in the
best position professionally and ethically to determine  when a conflict of interest exists or will
probably develop in the course of a trial."' (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Holloway
v. Arkansas, 435 U.S.  475, 485 (1978))).790 F'LORIDA LAW RE VIEW [Vol. 68
monopoly  than  to  safeguard  the  public  interest,1 17  and  that  other
institutions,  such  as  legislatures  and  administrative  agencies,  may  be
better situated to address certain types of professional misconduct than
the profession itself.'18 For the most part, however, the rules represent a
coherent, normatively  attractive vision of ethical  lawyering.  The rules
emphasize the highly fiduciary nature of the lawyer-client relationship,
state  strict  duties  of  loyalty,  and  require  a  reasonable  degree  of
competence,  diligence,  and communication  with clients." 9  Certainly  if
the legal profession values its independence from intrusive oversight by
courts,  legislatures,  and regulatory agencies,  lawyers  have  a reason to
follow the rules that they, as an organized profession, have adopted as a
quid pro quo for a monopoly over the provision of legal  services.  It is
understandable  that courts do not want to create rigid, inflexible norms
of  professional  conduct  under  the  guise  of  interpreting  the  Sixth
Amendment's  right to  effective  assistance  of counsel.  But the  duties
stated  in the rules  do not disappear  merely because  there may be  no
federal habeas corpus remedy as a result of their violation. As the rules
themselves remind courts, the law generally does, and should, presuppose
voluntary compliance.120
Voluntary compliance  is even more  important when the profession
claims the prerogative of self-regulation. Of course, the legal profession
is not really  self-regulating:  American  lawyers  are  subject to  various
court-administered  sanctions  for violations  of professional  standards,
117.  See, e.g., Richard L. Abel, Why Does the ABA  Promulgate Ethical Rules?, 59 TEX. L.
REV. 639, 655, 658 (1981);  Deborah L. Rhode,  Why the ABA  Bothers: A Functional Perspective
on Professional Codes, 59 TEx. L. REv. 689, 697-98, 704 (1981).
118.  For example, Professor Susan Koniak understands the history of lawyers' involvement
in numerous financial scandals to reveal the ABA's inability to promulgate effective rules for the
protection of investors. See Susan P. Koniak, When the Hurlyburly's Done: The Bar's Struggle
with the SEC, 103 CoLuM. L. REv. 1236, 1238 (2003) (asserting that the ABA's battles with the
U.S.  Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)  have "[left]  lawyers free to continue helping
major corporations deceive the investing public"). The problem  Professor Koniak considered
involves an assertion by the profession of a norm-a near-absolute duty of confidentiality-that
conflicts with a more pro-disclosure norm favored by the SEC, Congress (in the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act), and many state courts applying the common law of fraud. See Susan P. Koniak,  The Law
Between the Bar and the State, 70 N.C. L. REV. 1389, 1427, 1462 (1992). The cases on ineffective
assistance of counsel, by contrast, generally do not involve a conflict between the norms supported
by the legal profession and those preferred by other institutions. Instead, they involve the frequent
failure of both institutions to take these norms seriously.
119.  See, e.g., MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT rr. 1.1 (competence),  1.3 (diligence), 1.4
cmt. I (communication), 1.7 cmt. I (loyalty) (AM. BAR ASS'N 2015).
¶ 
120.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT  pmbl.  16 ("Compliance with the Rules, as
with all law in an open society, depends primarily upon understanding and voluntary compliance,
secondarily upon reinforcement by peer and public opinion and finally, when necessary, upon
enforcement through disciplinary proceedings.").20161 CAPITAL POS'-CONVIC77ON  REPRESEN7A77ON 791
including  contempt  of  court,  money  damages  for  negligence,
disqualification from representation, and disgorgement of earned fees.121
Similarly,  it  is  a  misstatement-common  enough,  but  inaccurate
nonetheless-to assert that the prevailing customs and norms of the legal
profession set the standard  of effective  representation  under the Sixth
Amendment.1 22 Uncritical deference to prevailing practices may have the
effect of ratifying incompetent  representation.123  Yet Justice O'Connor
was right to be concerned about the independence of the legal profession
from excessive regulation by the judiciary.1 24  The truth of the matter is
that the judiciary and the legal profession gradually establish standards
of effective representation in a back-and-forth process.  As Justice John
Paul Stevens wrote in Padillav . Kentucky,125 the constitutional standard
depends upon "the practice and expectation of the legal community," and
the profession's own internal norms, including the rules of professional
conduct,  are  not  conclusive  authority  but  guides  to  assessing
competence.126  This means that when the Supreme Court establishes an
important new legal principle, as it did in Martinez,127 it may take awhile
for the legal profession to adjust to the change.  Post-conviction lawyers
need to identify the ethical obligations required in light of the holding in
Martinez that ineffective  assistance of counsel  in state post-conviction
proceedings  may  serve as cause to  excuse what would otherwise  be a
procedural  default. Courts must also work through the ramifications  of
Martinez. For example,  given the  responsibility  of counsel to  identify
conflicts  and  bring  them  to  the  attention  of the  court,128  are  courts
warranted  in continuing  to  rely on lawyers  when there are  reasons to
believe that the lawyer's prior negligence is the source of the conflict? As
the following Part shows, lawyers outside the criminal  defense context
121.  RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § 6 (AM. LAW INST. 2000).
122.  See Russell  Stetler & W.  Bradley Wendel,  The ABA  Guidelines and the Norms of
Capital Defense Representation, 41  HOFSTRA  L. REv.  635, 651-53  (2013)  (arguing that in
ineffective assistance of counsel cases, "courts should look to what actors should do as opposed
to what they sometimes do in fact").
123.  Id. at 663-64.
124.  See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 688-89 (1984) ("Any such set of rules
would interfere with the constitutionally protected independence of counsel and restrict the wide
latitude counsel must have in making tactical decisions.").
125.  559 U.S. 356 (2010).
126.  Id. at 366-67.
127.  Martinez v. Ryan, 132 S. Ct. 1309, 1320 (2012); see supra text accompanying note 17.
128.  See Holloway v. Arkansas, 435 U.S. 475, 485-86 (1978)  (stating that "[a]n  'attorney
representing two defendants in a criminal matter is in the best position professionally and ethically
to determine when a conflict of interest exists or will probably develop in the course of a trial'"
and that "defense attorneys have the obligation, upon discovering a conflict of interests, to advise
the court at once of the problem" (quoting State v. Davis, 514 P.2d 1025, 1027 (Ariz.  1973) (en
banc))).792 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
have long struggled with the conflicts of interest that arise from credible
allegations  of their own  incompetence  within an ongoing  professional
relationship.129 Courts working their way through the puzzle of Martinez
may find these approaches instructive as far as they go, keeping in mind
that the unique features of capital defense representation may limit their
utility.
II.  "PRIOR WORK" CONFLICTS IN THEIR NATURAL ENVIRONMENT,
Martinez is  implicated  when a lawyer representing  a petitioner  in
federal  habeas proceedings  also represented  that person in state  post-
conviction proceedings.' 30 If the lawyer unreasonably  failed to raise a
meritorious claim of ineffective  assistance of trial counsel in the  state
courts, then counsel's deficient performance can excuse the procedural
default for failing to raise the claim in the right court at the right time.131
As  discussed  above,  this failure  can  satisfy the "cause"  requirement,
which allows federal courts to adjudicate otherwise procedurally barred
claims.132 Given Martinez's creation of a new path to a merits review of
previously  barred  claims,  attorneys  representing  petitioners  in  federal
habeas  corpus  proceedings-who  were  also  state  post-conviction
counsel-are  now  required  to  assess  the  quality  of  their  prior
representation. This assessment involves taking into account the potential
benefits to the client of continuity of representation, including counsel's
familiarity  with the  record and any hard-won relationship  of trust that
may have developed between the client and lawyer.
Setting  aside  the  constitutional  framework  for  judging  the
performance of counsel, as well as the complexities of procedural default
under AEDPA,  what would a "pure" analysis look like under the  state
rules of professional conduct? To help answer this question, imagine a
situation roughly analogous to the Martinez dilemma, only in the context
of the representation of a client in civil litigation. A common version of
this  scenario  involves  a  law  firm  that  represented  a  client  in  a
transactional, advising, or regulatory matter and subsequently attempted
to represent the client in litigation in which resolution of one of the issues
in dispute implicates the advice given by the firm or the actions  it had
recommended  the  client  take.133  Other  cases  involve  successive
129.  See infra text accompanying notes 137-39.
130.  See Martinez, 132 S. Ct. at 1313.
131.  See id. at 1315.
132.  See id. at 1320; supra text accompanying note 17.
133.  See, e.g., Red Zone LLC v. Cadwalader,  Wickersham & Taft LLP, 988 N.Y.S.2d 588
(N.Y.  Sup. Ct. App. Div. 2014) (statute of limitations on malpractice claim did not begin to run
while law firm that had made mistakes in transactional representation continued to negotiate and
litigate over the contract); St. Simons Waterfront, LLC v. Hunter, McLean, Exley & Dunn, P.C.,2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTATION 793
representation  in  litigation.134  They  all pose  not only  the  "endgame"
question of when a conflict of interest burdens a lawyer so much that it is
impermissible to proceed with the representation, but also the much more
subtle  and  complicated  issue  of how to  proceed  in  the  middle  of a
representation when either there is an allegation of incompetence or the
lawyer comes to realize that she made a mistake that affects the client's
legal interests.135
All  of these so-called  "prior-work"  conflicts  issues share  a  similar
dynamic. The claim that a lawyer provided incompetent representation at
least potentially creates a conflict between the interests of the client and
the  lawyer's personal  interest in avoiding  liability,  discipline,  or even
embarrassment  for having been careless.  The lawyer may want to take
steps  to  defend  her  pocketbook  or reputation,  including  resisting  the
746 S.E.2d 98 (Ga. 2013) (analyzing  intra-firm attorney-client privilege issues arising out of a
lawsuit threat issued by a current client of the law firm in real estate matters); Koen Book Distribs.
v. Powell, Trachtman, Logan, Carrie, Bowman & Lombardo, P.C., 212 F.R.D. 283 (E.D.  Pa.
2002) (determining first whether conflict of interest related to prior representation existed before
analyzing attorney-client privilege and work product issues); Eurocom S.A. v. Mahoney, Cohen
& Co., 522. F. Supp. 1179 (S.D.N.Y.  1979) (disqualifying law firm from representing corporation
in negligence  action against accountant where law firm had allegedly also been negligent and
firm's  negligence,  if proven,  would  reduce the  corporation's  recovery  under principles  of
comparative negligence); Veras Inv. Partners LLC v. Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP, 17
Misc.3d 1103(A),  2007 WL 2792175 (N.Y.  Sup. Ct., N.Y. County, Sept.  27, 2007) (outlining
malpractice  theory based on  law  firms previous  advice to  and subsequent representation  in
litigation of hedge fund managers).
134.  See, e.g., Crews v. Cty. of Nassau, No. 06-CV-2610, 2007 WL 316568, at *6 (E.D.N.Y.
Jan.  30,  2007)  (disqualifying  a  lawyer  who  had  represented  a  criminal  defendant  from
representing the same client as a plaintiff in a civil rights action because the lawyer's personal
interest in concealing alleged errors in the underlying criminal action posed a "significant risk of
trial taint" (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Glueck v. Jonathan Logan, Inc., 653 F.2d
746, 748 (2d Cir. 1981))); Jamieson v. Slater, No. CV 06-1524-PHX-SMM,  2006 WL 3421788,
at *8 (D. Ariz. Nov. 27, 2006) (holding that a non-waivable conflict exists when an attorney is a
co-defendant with a client in a malicious prosecution lawsuit); Circle Chevrolet Co. v. Giordano,
Halleran & Ciesla, 662 A.2d 509, 512 (N.J.  1995) (discussing a malpractice claim against a law
firm that represented a client in litigation, made a mistake in settlement negotiations that caused
prejudice to the client, and  subsequently withdrew as counsel  due to a conflict of interest),
abrogated by Olds v. Donnelly, 696 A.2d 633 (N.J.  1997).
135.  See, e.g., Colo. Bar Ass'n Ethics Comm., Formal  Op. 113 (2005) ("When, by act or
omission, a lawyer has made an error, and that error is likely to result in prejudice to a client's
right or claim, the lawyer must promptly disclose the error to the client."); Conn. Bar Ass'n Prof I
Ethics Comm., Informal Op. 2014-05 (2014) (holding that no conflict of interest existed where a
lawyer promptly communicated a mistake to the client and took steps to ameliorate it); N.Y. State
Bar Ass'n Comm. on Prof I Ethics, Ethics Op. 734 (2000) (noting that, ordinarily, a lawyer "has
an obligation to report to the client that [she] has made a significant error or omission that may
give  rise  to a  possible malpractice  claim").  See generally Anthony  V.  Alfieri,  Law  Firm
Malpractice Disclosure: Illustrations and Guidelines, 42 HOFSTRA L. REv.  17,  46-53 (2013)
(discussing the "best practice guidelines applicable to law firm malpractice disclosure disputes").794 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
client's  legitimate  requests  for information  or  asserting  defenses  that
claim contributory  misconduct by the client; these steps may harm the
client.  The  lawyer's  understandable  desire to  protect herself conflicts
with the bedrock principle that a lawyer owes a fiduciary duty to the client
at all times during the existence  of an attorney-client relationship  and
must  always  put  the  client's  interests  first.136  The  lawyer  may  also
become so preoccupied with defending against allegations of misconduct
that the client's case suffers from neglect.  A further difficulty is that it
may  not be clear  at the  time  whether the  lawyer  actually  committed
malpractice  or  provided  ineffective  assistance  of  counsel.  Not  all
assertions  of error  have  merit,  and  the  lawyer  may  believe  that  her
conduct  was  reasonable.  Of course,  if an  allegation  is  serious  and
credible, a lawyer has a duty to inform the client of this fact, advise the
client  of the  best  way  to  protect  her  rights,  and  obtain  the  client's
informed  consent  to  the  conflict  if the  lawyer  wishes  to  continue
representing the client.137 But a lawyer need not go through the procedure
of explaining the possible conflict and obtaining informed consent every
time something goes wrong that an aggrieved client might characterize
as  the  result  of negligence.  A  lawyer  is therefore  in the  unenviable
position of having to decide how to advise her client on the client's rights
to  assert  claims  regarding  the  lawyer's  negligence  while  remaining
immersed in the ongoing representation  of the client in the underlying
matter.  The  lawyer's  involvement  on  behalf of the  client  makes  it
extremely  difficult to  adopt  the  necessary  stance  of detachment  from
which  it  would  be  possible  to  evaluate  whether  she  had  provided
competent services to the client. The conflicts rules, which contemplate
the  lawyer  providing  independent  advice to  the  client  as part  of the
process of obtaining informed consent, are not well designed to handle a
situation in which allegations  of her own misconduct in representation
potentially diminish the lawyer's capacity to provide this advice. Yet, a
per se rule of disqualification would fail to reflect the reality that many
allegations  of malpractice  or ineffective  assistance  of counsel  are  not
well-founded.  At  the  very  least  a  lawyer  should  be  entitled,  and
encouraged,  to  seek legal  advice concerning  what to do in light of an
allegation of misconduct.'38  Beyond that, however, the situation becomes
136.  See Koen Book Distribs., 212 F.R.D. at 286 (stating that a firm's fiduciary duty to its
clients is paramount to the firm's own interests).
137.  MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r.  1.4 (AM. BAR ASS'N 2015); see also, e.g., Garvy
v. Seyfarth Shaw LLP, 966 N.E.2d 523, 528 (Ill.  App. Ct. 2012) (describing how the law firm
advised the client to consider obtaining separate counsel due to conflicts created by malpractice
allegations).
138.  See N.Y. State Bar Ass'n, Comm. on Prof I  Ethics, Ethics Op. 789 (2005),  at ¶ 13
(explaining that, although concurrent conflicts rule does not preclude consultation with in-house2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION REIPRESENTATION 795
considerably more murky.
For  the  purposes  of illustrating  a  civil  analogue  to  the  Martinez
dilemma, consider the following hypothetical representation based on a
well-known  legal malpractice case.139 Lawyer represents Dealership, an
automobile dealership, located on a parcel of land owned by Landlord.
Dealership  and  Landlord  have  a  thirty-year  lease,  which  includes  a
provision that the parties renew the lease and renegotiate the amount of
rent  at  five-year  intervals.  In  the  negotiations,  Landlord  proposed  a
complex formula for setting the amount of rent using the Consumer Price
Index  (CPI)  as  published  by the  U.S.  Department  of Labor.  Lawyer
conveyed this offer to his client, President of Dealership, and President
asked, "What do you think?" Lawyer had taken a course in law school on
accounting for lawyers but was not otherwise trained as an accountant or
economist. Based on his knowledge and his general inclination to trust
Landlord, Lawyer advised his client that the proposed formula was fair.
On behalf of Dealership, President  signed the  lease renewal.  The next
month, President was horrified  when she discovered that Landlord had
increased the amount of Dealership's rent by $37,000 per month. She sent
a copy of the lease to Dealership's  accountant, who quickly discovered
the  problem:  rather  than basing  the  amount of rent on an  average, of
percentage  increases  in  the  CPI,  Landlord  based the  new formula  on
actual increases in CPI, which had the effect of locking in temporary price
increases.  President informed Lawyer of the problem and asked for his
advice.
Suppose under state law there is some basis for arguing that the parties
did not have a meeting of the minds over the formula for calculating rent
increases.  Lawyer reviews the applicable  cases  and concludes there is
about a fifty-percent chance of successfully voiding the lease renewal on
the  basis of a mutual  mistake  in  fact.  Lawyer  also calls  Landlord  to
explore the possibility of agreeing to modify the formula for calculating
rent increases, but Landlord tells Lawyer to pound sand.
What should Lawyer  do?  Keeping in mind  that the  client  has the
authority to make decisions about the objectives of the representation, 140
but that a lawyer should communicate all information necessary to enable
the client to make informed  decisions about the representation, 141 what
counsel  about potential malpractice  claim,  a firm's conclusion  that it may have  committed
malpractice  may  affect its independent professional judgment  and therefore  be a conflict of
interest).
139.  Loosely  based,  with a few embellishments,  on  Circle Chevrolet Co. v.  Giordano,
Halleran & Ciesla, 662 A.2d 509, 511  (N.J. 1995). For additional analysis of this case, which is
well known in the legal ethics and malpractice community but perhaps not elsewhere, see Nancy
J.  Moore, Implications of Circle Chevrolet for Attorney Malpractice and Attorney Ethics, 28
RUTGERS L.J. 57 (1996).
140.  MODEL RuLES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.2(a).
141.  MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.4(b).796 FLORIDA LAWREVIEW  [[Vol. 68
advice should he give to the  client, what alternative courses  of action
should he recommend, and how strongly should he urge the client to take
his advice? Imagine three versions of the next chapter of the story:
1. Ignore the Problem. Lawyer advises President that, in his
judgment, it would be in the best interests of Dealership to
file a declaratory judgment action seeking to void the lease
renewal.  The  action  would  give  Dealership  leverage  and
likely induce Landlord to agree  to a less onerous formula
based on average CPI increases.  Lawyer also recommends
that  Dealership's  accountant  be  involved  in  any  future
decisions  relating  to  the  calculation  of  rent  payments.
President  asks, "What  other options do I have?" to which
Lawyer  responds,  "Pay  the  increased  rent."  President
reluctantly  authorizes  Lawyer  to  file  the  declaratory
judgment action.
2.  The Most Conservative Approach. Lawyer is aware  of
cases stating  that "an  attorney  who realizes he  or she  has
made  a mistake must immediately notify  the client  of the
mistake as well as the client's right to obtain new counsel
and  sue  the  attorney  for  negligence." 42  Lawyer  calls
President, offers to resign as counsel, and informs President
that she has a right to retain a separate  attorney  and file a
malpractice  lawsuit.  "Are  you crazy?" responds President,
"You have represented  Dealership  for years, and I am not
about to terminate that relationship over one little mistake.
Do what you think is best for the company."
3.  The Lawyerly Approach. Lawyer practices in a law firm
that  is  large  enough  to  have  an  in-house  liability,  loss-
prevention, and ethics partner. Lawyer consults with Partner,
seeking  advice  concerning  how to  proceed.  Partner,  who
does not have the same direct personal involvement with the
case that Lawyer does,  asks Lawyer to describe  all of the
facts  pertaining  to  the  negotiation  of the  lease  renewal,
including  Lawyer's  understanding  of  the  formula  for
calculating  rent.  Partner  also  asks  Lawyer  to  explain  the
reasoning  underlying his judgment  that Dealership  should
agree  to the  proposed  rent  formula.  An  issue arising  for
lawyers practicing in firms with in-house counsel is whether
the  attorney-client  privilege  protects  these  intra-firm
communications from discovery. 43 Dealership may want to
142.  Circle Chevrolet, 662 A.2d at 514.
143.  See, e.g., St. Simons Waterfront, LLC v. Hunter, MacLean, Exley & Dunn, P.C., 746
S.E.2d 98, 102 (Ga. 2013);  RFF Family P'ship v. Bums & Levinson, LLP, 991 N.E.2d  1066,
1067-68 (Mass. 2013); Palmer v. Superior Court, 180 Cal. Rptr. 3d 620, 623 (Cal. Ct. App. 2014);2016]1 CAPI7AL POST-CONVIC77ON  REPRESENTATION 797
know the reasons underlying Lawyer's advice about how it
should proceed.  However,  because  Lawyer has a personal
interest in avoiding liability or discipline,  he is entitled to
obtain legal  advice about  how best to proceed  in view of
these risks. This is not just a technical issue; rather, it reveals
something  important  about  the  nature  of  prior-work
conflicts-the legal interests of the lawyer and client may
diverge when there is a credible allegation of misconduct.
In this hypothetical, it is fairly clear that Lawyer made a mistake in
the negotiation of the lease renewal. Nevertheless, Dealership may have
good reasons to wish to continue Lawyer's representation,  including the
transaction  costs  that  would  result  from  having  to  locate  substitute
counsel and bring the new lawyer up to speed on the matter.  Assume,
therefore, that Dealership decided to stay with Lawyer and directed him
to file the declaratory judgment action. With the consent of the parties,
the judge conducted a bench trial and concluded that there was no mistake
of fact. In her written decision, the judge stated that one element of the
mutual mistake doctrine was the mistake by both parties or their agents
VersusLaw, Inc. v. Stoel Rives, LLP, Ill P.3d 866, 878 (Wash. Ct. App. 2005); TattleTale Alarm
Sys., Inc. v. Calfee, Halter & Griswold, LLP, No. 2:10-CV-226,  2011 WL 382627 (S.D.  Ohio
Feb. 3, 2011), at *1-2; Thelen Reid & Priest LLP v. Marland, No. C 06-2071  VRW, 2007 WL
578989 (N.D.  Cal. Feb. 21, 2007),  at *6; Koen Book Distribs. v. Powell, Trachtman, Logan,
Carrie, Bowman & Lombardo, 212 F.R.D. 283, 284 (E.D. Pa. 2002); Bank Brussels Lambert v.
Credit Lyonnais (Suisse), S.A., 220 F. Supp. 2d 283, 286 (S.D.N.Y.  2002); In re SonicBlue, Inc.,
No. 07-5082, 2008 WL 170562 (Bankr. N.D. Cal. Jan. 18, 2008), at *8-9. See generally Elizabeth
Chambliss,  The Scope  of In-Firm Privilege, 80  NOTRE DAME L.  REV.  1721,  1723 (2005)
(addressing "the scope of the attorney-client privilege between law firm in-house counsel and
other members of the firm"). Under the fiduciary exception to the attorney-client privilege, first-
and highly influentially-articulated in the context of shareholder derivative actions in Garnerv .
Wolfinbarger, 430 F.2d 1093, 1103-04 (5th Cir. 1970), a party with a fiduciary duty cannot shield
from the beneficiary communications with a legal advisor on matters related to the fiduciary's
breach of duty. The prior-work conflict of the lawyer representing the client is analogous to a
corporate manager's breach of fiduciary duty. An alternative route to the conclusion that intra-
firm communications concerning potential  malpractice are not privileged is the imputation of
conflicts of interest to all lawyers associated in a firm. See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r.
1.10(a). Under a strict application of the imputation rule, the firm's in-house lawyers-whose job
it is to advise the firm on its own legal obligations-"have developed interests adverse to those
of the firm's client." St. Simons Waterfront, 746 S.E.2d  at  105. Nevertheless,  many courts,
including the highest courts in Massachusetts and Georgia, have concluded that the firm's interest
in receiving legal advice, which is no different from that of any other client, prevails over the
client's interest in obtaining information concerning the firm's breach of its duty of care. See St.
Simons Waterfront, 746 S.E.2d  at 107-08; RFF Family P'ship, 991  N.E.2d  at 1080. As the
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court concluded, a law firm may have its own interests, such as
in the defense of litigation brought or threatened  by a client, on which  it is entitled to seek
confidential  legal  advice,  even while  providing complete and candid disclosure  of the facts
relevant to the client's interests, including communications with legal advisors. See RFF Family
P'ship, 991 N.E.2d at 1076.798 SFLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
regarding  a material fact. The judge noted that Lawyer had testified at
trial (which the judge had concluded was permissible since it was a bench
trial)'" that he had not made a mistake in reviewing the CPI formula. As
her opinion observed,  "perhaps Lawyer was motivated to minimize the
possibility that he made a mistake by the  understandable  hesitation to
admit to having been negligent in representing Dealership." The judge
went on to note that there may have been grounds for reforming the lease
agreement  on the basis of an implied covenant  of good faith and fair
dealing but that Dealership had waived that claim by not asserting it in
its complaint.
A.  Theory of Conflict
Under  the  Model  Rules,  a  conflict  of  interest  exists  if  the
representation of a client would be materially limited by (among other
things) a personal interest of the lawyer.' 45  The  lawyer's  personal
interest creates  a material limitation on the representation if "there is a
significant risk that a lawyer's ability to consider, recommend or carry
out an appropriate  course of action for the client" will be limited by the
lawyer's own interests,146  including avoiding liability for malpractice or
preserving  his  reputation.147  A  court  or  disciplinary  authority  will
evaluate conflicts of interest functionally.1 48  That is, it will ask whether
the  competing  interest,  such  as duties  owed to  another  client  or  the
lawyer's own interests, creates a significant likelihood of interfering with
the  lawyer's ability to fulfill the  lawyer's duties to the  client.149  Those
duties include providing competent representation, keeping confidences,
exercising  independent  judgment  on  the  client's  behalf,  and  making
decisions based solely on the lawyer's best assessment of what is best for
144.  Cf MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 3.7 (lawyer as witness). The prohibition on
acting as an advocate and a witness at trial is intended to prevent confusion of the trier of fact. Id.
cmt. 2. The trial court may balance the danger of confusion with the prejudice to the client if the
lawyer does not testify. Id. cmt. 4.
145.  Id. r.1.7(a)(2).
146.  Id r. 1.7 cmt. 8. The New York conflicts rule uses the language "differing interests" but
the substance of the analysis is the  same. See Roy D. SIMON,  SIMON'S NEW YORK RULES OF
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT ANNOTATED 306-14 (2013).
147.  See ABA  Comm.  on  Ethics &  Prof I  Responsibility,  Formal  Op.  94-384  (1994)
(recognizing that "the representation of [a] client may be materially limited by the lawyer's own
interest in avoiding discipline").
148.  Several classic conflicts cases establish this functional mode of analysis. See Brennan's,
Inc. v. Brennan's Rests., Inc., 590 F.2d 168, 172 (5th Cir. 1979); Westinghouse Elec.  Corp. v.
Kerr-McGee Corp., 580 F.2d 1311, 1319 (7th Cir. 1978); Int'l Bus. Machs. Corp. v. Levin, 579
F.2d 271, 280 (3d Cir. 1978); Cinema 5, Ltd. v. Cinerama, Inc., 528 F.2d 1384, 1386-87 (2d Cir.
1976).
149.  See cases cited supra note 148.2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION REPRESENTAION 799
the client. Importantly, the conflicts rules are risk rules, not harm rules. 50
A  conflict  exists  if there  is  a  significant  risk  of  interference  with
professional values such as loyalty and independence."s5  Actual harm to
the client is not an element of a conflict of interest, as understood in the
civil litigation or transactional  context.  To put it another way, there is
really no difference between actual and potential conflicts for purposes
of the rules of professional conduct. If there is a significant risk that the
attorney's personal interests would materially limit the representation of
a client, there is a conflict of interest, period.152
A significant source of confusion when considering the relationship
between the Sixth Amendment and conflict-of-interest doctrine under the
rules  of  professional  conduct  is  the  distinction  between  actual  and
potential  conflicts  in  Cuyler v.  Sullivan.153  Because  the  conflict-of-
interest provisions of the disciplinary rules are risk rules, not harm rules,
there is really no such thing as a "potential" conflict under the rules.154
Either a risk of material limitation is sufficiently significant to trigger the
requirements of informed consent and waiver, or there is no conflict.'55
150.  See Kevin McMunigal, Rethinking Attorney Conflict of Interest Doctrine, 5  GEO. J.
LEGAL ETHICS 823, 839 (1992)  ("Much of conflict of interest doctrine reflects a risk avoidance
approach.").
151.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.7 cmt. 1.
152.  Id. r.  1.7(a)(2); see HAZARD ET AL., supra note 32, § 10.4, at 10-13  ("[I]n modem
thinking about conflicts of interest,  it is no longer appropriate to speak of 'potential'  versus
'actual' conflicts of interest. Instead, these terms, if they are used at all, must have reference to
the degree  of likelihood  that the risk-the potentiality-will  ripen into adverse  effect-the
actuality.").
153.  446 U.S.  335,  350  (1980)  (holding that "to  demonstrate  a  violation of his Sixth
Amendment rights, a defendant must establish that an actual conflict of interest adversely affected
his lawyer's performance" as opposed to a "possible conflict of interest"); see People v. Holmes,
565 N.E.2d 950, 956, 958 (111. 1990) (attempting to impose some order on labels such as "potential
conflict" and "possible conflict").
154.  That statement is true regarding the ABA Model Rules and the forty-nine states that
have disciplinary  rules  based  on  the  Model  Rules.  See supra text accompanying  note 78.
California, however, retains an idiosyncratic regulatory scheme, with a blend of court rules and
statutes.  See supra note 78.  The California conflicts of interest rule refers  to the distinction
between actual and potential conflicts. See CAL. RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 3-310(C)(l)-(2)
(2015), http://rules.calbar.ca.gov/Portals/10/documents/2015_CalifomiaRulesofProfessionalCon
duct.pdf. Judicial interpretation of the rule has brought it closer to the Model Rules. California
courts have held that a potential conflict cannot be purely hypothetical but must be an identifiable
scenario in which it is reasonably likely that an actual conflict will arise. See Havasu Lakeshore
Invs., LLC v. Fleming, 158 Cal. Rptr. 3d 311, 319 (Ct. App. 2013); Fox Searchlight Pictures, Inc.
v. Paladino, 106 Cal. Rptr. 2d 906, 913 (Ct. App. 2001). Thus, in Model Rules terms, what the
California rules refer to as a potential conflict is one in which  duties owed to another client
materially limit the lawyer's representation of a client. Cf MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r.
1.7(a)(2).
155.  See discussion infra Sections I.B, II.C; see also Wheat v. United States, 486 U.S.  153,
162 (1988) (holding that a district court may refuse to accept waivers of conflict because it has an800 FLORIDA LAWREVIEW [Vol. 68
For  Sixth Amendment  purposes,  however,  federal  courts  do  use  the
language  of actual  and  potential  conflicts.156  In  Cuyler, two  private
lawyers jointly represented John Sullivan, one of three codefendants in a
murder  case.157  Sullivan  did  not raise  an  objection  to  the  concurrent
representation.158  After  his  conviction,  Sullivan  filed  an  ineffective
assistance of counsel claim based on a conflict of interest arising from the
concurrent representation. 159 Because his lawyers did not object, Sullivan
was required to show that "potential conflicts impermissibly imperil[ed]
his right to a fair trial" 60-that  they were in a sense actual conflicts. As
the  Court put it,  "a  defendant  who  raised  no  objection  at trial  must
demonstrate  that  an  actual  conflict  of interest  adversely  affected  his
lawyer's performance."'61  One must be careful here, however, because
the definition of "actual conflict" has a great deal in common with the
way  the  state  rules  of professional  conduct  understand  the  conflicts
provisions as risk rules. Most importantly,  an actual conflict does not
equate with Strickland prejudice-a showing that there is a reasonable
likelihood that but for the conflict, the result of the trial would have been
different.162 Rather, once an attorney has an actual conflict of interest, the
court presumes prejudice.163 What, then, is an actual conflict of interest
if not something that likely had an effect on the outcome of the trial?
Considering the cases cited by the Court in Cuyler and the interpretation
of Cuyler by subsequent  cases,  it  is apparent  that  the  standard  of an
"actual conflict of interest [that] adversely affected" the performance of
counsel 64 is not a two-element test. In other words, an actual conflict is
one that adversely affects counsel's performance, as opposed to a merely
theoretical  possibility  of  an  interference  with  the  loyalties  of  the
obligation to monitor proceedings for conflicts and must do so from "the murkier pretrial context
when relationships between parties are seen through a glass, darkly").
156.  See, e.g., Cuyler, 446 U.S. at 350.
157.  Id. at 337.
158.  Id. at 337-38. The lack of objection distinguishes the case from Holloway v. Arkansas,
435 U.S. 475, 477 (1978),  where the trial court refused to investigate the possibility of a conflict
of interest despite the lawyer's timely objection to being appointed to represent three codefendants
concurrently.
159.  Cuyler, 446 U.S.  at 338.
160.  Id. at 348.
161.  Id.
162.  See Strickland v.  Washington, 466 U.S.  668, 694 (1984).  The Court decided Cuyler
before  Stric/dand, so  obviously  it  could not have explicitly  made reference  to the  second,
prejudice prong of Strickland, but subsequent cases have made the relationship between these two
standards clear. See, e.g., Mickens v. Taylor, 535 U.S. 162, 166, 168, 171 (2002).
163.  Cuyler, 446 U.S. at 349-50.
164.  Id. at 350.2016] CAPITAL POST-CONVIC77ON REPRESENA7ION 801
lawyer.165 This is somewhere between the Model Rule 1.7(a)(2) standard
of a significant risk of a material limitation on the representation, on the
one hand, and a showing of actual harm or Strickland prejudice on the
other.
To emphasize, concluding that a conflict of interest does not invoke
the presumption of prejudice under Cuyler does not take the conduct out
from the  state  disciplinary  rules.  For example,  a  lawyer who  obtains
media  rights  to  a  portrayal  based  on  information  relating  to  the
representation of a client violates a clear and unambiguous provision in
the  state disciplinary rules.166  The U.S.  Court of Appeals  for the Fifth
Circuit  has held,  however,  that the  client  must  still  show  Strickland
prejudice to establish a claim of ineffective assistance  of counsel based
on  this  conflict  of interest.167  Whatever  one  thinks  of the  court's
reasoning in Beets, there is no suggestion that the lawyer's conduct was
anything  other  than an  act of self-interest that breached  the lawyer's
fundamental fiduciary obligation to his client. The court lists other types
of conflict for which the second prong of Stricklandm  ust be satisfied and,
like the  media-rights  case,  all are  clear violations  of the  disciplinary
rules-accepting  a  case  when  the  lawyer  is  too  busy  to  handle  it
competently;  accepting  payment  from  someone  other  than the  client
without  obtaining  the  client's  informed  consent;  and  continuing  to
represent a client when it is likely that the attorney will be called as a
witness.168  There is a  conflict in  all of these  cases-the lawyer  acted
improperly-notwithstanding  the  inapplicability  of  the  Cuyler
presumption.  Interestingly,  the court  mentions  a fourth  situation:  "An
attorney  has neglected  to  file  a competency  motion.  To cover up the
mistake,  it is alleged, he tardily files an inadequate motion." 69 This is
exactly the problem considered here and,  regardless of whether it falls
within the Cuyler presumption, it is clearly a conflict of interest under the
rules.
In the hypothetical  discussed above, in Model Rules terms, what did
Lawyer do wrong  that constituted  a conflict of interest?  Obviously he
erred  by  misunderstanding  rent  calculation  under  the  new  formula
proposed by Landlord.  But that is a simple failure of competence, not a
conflict  of interest.  A  conflict  requires  a  substantial  likelihood  of
interference  with the  performance  of a duty that counsel  owes to  the
165.  See Mickens, 535 U.S. at 171  (.'[A]n actual conflict of interest' mean[s] precisely a
conflict that affected counsel's performance-as opposed  to a  mere theoretical  division of
loyalties.").
166.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.8(d) (AM. BAR ASS'N 2015).
167.  Beets v. Scott, 65 F.3d 1258, 1266-69 (5th Cir. 1995).
168.  Id. at 1271; MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT rr. 1.1, 1.8(f), 3.7.
169.  Beets, 65 F.3d at 1271.802 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
client. 7 0 The conflict manifests itself later, when Lawyer is advising his
client,  Dealership,  acting through its duly authorized agent,  President,
about what to  do next.  Lawyer's  own  interest may be to  cover up or
minimize the mistake, and this interest may cause him to be excessively
optimistic when reading the cases  on the mistake-of-fact defense.  This
personal interest materially limits Lawyer's representation of Dealership
because it creates a significant risk that Lawyer will not be able to advise
Dealership competently  and provide the independent advice owed to the
client.171 The essence of the conflict is the failure of Lawyer's impartiality
caused by Lawyer's own interest in avoiding liability or discipline.
B.  Waivability
Under the  Model  Rules,  most  concurrent  conflicts  of interest  are
consentable  or  waivable  (used  interchangeably)  with  full  disclosure.
Certain conflicts are not waivable, however.172  The three categories  of
non-waivable  conflicts  are (i) representations  prohibited by law,173  (ii)
assertion  of a claim against another client represented by the lawyer in
the same litigation,' 74  and (iii) conflicts so severe that the lawyer could
not  reasonably  believe  it possible  to  provide  competent  and diligent
representation to both clients.175  Categories (i) and (ii) state per se rules
of non-waivability but are relatively narrow in scope. In criminal defense
representation  and in the context of prior-work conflicts,  non-waivable
conflicts will generally fall within the third category. A non-consentable
conflict would arise from a mistake so serious that no reasonable lawyer
could believe it is possible to provide effective representation to the client
while worrying about her own potential liability.
Many conflicts may be waivable in theory, but for practical reasons it
170.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT  r. 1.7 cmt. 8 (explaining when a conflict will
rise to a violation of the rule).
171.  See  id r.  1.7(a)(2)  (addressing material-limitation  conflicts);  id r.  1.1  (addressing
competence); id. r. 2.1 (addressing independence).
172.  Id. r.  1.7(b). The non-waivability provision of the concurrent conflicts rule is drafted
negatively,  so it actually states conditions for a conflict to be waivable. That is, a conflict is
waivable if it does not fall into one of the three specified categories. See id
173.  Id. r. 1.7(b)(2). This is a relatively limited category of non-waivable conflicts, the most
common  instance of which is when a statute or regulation applicable to a former government
official prohibits a lawyer from representing a client in private practice. See id. r. 1.7 cmt. 16;
RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § 122 cmt. g(i) (AM. LAW INST. 2000).
174.  MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.7(b)(3). Note that this standard differs from one
of the tests for defining a conflict of interest. A conflict may exist if the interests of one client are
directly adverse to the interests of another client of the lawyer or law firm. Id. r. 1.7(a)(1). The
conflict is only non-waivable,  however, if the lawyer or firm attempts to represent both sides of
the litigation simultaneously. Id. r. 1.7(b)(3).
175.  Id r.  1.7(b)(1);  RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS  § 122 cmt.
g(iii).2016] CAPTAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESEN7ATION 803
may be impossible to obtain informed consent.  A frequent  scenario in
private  practice,  though  unlikely  to  arise  in  criminal  defense
representation,  occurs  when  the  lawyer  has  confidential  information
regarding one client that the lawyer would ordinarily have to disclose to
another client as part of the process of obtaining both clients' informed
consent to a conflict of interest.176 A problem more likely to exist in the
Martinez dilemma is that the lawyer's own involvement in the ineffective
representation  makes it difficult for the lawyer to provide the kind  of
candid,  impartial  disclosure  to  which  the  client  is  entitled.  This  is
technically a failure of informed consent, not an evaluation of the conflict
as non-waivable. A further problem that may arise in the case of multiple
representation in a criminal defense matter, but not civil litigation, is that
the district court has the authority to decline to accept waivers of conflicts
of interest.177 A lawyer may believe a conflict is waivable and obtain the
client's informed consent, yet the court may nevertheless disqualify the
lawyer under Rule 44(c) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.
C.  Informed Consent and Its Limitations
If a conflict is consentable-and most are-informed consent requires
that the lawyer provide full disclosure of "the relevant circumstances and
of the material  and reasonably foreseeable ways that the conflict could
have adverse effects on the interests of that client."l78 The purpose of the
176.  See, e.g., Ass'n of the Bar of the City of New York, Formal Op. 2005-02 (2005).
177.  Wheat v.  United  States, 486 U.S.  153,  160-63  (1988).  If the district court is too
deferential to prosecutors who are insisting on the disqualification of defense counsel for some
highly speculative theory of a conflict, the result may be to deprive defendants of the counsel of
their choice-and sometimes highly effective defense counsel-with no corresponding gain in
the protection afforded by the conflicts rules to either the interests of defendants or the integrity
of the adversarial process. See Bruce A. Green, "Through a Glass, Darkly ": How the Court Sees
Motions to Disqualify Criminal Defense Lawyers, 89 COLUM. L. REv.  1201, 1250 (1989)  ("The
defendant  has  an  interest  in  receiving  the  effective  assistance  of counsel,  in receiving  the
assistance of his attorney of choice, and in deciding for himself whether to undertake the risks
attendant to counsel's potential conflict. These interests are obviously undermined by the defense
counsel's disqualification, which may deprive the defendant of the possible strategic advantage
of being represented by a particular attorney and may derogate his interest in deciding for himself
whether  to  continue  with  an  attorney  who  may  have  a  conflict  or  to  seek  different
representation.").
178.  MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r.  1.7 cmt. 18. "Informed consent" is a defined term
in the Model Rules. See id. r. 1.0(e) (defining "informed consent" as the "agreement by a person
to a proposed course of conduct after the lawyer has communicated adequate information and
explanation about the material risks of and reasonably available  alternatives to the proposed
course  of conduct").  The  1983  version  of the  Model  Rules  used  the  term  "consent  after
consultation." See ABA  Comm. on Ethics & Prof's Responsibility, Formal Op. 05-436 (2005)
(noting that in 2002 the ABA Commission of Evaluation of the Rules of Professional Conduct
replaced the term "consent after consultation" with the term "informed consent"). Although the
term "informed consent" is preferable, due to its association-drawn intentionally by the drafters804 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
informed-consent standard is to permit the client to make an autonomous
decision to proceed  with the  representation  despite  the  existence  of a
conflict.  The  client  may  decide,  for  example,  that  the  cost  and
inconvenience of switching lawyers is not worth it, given what the client
perceives as only a slight risk that a conflict of interest will impair the
lawyer's ability to provide  competent and diligent representation.  The
overarching  idea of informed consent is that many decisions regarding
the representation are for the client to make, but the lawyer must give the
client sufficient  information to participate intelligently in the decision-
making process.'79  The lawyer has a fiduciary duty to act in her client's
best interests, as the client defines them, after consultation. 80 The agency
or fiduciary model of allocation of decision-making authority, recognized
by the common law of agency and the Model Rules,'8' presupposes both
the client's ability to participate  in the decision-making process and the
attorney's  ability  (and  willingness)  to  communicate  all  relevant
information.  Because clients frequently lack the expertise necessary  to
make decisions about their legal rights and liabilities, they are necessarily
dependent  upon  their  lawyer.  The  attorney  and  client  thus  have
coordinating roles in decision-making.  The client has the final authority
with respect to the objectives of the representation, but the lawyer owes
the client fully informed, candid, and impartial advice by a lawyer acting
solely in the client's best interests.
The  informed-consent  standard  is  similar  to  the  "knowing  and
intelligent waiver" test used in many areas of criminal procedure.  For
example, the Supreme Court in Moran v. Burbine,182 evaluating a waiver
of a suspect's Miranda rights, asked whether the suspect waived those
rights  with  "full  awareness  of both  the  nature  of the  right  being
abandoned and the consequences  of the decision to abandon it."183  The
informed-consent standard in civil conflicts-of-interest law "requires that
each  affected  client  be  aware  of the  material  respects  in  which  the
of the Ethics 2000 version of the Model Rules-with the doctrine of informed consent in medical
malpractice law, the older term "consent after consultation" does have the virtue of reminding
lawyers that they first have an obligation to consult with their clients before seeking the client's
waiver. See HAZARD ET AL., supra note 32,  § 10.8, at 10-23 (emphasizing the initial step of full
disclosure to the client of all aspects of the conflict). See generally Susan R. Martyn, Informed
Consent in the Practiceo f Law, 48 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 307 (1980) (tracing the development of
informed consent in medical malpractice law and the law governing lawyers).
179.  HAZARD ET AL.,  supra note 32, § 7.4, at 7-7  ("If the client is to make turning-point
decisions about his legal  affairs, he must be armed  with sufficient information  for intelligent
decisionmaking.").
180.  See MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.2(a).
181.  See id
182.  Moran v. Burbine, 475 U.S. 412 (1986).
183.  Id. at 421.2016]1 CAPIT7AL POST-CONVICTION REPRESENTATION 805
representation  could  have  adverse  effects  on  the  interests  of  that
client." 84 Conflicts involving credible allegations of attorney misconduct
present  a  difficult  variation  on  the  problem  of obtaining  informed
consent.  In the prior-work conflicts hypothetical this Article considers,
the issue is not merely that the adverse effect of the lawyer's mistake on
the client's interests might be expensive and time-consuming to unwind,
and might have further consequences down the line. The further adverse
effect  is  that  the  attorney's  reluctance  to  "fess  up"  to  a  mistake
compromises the lawyer's own ability to give that advice. The lawyer's
inability to provide  fully candid,  impartial  advice  impairs the  client's
capacity  to  make  fully  informed  decisions  concerning  the
representation.1
Complicating the process of providing full disclosure is the possibility
that  the  lawyer's  desire  not to  admit his mistakes  may  operate  at an
unconscious level. In an important article on lawyer liability for aiding
and  abetting  client  fraud,  Professor  Don  Langevoort  reviews  the
empirical  literature  on  social  cognition  and  concludes  that  certain
cognitive effects present an obstacle to lawyers perceiving  the warning
signs  of fraud.186  Importantly,  many  of these  processes  occur  at-the
unconscious or "preconscious" level, so the actor sincerely believes she
is acting rationally.'87  For example,  once  someone  is committed  to  a
position, "the subsequent discovery of information that indicates harmful
consequences flowing from that commitment directly threatens their self-
concept as good, worthwhile individuals," with the result that the person
suppresses or ignores certain information that should function as a "red
flag"  warning  of  danger.'88   The  phenomenon  of  escalating
commitment-gamblers  doubling  down  on  a  losing  hand  or bankers
throwing good money after bad-can be explained in this way.1 89 In the
case  of prior-work  conflicts  caused by the  lawyer's  malpractice,  it is
likely that the lawyer ignored at least some evidence of having made a
mistake and will therefore  not be in a position to provide the kind  of
candid, impartial advice that the client deserves and is entitled to under
the doctrine of informed consent.190
184.  RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS  § 122 cmt. c(i) (AM. LAW
INST. 2000).
185.  See Martyn, supra note 178, at 330 (recognizing the material impairment to a client's
decision-making when the lawyer has not fully informed the client).
186.  See Donald C.  Langevoort,  Where  Were  the Lawyers? A  Behavioral Inquiry into
Lawyers' Responsibilityf or Clients'Fraud,4 6 VAND. L. REv. 75, 95-96 (1993).
187.  Id. at 97.
188.  Id at 102-03.
189.  Id. at 103.
190.  Pertinent to the issues considered here, Professor Tigran Eldred recently published an
application  of the research  on this kind of motivated  reasoning to the ethical  obligations of806 SFLORIDA  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
It is important to stress that this occurs unconsciously, so that the actor
is unaware  of her blind spot with respect to this evidence.' 9'  A lawyer
may believe,  in absolute,  subjective  good faith, that  she has provided
effective representation to the client even though an impartial observer
not affected  by  the  same  perceptual  and  cognitive  limitations  could
discern the malpractice.  An attorney may believe  she is fully disclosing
to the client all material effects  on the client's interests, but she will in
fact not be fully informing the client because of unconscious processes
that lead to the construal of some of the attorney's actions as not mistakes
at  all.  It  is  a  natural  human  reaction  to  attempt  to  minimize  the
responsibility for one's own failings:
Commonly,  lawyers  against  whom  [allegations  of
ineffective  assistance  of counsel]  are  raised  react  with
disappointment,  outrage,  and  anger.  When  these  feelings
subside, the next usual response is to develop a strategy to
defend the  allegations.  Unfortunately,  from that point on,
many attorneys facing a claim of ineffective assistance tend
to distance themselves from the former clients  and even to
create an adversarial  relationship between  themselves and
their former clients.' 92
The result of this process of an attorney  coming to  grips with  her
mistakes,  however,  may be that  the  informed-consent  standard  is not
doing  the  work  it  is  designed  to  do-allowing  the  client  to  make
autonomous  decisions  about whether  to proceed  with a representation
despite  the  existence  of a  conflict  of interest-because  the  lawyer's
inability to perceive her mistakes clearly may interfere with the attorney's
role  as the advisor to the client. To make this discussion  less abstract,
return to the hypothetical  of the prior-work conflict of interest but vary
the facts slightly:  Imagine that President was surprised to find that the
rental payment had increased significantly and asked Lawyer to explain
why this had occurred. Lawyer is now looking back at his conduct in the
course of renegotiating the lease, considering at least two possibilities:
(1)  "I screwed up" and (2) "Landlord screwed me."
predecessor  counsel  in  capital  cases.  See generally Tigran  W.  Eldred, Motivation Matters:
Guideline 10.13 and Other Mechanisms for Preventing Lawyers from Surrendering to Self-
Interest in Responding to Allegations of Ineffective Assistance in Death Penalty Cases, 42
HOFSTRA L. REv. 473 (2013).
191.  See generally MAX H. BAZERMAN & ANNE. TENBRUNSEL, BLIND SPOTS: WHY WE FAIL
TO Do WHAT'S RIGHT AND WHAT TO Do ABOUT IT (2012) (discussing ethical blind spots, the gap
between what a person wants to be and what the person actually is, and ways to be aware of and
remove these blind spots).
192.  Eldred, supra note 190, at 486 (quoting Michael Mears, The Defense Attorney's Ethical
Response to Ineffective Assistance of Counsel Claims, G. B.J., Oct. 1999, at 40, 42) (alteration in
original).2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION REPRESENTATION 807
The unconscious psychological process of motivated reasoning makes
it  likely  that  Lawyer  will  tend  to  attribute  the  explanation  for  the
increased rent to some trickiness or deception by Landlord. In fact, from
an objective point of view, Lawyer's conduct fell below the applicable
standard of care-"the competence and diligence normally exercised by
lawyers  in  similar  circumstances." 193  But  clients  do  not  receive
information  and advice  from  an  objective  point of view.  Their  legal
advisors,  in  large  part,  provide  their  understanding  of the  available
options and the risks and benefits associated with each of them. There is
thus a significant likelihood that Lawyer may not inform President that
the  client, Dealership,  has the option  of filing a declaratory judgment
action to void the new lease on the ground of a mutual mistake of fact.
The  informed-consent  standard  works  only  if  the  client  has  full
information,  but the  lawyer's  dual role  as provider of information and
cause of the problem limits the provision of full information. The lawyer
is responsible for ensuring that the client has adequate information, but
the lawyer's discomfiture at an accusation of making a mistake impairs
her ability to carry out this responsibility.
Would  it  help  to  require  lawyers  to  recommend  that  their clients
consult with independent counsel when there is a credible allegation of
misconduct? The Model Rules suggest that "[i]n  some circumstances it
may be appropriate for a lawyer to advise a client ...  to seek the advice
of other counsel,"l94 but again the operation of this norm depends on a
prior determination by the lawyer either that the lawyer made a mistake
or that  an  allegation  of wrongdoing  is  credible.  Clients  may  accuse
lawyers  of malpractice  absent valid grounds,  and  it would be unduly
cumbersome and expensive to require that lawyers recommend that their
clients consult with independent counsel whenever there is any allegation
of carelessness. It appears to be impossible to avoid the critical threshold
judgment  of the existence  of a conflict of interest being made by the
lawyer whose conduct has been called into question.
D.  Clients with DiminishedD  ecision-Making Capacity
All of this analysis of the allocation of decision-making authority in
the attorney-client relationship assumes that the client has the capacity to
understand and act upon information pertaining to his rights and options
going forward. The theoretical ground for the informed-consent doctrine
is the value of autonomy and the right of competent adult clients to make
decisions  pertaining  to their  own  well-being.195  Clients  with ordinary
decision-making  capacity should be allowed to choose among a variety
193.  RESTATEMENT  (THIRD)  OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS  §  52(1) (AM.  LAW INST.
2000).
194.  MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.0 cmt. 6 (AM. BAR Ass'N 2015).
195.  See Martyn, supra note 178, at 312.808 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
of options for the representation, provided they are fully informed about
the risks and benefits of their choices. But there are many clients whose
"capacity to make adequately considered decisions in connection with the
representation  is  diminished ...  because  of minority, physical  illness,
mental disability, or other cause."196
In these cases, the Model Rules rather unhelpfully instruct lawyers to
maintain as normal an attorney-client relationship as possible.197  To the
extent this means only treating the client with respect, listening carefully,
and  trying  to  ascertain  the  client's  views  about  his  interests,  this  is
perfectly sensible advice. But when it comes to making critical decisions
about the representation, lawyers cannot rely on clients with diminished
capacity to provide effective informed consent. They may have the option
to seek the appointment of a guardian to make decisions on behalf of the
client,198 but if no representative is available to make these decisions, the
lawyer may have no choice but to muddle through, acting on the basis of
the  lawyer's reasonable  view of the client's interests if the client were
able to  make adequately  considered  decisions.199 A  lawyer's  personal
interest  in covering  up  the  mistake  therefore  affects  the  lawyer  who
makes a mistake in the course of representing a client with diminished
capacity at two levels-first, in recognizing the mistake and the conflict
it may have caused and second, in reaching a decision about what would
be in the client's best interests.
The  diminished-capacity  problem  arises even  for lawyers  who  are
completely conflict-free.  Take the case of a lawyer representing a client
on death row who has instructed the lawyer that he has decided to "accept
responsibility" for his crimes and that the lawyer should waive all appeals
and should in all other respects simply acquiesce in the imposition of the
death  sentence.200  As  long as the  defendant  has a rational and factual
understanding  of the  consequences  of his  decision,201 which  is  an
extremely lenient standard for competency, he theoretically has the right
to waive his appeals.202  In principle, this means his lawyer must "abide
by [the] client's decisions concerning the objectives of representation."203
196.  RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § 24(1).
197.  MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.14(a) ("[Tjhe lawyer shall, as far as reasonably
possible, maintain a normal client-lawyer relationship with the client.").
198.  See id. r. 1.14(b).
199.  RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § 24(2).
200.  See John H. Blume, Killing the Willing: "Volunteers," Suicide and Competency, 103
MICH. L. REV. 939, 939-40, 982 (2005) (asking whether a death row inmate who wishes to waive
his appeals should be viewed as a client accepting the justness of his punishment or as a person
seeking the aid of the state in committing suicide).
201.  Godinez v. Moran, 509 U.S. 389 (1993).
202.  See Blume, supra note 200, at 945, 946.
203.  MODEL RULES OF PROF'L CONDUCT r. 1.2(a).20161 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTATION 809
As experienced capital defense lawyers know, however,  serious mental
illness is common among their clients, and even those who do not have
chronic,  untreated  mental  illness  often  suffer  from  episodic  bouts  of
depression,  which can temporarily interfere  with their ability to  make
rational  decisions.204  Many  of these  same  clients  have  subsequently
expressed deep gratitude to their lawyers for not acting on instructions to
waive  appeals.205  But  the  law  governing  lawyers  does  not  really
recognize this possibility. If anything, the law is so strongly committed
to the value of client autonomy that it goes too far in discouraging lawyers
from trying to talk sense into despondent clients or taking other actions
in  the  client's  long-term  best  interest.  For example,  the  Restatement
comments on the diminished-capacity  rule warn lawyers not to infer a
disability  from  their  clients'  seemingly  irrational  instructions:
"Lawyers ...  should be careful not to construe as proof of disability a
client's insistence on a view of the client's welfare that a lawyer considers
unwise or otherwise at variance with the lawyer's own views."206 This is
sound advice in the mine run of cases, but in light of the prevalence of
serious  mental  illness  and  cognitive  disabilities  among  death  row
inmates,  capital  defense  lawyers  need  some  latitude  to  act  on  their
assessment of what is best for their clients when there is reasonable doubt
about the client's capacity to make an informed decision.
Many  lawyers  would  object  on the  ground  of paternalism  to  the
Restatement's directive to pursue the client's interests as the client would
define them "ifable to make adequately consideredd ecisions,"207 even if
the  lawyer were acting in the utmost good  faith, without any personal
bias. The lawyers who represented the Unabomber, Ted Kaczynski, and
persuaded  (or tricked) him into  allowing them to put on mental-status
evidence208 were not biased or incompetent-in fact, the dissenting judge
went out of his way to call them "superb" lawyers.209 Nevertheless, they
were criticized for overriding their client's express instruction that they
not portray him as mentally ill.210 As Professor David Luban argues, they
violated  Kaczynski's  right  to  be  treated  with  dignity  by  "rid[ing]
roughshod over the commitments that make the client's life meaningful
and so impart dignity to it."211 Of course, they did so based on the belief
that Kaczynski's  life commitments would be all for naught if the state
204.  See Blume, supra note 200, at 944, 968.
205.  See id. at 940.
206.  RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § 24, cmt. c.
207.  Id. § 24(2) (emphasis added).
208.  See United States v. Kaczynski, 239 F.3d 1108, 1110 (9th Cir. 2001).
209.  See id at 1121 (Reinhardt, J., dissenting).
210.  Id
211.  DAVID LUBAN, LEGAL ETHICS AND HUMAN DIGNITY 76-77 (2007).810 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
executed him.212  There  are good moral  arguments  for both courses  of
action in this case-either respecting Kaczynski's commitments even at
the expense of allowing him to participate injudicially sanctioned suicide
or overriding  his commitments in an effort to save his life. Where the
lawyer is laboring under a conflict due to a prior instance of incompetent
representation,  however,  there  is even  less reason  to  grant  decision-
making authority to the lawyer at the expense of the client. The actions
of  Kaczynzski's  lawyers  were  admirable  because  their  objective,
preventing  his  execution,  is  one  that  a  rational  person  could  share.
(Whether the judicial system should permit a seriously mentally ill person
to represent himself and thereby consent to "an execution following a trial
that lacked the fundamental elements of due process, and was farcical at
worst,"213  is a separate matter.) But there is nothing admirable about a
lawyer who  overrides his client's directives out of a desire to hide his
own  malpractice.  This  observation  only  sharpens  the  issue  of  the
representation  of capital  defendants  with diminished  capacity.  To  the
extent a lawyer has the authority to "pursue the lawyer's reasonable view
of the client's objectives or interests,"214  the capacity of the informed-
consent  doctrine  to  protect client  interests  is weakened.  Throw  in the
problem of conflicts of interest and the problem of alienation of clients
from their constitutional  entitlement  to effective  assistance  of counsel
becomes even more acute.
III.  WHY CRIMINAL DEFENSE, AND PARTICULARLY CAPITAL
DEFENSE, Is DIFFERENT
The reflexive response to the Martinez problem is obvious: state post-
conviction  counsel  should not represent  capital  clients  in  subsequent
federal habeas corpus proceedings because of the possibility of conflicts
of interest. Judges should appoint new counsel to represent the client in
federal court. If the failure to raise a claim adequately,  or at all, in the
state courts can transform a claim that is procedurally defaulted into one
that federal courts can entertain on the merits, then someone other than
the  lawyer who represented  the client in  state courts- must review. the
record and conduct an investigation to see if there are any such claims.
Lawyers  are generally  not allowed  to  assess-much less litigate-the
quality of their own representation. Thus, because of the potential conflict
of interest state post-conviction counsel inevitably has, new counsel is
needed in federal habeas corpus proceedings to determine whether there
212.  See id. at 77 (arguing that Kaczynski had a different theory of his case than his lawyers,
but Kaczynski eventually and reluctantly took his lawyers' advice).
213.  Kaczynski, 239 F.3d at 1128 (Reinhardt, J., dissenting).
214.  RESTATEMENT (THIRD)  OF THE LAW GOVERNING  LAWYERS  § 24(2) (AM.  LAW  INST.
1998).2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVIC770N  REPRESENTATION 811
are additional claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel that should
have been raised in the prior state collateral proceedings.215 Some courts,
in fact, have taken this reflexive position.216
But, is it always in a death row inmate's best interests for state post-
conviction counsel to be relieved and for new counsel to be appointed?
Clearly  not;  in  many-if  not  most-jurisdictions,  the  number  of
competent and experienced capital post-conviction counsel is quite small.
The relieved state collateral  appeals attorney may be quite experienced
and very skilled, and the new lawyers that will be appointed may not be
nearly  as competent.  Given that it is often unknown whether anything
was overlooked in state post-conviction proceedings, and if so, whether
anything  not  raised  is  potentially  meritorious,  a  disruption  in
representation  is definitely not always  in the  client's best interests.  In
other cases, the attorney-client relationship that has developed may be so
strong that a disruption in representation could have significant adverse
effects on the  client's mental  state  or willingness  to proceed  with the
appeals.217 Thus, it is not difficult to envision cases in which sticking with
long-time counsel offers the inmate the best chance to prevail and thus to
live. The difficulty lies in determining which category a particular case
falls in. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that an inmate generally
makes this type of decision with the advice of counsel, but in the cases
this Article describes, counsel is the very lawyer whose past errors may
entitle the inmate to proceed with what would otherwise be procedurally
defaulted claims.
Thus,  the  ethical  conundrum  is how to  assess  whether  state  post-
conviction  counsel  can  or  should  continue  to  represent  the  client  in
federal  habeas  corpus  proceedings.  In  the  abstract,  it  would  be
215.  In theory, the same analysis would apply in non-capital cases as well. But, this Article
limits its discussion to capital cases for several reasons. First, in non-capital cases, inmates seeking
state collateral relief are often  unrepresented; thus,  counsel will not have the opportunity to
provide substandard representation. And because non-death-sentenced inmates are not entitled to
court-appointed counsel in federal habeas corpus proceedings, most are unrepresented in federal
court as well. Thus, in the small percentage of cases where this issue arises, if counsel were to
withdraw  following state  post-conviction  proceedings,  the  client would be left without any
representation.  Second, despite often being "honored in the breach," this Article also falls back
on the simple reality that "death is different."
216.  Owens v. Stirling, No. o:15;mc-00254-TLW-PJG  (D.S.C. Aug. 13, 2015) (refusing to
appoint state PCR counsel in habeas corpus proceedings after attorney general objected to their
appointment based on a potential conflict of interest).
217.  Clients  who attempt to waive  their appeals and submit to execution are frequently
referred to as "volunteers." Blume, supra note 200, at 940. Approximately twelve percent of all
people executed in the United States are volunteers.  Id  at 1008. Most have a serious mental
illness,  and disruptions in  relationships  can trigger  the decision. Id.  at 962. Thus,  it  is not
impossible to imagine situations where a change in counsel could render a death row inmate so
distraught that he decided to "volunteer" for execution.812 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW  [[Vol. 68
theoretically possible to have independent counsel (1)  review the record
of the  proceedings  below,  (2)  conduct  any  needed  investigation,  (3)
consult with the client about the pros and cons of having former counsel
continue  with  the  representation,  and  (4)  allow  the  client  to  make  a
knowing  and  intelligent  decision  as  to  how to  proceed.218  Again,  in
theory, the client would then be in a position to decide whether to request
new counsel or to waive any potential conflict of interest arising from
continued  representation,  i.e., give  informed consent.219  But this  ideal
poses several practical problems as well, such as: who will those lawyers
be,  and who  will compensate  them? Given  both the  small  number  of
attorneys  competent  to  represent  a  death-sentenced  inmate  in  federal
habeas  corpus proceedings  and fiscal constraints  in difficult  economic
times, systemic resistance to such a proposal is not difficult to imagine.
It also raises  questions of efficiency,  i.e., if the court  is going to pay
someone to review the files, investigate the case, and become sufficiently
"up to speed" to advise the client on the benefits and dangers of continued
representation, then why not just appoint new counsel? Courts may also
worry about the informal game-theoretic  implications of Martinez, such
as whether lawyers might attempt to sandbag by committing an error in
state post-conviction proceedings that they could then subsequently raise
as a ground for filing a federal habeas petition, all with a view toward
creating delay and prolonging the life of their client.
A less cumbersome procedure would be to have independent counsel
explain to the client that inadequate assistance  of state post-conviction
counsel  may  be  a  gateway  to  merits'  review  of defaulted  claims  of
ineffective  assistance of trial counsel and that proceeding  with current
counsel would constitute a waiver of any such claims. While better than
nothing, this hardly seems adequate for a knowing and intelligent waiver
of the potential conflict of interest. Without the type of review described
above, neither the attorney providing the "advice" nor the client will have
an  accurate  assessment  of the  risks  of continuing  with  state  post-
conviction counsel. Thus, it is difficult to see how any purported waiver
could in any real sense be knowing and intelligent.
Another  option  would  be  to  place  the  initial  responsibility -of
determining  whether  new  counsel  is  needed  on  state  post-conviction
counsel.  Upon entering  federal  habeas  corpus  proceedings,  state post-
218.  This approach has also been used in a few cases.  See, e.g., Folwer v. Joyner, 753 F.3d
446 (4th Cir. 2014); Gray v. Pearson, 526 F. App'x. 331 (4th Cir. 2013).
219.  See Christeson v. Roper,  135 S. Ct.  891, 893 (2015) (depicting independent counsel
advising client not to waive  the prior-work conflict by filing motion  for substition). Again,
however, the situation in Christeson is somewhat anomalous because the petitioner's original,
incompetent attorneys asked two independent lawyers  for advice on the case.  Id. at 892. The
independent lawyers then noticed the conflict and moved for substitution of counsel. Id. at 892-
93. If the original two attorneys had not asked for this advice the client may never have found out
about the conflict. See id. at 892.2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTATION 813
conviction counsel-assuming  she desires to continue representing  the
client-would be required to reassess the quality of her representation in
state  proceedings  and  then advise  the  client  whether  new counsel  is
needed. However,  simply to state it as an option is to expose its patent
deficiencies; state post-conviction counsel is frequently in no position to
determine whether their own performance was inadequate, particularly
given the psychological reality of having blind spots regarding one's own
ethical shortcomings. Furthermore, given the federal statute of limitations
for federal habeas petitions and rules forbidding amendments to a habeas
petition after  the  limitations  period has  expired,  new counsel's hands
could be tied even if substantial issues were uncovered.220
Thus,  the  question  remains:  What  to  do?  There  are  a  few  clear
scenarios.  In  cases  pending  in  federal  court,  federal  habeas  counsel
clearly has a potential conflict of interest where:
(a) federal habeas counsel represented the petitioner in state
court; and
(b) counsel for the state has alleged that one or more claims
of ineffective  assistance  of trial  counsel  are procedurally
defaulted because they were not raised (at all or adequately)
in the state court proceedings.
In  such cases,  current  habeas  counsel  must  move  to be  relieved  and
request appointment of conflict-free counsel who can assert inadequate
assistance  of state post-conviction  counsel  as  "cause"  for the  alleged
default unless:
(a) counsel for the state waives the procedural defense  (as
this Article  contends  he  should  when  there  are  credible
grounds for believing the defense attorney has a prior-work
conflict and independent counsel is not available  );
(b) the court concludes that the claim is not in fact barred
because counsel fairly presented the claim to the state courts
or for  some other  reason  (e.g.,  the  alleged  default  is not
adequate or independent of federal law); or
(c)  the  court  determines  the  claim  is  not  "substantial"
because it patently lacks merit.
Similarly,  there  are  instances  where  state  post-conviction  counsel
220.  See infra note 230.
221.  Procedural default is an affirmative defense and, as such, can be waived. Trest v. Cain,
522 U.S. 87, 89 (1997)  ("[P]rocedural default is normally a 'defense' that the State is 'obligated
to raise' and 'preserv[e]' if it is not to 'lose the right to assert the defense thereafter."' (alteration
in original)).814 SFLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
intends to continue as federal habeas counsel and the federal courts have
appointed that counsel under the Criminal  Justice Act pursuant to the
Supreme Court's decision in McFarlandv .  Scott,222 and in the course of
preparing the petition for writ of habeas corpus  discovers one or more
potential claims  of ineffective  assistance of trial counsel that were not
raised  in the  state collateral proceedings  (or not raised adequately).  In
these  instances,  counsel has an obligation to inform the court  and the
client and to ask the court to appoint counsel who is not laboring under a
potential conflict of interest for, at a minimum, the purpose of advising
the clients of the pros and cons of proceeding with current counsel. If the
court  denies the  request,  counsel  is obligated  to  file  a  motion  to  be
relieved based upon the potential conflict of interest.  Only if the  court
denies  the  motion  should  counsel  continue  with  the  federal
representation.
These scenarios (and Martinez itself) raise a more fundamental issue:
if state post-conviction counsel intends to continue representing a capital
client in subsequent federal habeas corpus proceedings (after explaining
the Martinez equitable "exception" to the client and ascertaining that the
client  wants  counsel  to  continue),  does  counsel  have  an  affirmative
obligation to  actually  investigate  the  quality  of their prior state  court
representation to assess-in the parlance of Martinez-itsa dequacy? The
answer to this is also clear. Yes, counsel does. As counterintuitive as it
may seem at first blush, in the post-Martinez world, where the failure to
raise ineffective assistance of trial counsel claims in state post-conviction
proceedings  can be excused if the omission was the result of deficient
post-conviction representation, the continuing duty of loyalty to the client
demands  that  such  an  inquiry  be  undertaken.  It  would  be  best  if
experienced post-conviction counsel could be obtained to do the record
review  and  conduct  the  investigation,  but  little  about  capital  post-
conviction representation reflects best practices.  Courts are reluctant to
fund such work, and experienced post-conviction counsel are overworked
and cannot and should not be expected to perform the work for free. Thus,
in such situations counsel will simply have no alternative but to attempt
to  assess  the  quality  of their  previous  representation-honestly  and
candidly, with an awareness of the possibility of self-serving or impartial
judgments.223
222.  512 U.S. 849, 855 (1994) (holding that death-sentenced inmates have a right to have
counsel appointed prior to filing a petition for writ of habeas corpus).
223.  At the risk of over-complicating an already over-complicated set of possible scenarios,
this investigation must also take place in a sufficiently timely manner to discern the existence of
any additional, previously unraised claims before the statute of limitations for federal habeas
petitions expires. See 28 U.S.C.  § 2244 (2012) (requiring a federal petition to be filed within one
year of the case becoming "final" on direct review subject to tolling during "properly filed" state2016]1 CAPITAL POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTATION 815
Many  readers are  likely now scratching their heads and wondering
who created such an arcane set of doctrines that inexorably lead to what
in any other context would be considered absurd practices and results that
can literally result in someone with a meritorious claim being executed.
It is not a hyperbole to classify the current regime as "Kafkaesque." For
the most part, fault lies with the Supreme Court. The Court's creation of
a number  of doctrines,  e.g., procedural  default,  ostensibly to promote
comity  and federalism but clearly intended  to limit the  availability of
federal habeas corpus to state prisoners and especially death-sentenced
inmates has made habeas practice both complicated and unforgiving.224
Congress  also  must  take  its  share  of  the  blame  for  the  habeas
modifications  contained  in  AEDPA.  Numerous  scholars-and  even
Supreme Court Justices-have  commented on the statute's shoddiness,
which has in turn created numerous interpretive questions courts are still
sorting out almost twenty years after its enactment.225  And finally, state
legislatures and courts, which have refused to appoint and compensate
competent  counsel in state post-conviction proceedings,  also must take
their share of the blame. But the purpose of this Article is not primarily
to  look backward  and assess blame  for the current  "pickle" the  legal
community is in, but to look forward and, at least in this particular corner
of the habeas imbroglio, offer some possible solutions.
One solution to the hall-of-mirrors problem created by Martinez is to
take some of the pressure off defense counsel to be the only institutional
actor with a responsibility to ensure that capital cases are decided fairly
on the merits.226  This Article suggests that states' attorneys and federal
post-conviction proceedings). Some courts have held-nonsensically-that Martinez's equitable
exception for otherwise procedurally defaulted claims is not an exception to the limitations period.
See, e.g., Lambrix v. Fla. Dep't of Corr., 756 F.3d 1246, 1262 (11th Cir. 2014) ("Martinez does
not alter the statutory bar against filing untimely § 2554 petitions."). Furthermore,  in Mayle v.
Felix, the Supreme Court held that a defendant could not amend a habeas petition after the
limitations period expires to include claims unrelated to those in the timely filed petition. 545 U.S.
644, 650 (2005).
224.  For a more detailed discussion of the Court's handiwork in this area, see John H. Blume,
AEDPA: The "Hype" and the "Bite, " 91 CORNELL L. REV. 259, 265-70 (2006).
225.  See, e.g., LARRY W. YACKLE, FEDERAL COURTS: HABEAS CORPUS 57 (2003) ("AEDPA
is notorious for its poor drafting. The Act is replete with vague and ambiguous language, apparent
inconsistency, and plain bad grammar."). Justice David Souter remarked that "in a world of silk
purses and pigs' ears, the Act is not a silk purse of the art of statutory drafting." Lindh v. Murphy,
521 U.S. 320, 336 (1997).
226.  Another partial  solution  beyond the scope  of this Article  would be to require  the
appointment  and  adequate  compensation  of experienced,  competent  counsel  in  state  post-
conviction proceedings and to provide reasonable funds for investigative and expert assistance.
Most states do not provide either appointment or funding, even in capital cases. Raising the overall
quality of state post-conviction  representation  would necessarily reduce the number of viable
claims of inadequate post-conviction representation.816 SFLORIDA LA W REVIEW [Vol. 68
judges have an important role to play in this context. Bear in mind, it is a
state's invocation of the affirmative defense of procedural default-in an
effort to prevent a federal judge from reaching the merits of a potentially
meritorious  ineffective  assistance  of counsel  claim-that  creates  the
procedural morass this Article has described. This in turn can lead to both
inefficient  litigation  and  unjust  results.  Thus,  in  most  instances,  if
attorneys for the state agreed-either on their own or after being "leaned
on"  by the court-to waive procedural  default and allow  the court  to
proceed to the merits, litigation would proceed expeditiously and without
the  ethical  taint  of potential  and  actual  conflicts  of interest.227  If the
claims are not bona fide, the court will reject them.
On the other hand, if the issues not previously raised are meritorious,
then there are no true "losers," except possibly those people who ascribe
to  the  view  that  death  sentences  resulting  from  a trial  infected  with
prejudicial constitutional  error should be carried out. The responsibility
of avoiding the types  of potential  conflicts of interest this Article has
noted  lies not solely with counsel  for condemned  inmates.  The  other
systemic and repeat players-states' attorneys and judges-also must do
their part. As argued above, much of the mess created by the Supreme
Court  resulted  from  its  inconsistent  approaches  to  the  problem  of
reconciling  defense counsel duties arising under the  Sixth Amendment
with the state rules of professional conduct.228  In cases such as Whiteside
and Strickland, the  Court  took  pains  to  avoid  interfering  with  the
profession's  capacity  to  self-regulate  to  protect  clients  and  serve  the
public  interest.  But  when  ethically  conscientious  defense  lawyers
conclude that they have a conflict under the  state rules of professional
conduct because their clients may have  a Sixth Amendment right to  a
merits'  review  of a  procedurally  defaulted  claim,  courts  should  not
consider this a problem of defense lawyers' making and leave it to them
to muddle through. The Court cannot consistently say, as it did in Cuyler,
that the federal courts rely on defense lawyers to comply with their ethical
obligation to detect and avoid conflicts of interest while leaving lawyers
and their clients helpless when they do raise a conflict.
227.  Furthermore, these same attorneys general are often (at least partially) the cause of the
alleged state procedural default. Many lawyers for the state routinely oppose state post-conviction
counsel's  request  for funding,  time  to conduct  adequate  investigations,  and  production  of
documents and other information that could lead to the identification of potentially meritorious
issues.  And,  in some states, lawyers for the state  even  write the orders  denying  state post-
conviction relief, filling those orders with erroneous procedural default determinations. Thus, in
equity terms-and Martinez is at bottom an  equitable doctrine-in many cases the  lawyers
representing the State have "unclean hands."
228.  See supra Part 1l.20161 CAPITAL  POST-CONVICTION  REPRESENTA70N  88117
CONCLUSION
Martinez forces courts  to grapple  with a problem that civil lawyers
have always faced, with a significant difference. Most of the cases in Part
III illustrating the prior-work conflicts problem arose  in the context of
legal  malpractice  claims  asserted  by  clients  of the  law  firms  with  a
conflict.  The ever-present  threat of a malpractice suit has given rise to
mitigating  procedures,  such  as  in-house  ethics  advisors  who  are
sufficiently independent of the  lawyers in their own firm to be able to
give  advice  and take advantage  of the  attorney-client  privilege when
communicating with the lawyers who are providing the representation.229
It  also alerts lawyers  to the fact  that they are not particularly  reliable
judges of the competence  of their own performance. Mitigating the risk
of malpractice liability has thus led to the creation of practices that serve
to  protect  client  interests  in the  long run.  Without  the  threat of civil
liability, however,  criminal lawyers  do not have the same incentive to
establish procedures to  ensure their independence.230  The cost of non-
compliance with conflicts  rules is, in effect,  externalized to courts and
state prosecutors.  Courts will be faced with motions for substitution of
counsel  or  the  appointment  of independent  counsel  to  evaluate  the
performance  of state post-conviction counsel;  states' attorneys  general
will have to deal with the possibility of further delay while the conflict
issue is adjudicated. Standard law-and-economics  analysis suggests that
these institutional actors now have an incentive to minimize the expense
and  disruption  caused  by  the  Martinez  doctrine.231 Moreover,  the
Constitution may require them to work toward some kind of cooperative
solution. Defense counsel cannot solve this problem on their own. Thus,
229.  See  Elizabeth  Chambliss  &  David  B.  Wilkins,  Promoting Effective  Ethical
Infrastructurei n Large Law Firms: A Callfor Research and Reporting, 30 HOFSTRA L. REv. 691,
692 (2002) ("[Ajnecdotal  evidence suggests that large law firms increasingly rely on in-house
ethics  advisors,  firm  general  counsel,  and  other internal  specialists  to manage  the  firm's
compliance with ethics and malpractice regulation.").
230.  Malpractice remedies  for criminal  defendants  are generally unavailable  because of
causation doctrines. As a tort (negligence) cause of action, legal malpractice requires a showing
of factual, but-for causation.  The position of a majority of jurisdictions, with respect to factual
causation, is that showing that a different outcome would have resulted if the lawyer had not been
negligent would require a showing of factual innocence. That means the defendant in the criminal
action must first have the conviction set aside, on direct or collateral review, before bringing a
malpractice  action against  the  lawyer.  See RESTATEMENT  (THIRD)  OF THE LAW  GOVERNING
LAWYERS § 53, cmt. D (AM. LAW INST.  1998).  A leading case is Peeler v. Hughes & Luce, 909
S.W.2d 494, 498 (Tex. 1995) ("We therefore hold that, as a matter of law, it is the illegal conduct
rather than the negligence of a convict's counsel that is the cause in fact of any injuries flowing
from the conviction, unless the conviction has been overturned."). As a practical  matter, this
means that civil malpractice actions-as opposed to Sixth Amendment ineffectiveness claims-
are greatly under-litigated.
231.  See, e.g., RICHARD A. POSNER, EcoNoMIC ANALYSIS OF LAW § 6.1, at 179 (5th ed. 1998).8 18 FLORIDA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 68
this Article's  tentatively  hopeful  conclusion  to this exploration  of the
Martinez conundrum  is  that  the  institutional  actors  with  a  stake  in
procedures  and  outcomes  will  work  together  to  ensure  that  credible
claims of inadequate state post-conviction representation are investigated
competently, that clients are fully informed and involved in the decision-
making process, and ultimately that clients' wishes are respected. As the
Court itself has repeatedly emphasized, the role of defense counsel must
be  understood  in  an  institutional  context;  the  constitutional  right  to
effective assistance of counsel must be respected "not for its own sake,
but because of the effect it has on the ability of the accused to receive a
fair trial."232  If equity requires that a defendant is guaranteed reasonably
competent  state  post-conviction  representation,  then  judges  and
prosecutors-in  addition  to  defense  counsel-share  responsibility  for
ensuring that this right is recognized.
232.  United States v. Cronic, 466 U.S.  648, 658 (1984).