RESPONSE
EXCLUDING RELIGION:  A REPLY
NELSON TEBBE'
In response  to Thomas C.  Berg, Response,  Religious Choice and Exclu-
sions of Religion, 157 U. PA. L. REV. PENNUMBRA  100 (2008);  Richard
W. Garnett, Response,  "ExcludingR  eligion ":  A Response, 157 U. PA. L.
REV.  PENNUMBRA  113  (2008);  Steven  D.  Smith,  Response,  Playing
Around  with  Religion's  Constitutional Joints,  157  U.  PA.  L.  REV.
PENNUMBRA 123  (2008).
Disputes concerning exclusions of religion have continued to flare
up during  the last year.  A school district in New Jersey was sued for
prohibiting  devotional  religious  music in  its holiday programs,'  and
six Virginia State Police troopers resigned their voluntary positions as
chaplains after the state disallowed denominational  prayers at the de-
partinent's  public events.2   Sometimes,  the  results of these disputes
seemed  to be  in  tension  with one  another,  at least  on  the surface.
While a city was permitted  to exclude sectarian legislative  prayers,3 a
state was prohibited from limiting a scholarship program to colleges
that were not pervasively sectarian.'  And while one local legislature
Associate Professor of Law, Brooklyn Law School.  J.D., Yale Law School; Ph.D.,
University of Chicago Divinity School.  Thanks to Thomas Berg, Richard Garnett, and
Steven Smith for reading and responding with care.  For helpful comments on previ-
ous versions of this Response, I thank Michael Cahill, Susan Herman, Richard Primus,
and Christopher Serkin.
1  Stratechik v. Bd. of Edtic., S. Orange-Maplewood Sch. Dist., 577 F. Supp. 2d 731,
739, 741 (D.N.J. 2008) (describing and upholding the policy).
2 Anita Kurnar, Under Bav, Six Toopets Resign as Chaplains, WASH. POST, Sept. 25,
2008, at B6.
Turner v. City Council of Fredericksburg, Va., 534 F.3d 352, 353 (4th Cir. 2008).
4 Colo. Christian Univ. v. Weaver, 534 F.3d 1245, 1250 (10th Cir. 2008).
(283)284  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 157: 283
PENNumbra
could restrict opening invocations to monotheistic religions,5 another
was constitutionally barred from allowing only clergy from certain  de-
nominations  to  offer  prayers.  Although  the  proper  outcomes  of
these disputes may be unclear, it is beyond doubt that the problem of
excluding religion continues to trouble constitutional decision makers.
Excluding  religion  is the practice  of singling  out religious actors
or entities for special denial of government aid or support.  Until not
too long ago, many exclusions of religion were required by the Estab-
lishment Clause.7  Over the past decade or so, however, the Supreme
Court's  antiestablishment  jurisprudence  has  shifted  so  that  today
more forms of government support for religious practice are constitu-
tionally permitted."  That shift has increasingly presented federal and
state  governments  with  the  question  of whether  their  support  pro-
grams  ought to  include  religious  practices  and  institutions, not be-
cause of any legal requirement, but simply as a matter of policy.  Some
have chosen not to extend such support to religious actors on equal
terms.9  Consequently,  a  distinct  legal  question  has  become  newly
prominent:  now that governments are permitted to include sectarian
groups in certain support programs, are they constitutionally required
to do so?
In Excluding Religion, I argued that governments ought to be given
wider constitutional  latitude  to  exclude  religion  from their  support
programs  than  has  conventionally  been  supposed,  although  I  also
I 0
recommended certain  limits on the practice.  I defended  that more
permissive  approach  toward  selective  support  solely as  a  matter  of
constitutional law, leaving to one side the question of whether particu-
lar exclusions  were  desirable  as  a  matter  of good governance.  My
proposition was simply that the Constitution has less to say about gov-
ernmental decision making around the funding of religion than many
5  Simpson v. Chesterfield County Bd. of Supervisors,  404 F.3d 276, 278 (4th Cir.
2005).
6 Pelphreyv. Cobb County, Ga., 547 F.3d 1263, 1278-79 (11th Cir. 2008).
7  See, e.g., Tilton v. Richardson,  403 U.S. 672, 679  (1971)  (upholding an act be-
cause it was "carefully drafted to ensure that the federally subsidized facilities would be
devoted to the secular and not the religious function of the recipient institutions").
8 See NOAH FELDMAN, DIVIDED BY GOD 210-11 (2005)  (describing a series of major
decisions in the 1990s and 2000s that relaxed restrictions on government funding of
religion).
9 See, e.g., Eulitt ex iel. Eulitt v. Me.,  Dep't of Educ., 386 F.3d 344 (1st Cir. 2004)
(upholding the Maine voucher program, which  funded only students that wished to
attend nonsectarian public or private school).
10 Nelson Tebbe, LxcludingReligion, 156 U. PA. L. REv. 1263 (2008).2009] Excluding Religion: A Reply
have  thought.  Chiefly,  that  is so because  religious  freedom  is best
viewed primarily, though not exclusively, as a guarantee of liberty or
autonomy, rather  than neutrality or equality.  According to  that un-
derstanding,  government often can decide not to subsidize the exer-
cise of a protected activity without offending the Constitution.  A key
distinction  exists,  then, between  government  regulation  of religious
practice and government subsidy of it.  Finally, I outlined five limits that
the Constitution imposes on the ability of governments to exclude relig-
ion.
Now three prominent scholars have offered  thoughtful responses
to Excluding Religion."  Unsurprisingly, they have endorsed certain of
its arguments while  questioning  others.  In the first Part of this  Re-
sponse, I accept the invitation to explore the implications of my posi-
tion for legal and political theory, albeit in a limited way.  Then I  de-
fend  some  of my  original  points.  Part II  supports  the  affirmative
argument for wider governmental  latitude to selectively deny support
to religion, and Part III discusses my proposed limits on that practice,
particularly the prohibition  on singling out particular denominations
or sects.
I.
What would a permissive approach to excluding religion mean for
liberal  or constitutional  democracy?  Without adopting a "muscular"
form of liberalism, as Richard Garnett invites me to do,2  I will test one
thought about the argument's possible implications for political theory.
Of course, a  permissive approach  to selective  support need  not
have any significance at all for ideal theory.  A rule allowing some se-
lective  funding of religion  could be compatible with  a range  of ap-
proaches  to basic  conceptual  questions.  That is because  arguments
for the constitutionality of excluding religion occupy a middle level of
abstraction,  at the highest-they draw on ordinary precedent and le-
gal doctrine,  as well as on a conception  of the right to religious free-
dom, but not necessarily on arguments of basic design.  Rather, they
take  fundamental  legal and political  institutions largely as they  find
11 Thomas C. Berg, Response, Religious Choice and Exclusions o/ Religion, 157 U. PA.
L.  REV. PENNUMBRA  100  (2008),  http://NNwv.pennumbia.coirnesponses/12-2008/
Berg.pdf; Richard W. Garnett, Response,  "Excding Religion ": A Response, 157 U. PA. L.
REV.  PENNUMBRA  113  (2008),  http://wiww.pennunbia.com/r-esponses/12-2008/
Garnett.pdf;  Steven D.  Smith,  Response, Playing Aound with Religion's Conslilulional
joints, 157  U. PA.  L.  REV.  PENNUMBRA  123  (2008),  http://Nww.pennunbia.com/
responses/  12-2008/Smith.pdf.
12 See Garnett, suflra note 11, at 121.286  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 157: 283
PENNumbra
them, shaped  as they  are by the range  of contingent circumstances
that characterize our actually existing, second-best world.  Lower-level
arguments like those do not entail any necessary commitment to any
particular view of liberalism  (though of course they are incompatible
with some such theories).
Nevertheless,  people  who  oppose a neutralist conception  of lib-
eral democracy may also wish to allow government to be selective in its
support.  Here,  in other words,  I hypothesize  only that people who
think that democracies  ought to be able to take positions on compre-
hensive conceptions of the good, rather than remaining neutral as to
such  questions, may also wish  to allow officials greater leeway to  de-
cide whether to subsidize religious observance.  That combination of
views may strike some as counterintuitive, because people who defend
government's power to promote values that it considers worthwhile or
wholesome-often  those who value  religious  commitments  as a per-
sonal matter-tend to be the same ones who oppose exclusions of re-
ligion.  Yet I think such  people could well come out in favor of the
prescription  that Excluding Religion defends.  Although any particular
exclusion  might  not appeal  to  nonneutralists  on policy  grounds, al-
lowing democratic  branches  constitutional  authority to  decide  such
questions might be compatible with their view of government's role,
namely that the state ought to be able to encourage behavior that it
considers to be morally worthwhile.
Let us step back and unpack that hypothesis.  One commonplace
understanding of liberalism holds, in  part, that a democratic govern-
ment ought to remain  neutral as between private conceptions  of the
good.3  According to this view, a democracy best responds to modern
conditions  of conflict  among  private  values  by  striving  to  remain
evenhanded, neither promoting nor disfavoring one or another of the
comprehensive  commitments  that vie  for  citizens'  allegiance."  Re-
1'lSe e, e.g., RONALD DWORKIN, A MATTER OF PRINCIPLE  191-92 (1985)  (arguing that
liberal "government must be neutral on what might be called the question of the good
life"); STANLEY FISH, THE TROUBLE WITH PRINCIPLE  177-78 (1999)  (depicting liberal-
ism as "a forn of government where political decisions are, in so far as possible, 'inde-
pendent of any particular conception of the  good life or what  gives value to  life"'
(quoting DWORKIN,  supa note 13, at 191)); Michael J. Sandel, Freedom J'(nn.science or
Freedom of Choice?, in ARTICLES OF FAITH, ARTICLES OF PEACE  74, 75  gaines Davison
Hunter & Os Guinness  eds., 1990)  ("[Liberalism's]  central  idea is that government
should be neutral on the question of the good life.");  id.a t  78-82 (arguing that this
philosophical version of liberalism inforins actual Supreme Court case law on religious
fi-eedorn).
14S ee DWORKIN,  supra note 13, at 191 ("Since the citizens of a society differ in their
conceptions  [of the good life], the government does not treat them  as equals if it pre-20091 Excluding Religion: A Reply
garding religion specifically, adherents  of this conception have  advo-
cated strict separation of church and state as well as government neu-
trality  among religions  and between  religion  and irreligion.'  The
idea is that because government  can never  resolve  ultimate disputes
over religion  on terms that all citizens will find acceptable,  a deimoc-
racy ought to stay out of metaphysical debates, privileging none.
Opponents  of this conception  of liberal democracy  have argued
that governmental  neutrality regarding comprehensive  commitments
is unnecessary, impossible, and/or undesirable."  According to at least
some of them, government invariably does take positions on ultimate
questions, promoting positions on controversial moral issues with in-
plications for commitments of conscience.  Moreover, that practice  is
entirely  proper  and  compatible  with  modern  democracy.  On  this
view, what liberalism requires is only that the state not restrict individ-
ual freedom, not that it strive to cultivate a needless and unattainable
neutrality.
Think, for instance, of Justice Scalia, who has argued that it ought
to be perfectly permissible  for government to endorse  the idea of a
single divine creator in its pronouncements and displays."  According
to  him, American  legal  and  political  traditions  have  long  counte-
nanced government promotion not only of belief generally over non-
belief,8  but also  its endorsement  of one  particular sort of religious
commitment-namely, monotheism or the belief in a single creator.'9
More  generally, Justice  Scalia has  said that American  constitutional
law ought to allow lawmakers to enact legislation that prohibits certain
activities solely on moral grounds.  In support of government nonneu-
trality on questions of morality, he invokes longstanding bans on po-
lygamy, incest, and prostitution.21)
fers one conception to another....").
15 Sandel,  for  instance,  argues  that  "religion  offers  the  paradigmatic  case  for
bracketing controversial conceptions of the good."  Sandel, supra note 13, at 78.
16 For theorists whose views approximate this position, see generally JOSEPH RAZ,
THE  MORALITY OF FREEDOM  (1986)  and JOHN  STUART  MILL,  ON LIBERTY  (Edward
Alexander ed., Broadview Press 1999)  (1859).
17 See McCreary County, Ky. v. ACLU of Ky.,  545 U.S. 844, 894 (2005)  (Scalia, J.,
dissenting)  ("Historical practices thus demonstrate that there is a distance between the
acknowledgment of a single Creator and the establishment of a religion.").
Is See id. at 885-89.
19 See id. at 894.
See Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 590 (2003)  (Scalia, J., dissenting) (invoking
20 
with approval  "[s]tate  laws against bigamy, same-sex  marriage, adult incest, piostitu-
tion,  masturbation,  adultery,  fornication,  bestiality, and  obscenity,"  and  describing
these as "laws based on moral choices").288  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 157: 283
PENNumbra
Now, of course, Justice Scalia may simply be opposed to liberalism.
But it is not necessary to go that far to think that government ought to
be able to take positions on matters of morality and conscience,  and
that the  core attributes  of liberal  democracy lie not in  government
neutrality, but instead in  popular sovereignty  combined with robust
equal  protection  of individual  liberty  or  autonomy.  Other serious
thinkers have advocated similar conceptions.'
My point is just that people who take the view that a liberal gov-
ernment ought to be able to promote  conduct that it thinks  is valu-
able, so long as it does not restrict the freedom  to dissent, may also
take  the view  that government has discretion  to engage  in a certain
amount of selective  subsidization.  With regard  to religion, someone
like Justice Scalia who believes government can endorse religion  as a
category,  or even  monotheism  in particular,  may also  want to  allow
government discretion  to single out religion  for nonsupport.  While
such a person may not approve of any particular exclusion of religion
on policy grounds, lie would support the broader sense  that govern-
ment ought to be allowed, as matter of legal and political theory, to
take moral positions regarding citizen  conduct.  Under this combina-
tion  of views,  both  promoting  and declining  to  promote  religious
practice would be permissible,  at least within certain  limits discussed
below.
So while a more permissive approach to excluding religion might
seem at first to appeal chiefly to separationists, who see such a rule as
a poor substitute for a constitutional prohibition on subsidies of relig-
ion, Excluding Religion may also hold some appeal for people who favor
greater governmental influence over matters of conscience and moral-
ity.  Put differently, the article's argument is at least compatible with a
conception of democracy that envisions government taking somewhat
greater care to guide its citizens in matters of conscience than neutral-
ist conceptions have been willing to contemplate.  To be clear, I am
not endorsing that political theory or any other here.  Instead,  I am
suggesting only that Excluding Religion may prove attractive to a group
of theorists who might at first seem particularly inclined against it.
II.
The principal  argument of Excluding Religion is  that government
ought  to  have  greater constitutional  leeway  than  is  commonly sup-
21 See sources cited supra note 16.20091 Excluding Religion: A Reply
posed  to  decline  to  support  religious  actors  or  entities.22   That  is
chiefly because religious freedom is best conceptualized  as a right to
liberty or autonomy that is not normally burdened when government
decides simply to forego subsidizing its exercise.  The article therefore
draws  an  important distinction  between  government  regulation,  on
the one hand, and government support, on the other.  With regard to
the former,  the First Amendment places real  limits on  the ability of
law  and policy  to  regulate  observance,  because  there  the  threat  of
hindrance is very real.2  With respect to the latter, however, religious
practitioners will often not be thwarted by an official decision to with-
hold state support.  The article illustrates that point by gesturing to-
ward other liberty-based rights, such as free speech and due process,
as to which the Court has held that government may selectively deny
aid, even when it targets constitutionally protected activity.  The Court
itself has even  compared  religious  freedom  to free  speech  and due
process in just this way, saying that lawmakers may decide to subsidize
one protected  activity  rather  than another.4  And  again,  the article
differentiates  between  its  constitutional  argument  and  any  sugges-
tion-which  it avoids-that  excluding religion  is attractive  or neces-
sary as a matter of ordinary policy.
In his  perceptive response,  Steven  Smith calls this a  "play in  the
joints" approach . It is easy to see why he thinks that phrase fits, be-
cause the article does share something with approaches that argue for
greater room for government maneuvering between the Free Exercise
and  Establishment  Clauses.  I  avoid  that  formulation  for a  reason,
though:  it risks eliding the critical distinction between regulation and
funding.  While  I do  think that government  should have  somewhat
greater latitude over funding decisions in  certain carefully-defined  ar-
eas, I have also argued that it should face greaterc onstitutional limits on
its ability to regulate conduct than exists under current law.  So over-
all, my position, when filly worked out, differs from what the phrase
"play in the joints" might call to mind.  And that position makes sense
22 Tebbe, supra note 10, at 1267.
2J, See id.a t 1280 (discussing the distinction made by the Court in Locke v. Davey,
540 U.S. 712 (2004), between regulation and funding).
24 See id. at 1283-84 (explaining the Davy Court's implicit but unmistakable refer-
ences to free speech and due process cases).
SS5m ith, supra note 11, at 123.
26 See Nelson Tebbe, Free Fxeirise and the Prblem ( Symmeto, 56 HASTINGS L.J. 699,
703-05  (2005)  (arguing for a more robust Free Exercise doctrine guided by "liberty
and forinal neutrality").290  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 157: 283
PENNumbra
if you believe-as Smith himself seems to27--that the primary value of
free  exercise is liberty or autonomy, because government  regulation
risks coercion in ways that defunding often does not.
Conceptualizing  religious freedom  as a  liberty right ought to be
enough to support my prescription, but it leaves open the question of
why officials would want to withhold aid to religion as a matter of pol-
icy.  Are there any good reasons to do so, apart from simple bias or
animus?  I suggest that colorable policy rationales do exist, and I offer
three  possibilities:  to avoid dissensus and promote unity among the
citizenry, to lift the requirement that taxpayers support religious prac-
tices with which they disagree as a matter of conscience,  and to pro-
tect equal citizenship.  Each of these justifications has the added virtue
of resonating with antiestablishment norms that are grounded, to one
degree  or another, in  the American  constitutional  tradition.  Now,
these  reasons may not be particularly strong as a constitutional  mat-
ter.8  Yet the point is not that they justify a constitutional rule requir-
ing the exclusion of religion,  or even  that they are persuasive  on the
level  of policy,  but simply  that  they  provide  decent,  nonarbitrary
grounds for policymakers  to opt not to subsidize religious observance
on  the same  terms as  other social  practices.  These three  rationales
need  to do little work for the argument to succeed-they need only
provide  grounds other than mere bias to  exclude religion.  Garnett
acknowledges  that they offer "good reasons for legislating.2'  Nothing
more is required.  And to the degree that the responses argue that any
one  of  these  rationales  does  not  resonate,  even  faintly,  with  the
American antiestablishment tradition, I respectfully disagree.
Thomas Berg argues that if the First Amendment means that gov-
ernment  must minimize  its  influence over  private  religious  choices,
then  excluding religion  should not be permitted.  Obviously  this is
so.  After  all,  declining  to  subsidize  religious  practice,  even  while
choosing  to aid other practices, will discourage  observance.  So Berg
spends  the bulk of his response  demonstrating that the no-influence
approach  best fits  constitutional  history,  structure,  and  precedent.
That  theory has been  developed and defended at greater length by
27 See Smith, .supna note  11,  at 127-28  (agreeing that "freedom of religion is best
conceptualized as a right to liberty or autonomy").
28 See Garnett, supra note 11,  at 117-18 (recognizing that there may be sound legis-
lative reasons for refusing to fund religious activity, but questioning whether they qual-
ifyas  constitutional reasons).
29 Id. at 117 (internal quotation  narks omitted).
See Berg, supra note 11, at 101.20091 Excluding Religion: A Reply
Berg and other leading  scholars)'  While  I am  sympathetic  to  their
work and believe that it captures much of the American constitutional
approach to religious freedom, I have argued that it sits somewhat un-
comfortably with these authors' own commitment to the value of reli-
gious exemptions (a commitment that I share) .3
Moreover,  the no-influence  approach pulls  against important as-
pects of the Court's case law.  Most obviously, the Court squarely re-
jected  that reading  in  its most  significant  free  exercise  decision  to
date, Employment Division v.  Smith.3   Although  Smith has drawn  criti-
cism, the case stands in the way of the argument from precedent.  And
while Smith concerned a regulation, the Court's decisions with respect
to  funding  also  sometimes  clash with  the  no-influence  approach."
There are also significant conflicts between the theory and cases con-
cerning government displays of religious symbols, such as the decision
upholding  legislative  prayer-a patently  nonneutral  practice.  Cer-
tainly, the case law also  contains many passages deploring discrimina-
tion among religion  or against religion  as a whole, but there is a seri-
ous  question  whether  such  statements  apply  to  selective  funding.
After all, they did not seem  to trouble  the  Court too much when it
upheld an exclusion of religion in Locke v. Davey.!'
So  while  the  no-influence  theory  has  offered  arguments  from
precedent  that are  respectable  (and widely  respected),  they do not
seem to me to be dispositive.  Nor do its arguments from history, but I
A See Thomas C. Berg & Douglas Laycock, The Mislakes in Locke v. Davey and the
Future qf Slate Paymenlsfin Services Piovided b)yR eligious Institulions, 40 TULSA L. REV. 227,
232-33  (2004) (describing and defending substantive neutrality); Douglas Laycock,  or
real, Substav tive, and DisaggregatedN  eutrality Toward Religion, 39 DEPAUL L. REV.  993,
1018 (1990)  (arguing that neutrality is the closest the author can come "to a single
principle that summarizes the religion clauses"); Michael W. McConnell & Richard A.
Posner, An Economic Appnach to iRsues  ]'Retigiu.s Fineedom, 56 U. CHI. L. REV. 1, 1 (1989)
(proposing "an economic definition of 'neutrality'  to determine when government ac-
tion impinges impermissibly on religious choice").
.2  Tebbe, .supian ote 26, at 714-23.
494 U.S. 872, 878 (1990)  ("[I] f prohibiting the exercise of religion ...  is not the
object of [a law]  but inerely the incidental effect of a generally applicable and other-
wise valid provision, the First Amendment has not been offended.").
.4  See, e.g.,  Locke v. Davey, 540 U.S. 712 (2004)  (holding that Washington could
constitutionally exclude students of devotional theology from its scholarship program).
Also, the direct aid case,  MVitchell v.  Helms, arguably sets out an approach  that would
allow the government to fund only secular schools. 530 U.S. 793, 869 (2000).
M  See Marsh v. Chambers, 463 U.S. 783, 792-95  (1983).  The Court will almost cer-
tainly also uphold the Pledge of Allegiance, despite its inclusion of the phrase "under
God."  See Elk Grove Unified Sch. Dist. v. Newdow, 542 U.S. 1 (2004)  (resolving the
case on standing grounds).
540 U.S. 712 (2004).292  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 157: 283
PENNumbra
will leave those to one side.  Ultimately, Kent Greenawalt probably put
it best when he recently wrote that although the no-influence approach
captures much of the meaning of the religion  clauses, it alone does
not always  or filly describe  everything that  they permit or require .
Neutrality articulates  some of what the Constitution  signifies  regard-
ing religion,  but a freestanding  liberty or autonomy component is a
necessary-and prominent-element of any satisfying understanding.
I take comfort from knowing that Smith seems to accept both my
argument that religious freedom should be interpreted primarily (or,
for him, perhaps  completely)  as a right to liberty or autonomy, and
my contention  that thinking of it that way suggests  the general per-
missibility of exclusions of religion.38  Garnett also seems to think that
the practice  of excluding religion  ought to be free of constitutional
constraints,  for  the most part. 9  And while  Berg has not been  con-
vinced,  that is  because  of the genuine  conceptual  difference  that I
have just  described  regarding  the  proper  reading  of  the  religion
clauses. 411 Once the smoke has cleared, therefore,  the principal argu-
ment of ExcludingR  eligion appears to have stood up well.
III.
Although liberty  or autonomy is  the principal  value driving  the
argument of Excluding Religion, it is not the only one.  Consequently, I
offer  several limits  on  officials'  ability  to  exclude  religion,  most  of
which  sound  in  neutrality  or  evenhandedness.  These  restrictions
seem  to me undeniable,  not only because each of them occupies an
important place in our legal tradition, but also  for independent rea-
sons of constitutional theory.
On account of these limits, Smith concludes that I do not actually
believe in  an autonomy approach."  Yet he himself does  not offer a
.7  See 2 KENT GREENAWALT,  RELIGION AND THE CONSTITUTION:  ESTABLISHMENT
AND FAIRNESS  456 & n.14 (2008)  (quoting Douglas Laycock as saying, "I have  never
claimed or intended that substantive  neutrality should be  the single explanation or
only value of the Religion Clauses").
See Smith, supra note 11, at 127-28  ("I am more attracted to Tebbe's view than
Tebbe himself is ....  ); see also id. at 131  (suggesting simply a rule against coercion).
3 See Garnett, supra note 11, at 117 (accepting that "governments may and should,
sometimes and for some purposes, treat religion in a special or distinctive way").
10S ee Berg, supra note 11, at 101 ("[T]he Free Exercise and Establishment Clauses
together require government to minimize the effect it has on the choices of private
individuals and groups in matters of religion.").
41 See Smith, surna note  11,  at 131  (saying that  despite  the similarity between a
noncoercion approach and my liberty approach, I seem "not at all attracted" to either,20091 Excluding Religion: A Reply
unitary principle or value that he thinks can accurately capture every-
thing that religious freedom should permit or require.  And for good
reason:  matters are more complicated than that.  Sometimes his writ-
ing gives the impression that the entire endeavor of trying to identify
constitutional principles  in this area is hopeless.42   But to me, saying
that the interpretive undertaking is complex is not the same as saying
that it is meaningless or impossible.'  With regard to exclusions of re-
ligion, it does not follow from my contention that certain freestanding
neutrality  protections are necessary that noncoercion  is  not the pri-
mary value  in  the right to free  exercise,  nor does it follow that the
right has no comprehensible structure at all.44
Take, for instance, my first proposed limit, which prohibits exclu-
sions that discriminate on the basis of sect or denomination.  None of
the  responses  ultimately  contends  that  there  should  not be a  strict
constitutional  rule  against  government  preferentialism  of this  sort.
(Nor does any of them deny, in the final analysis, the attractiveness of
any of the other limits I propose, as far as I can tell.)  Yet today schol-
ars are becoming interested in whether and why government should
be prohibited from singling out particular faiths for favor or disfavor,
and the responses reflect that curiosity.  So Smith objects that it is not
enough  to  say  that the  rule  against  government  preferentialism  is
longstanding  in  our constitutional  tradition,  as it undeniably is, be-
cause  neutrality  toward  religion  is  similarly ancient,  and yet  I seem
happy to devalue  that principle.'  And Garnett wonders why a liberal
democracy  cannot  disfavor  certain  faiths.  After  all,  he  reasonably
points out, some of them are more compatible with American democ-
because I retain certain limits grounded in neutrality).
42 See id.a t 125  ("[T]here just is not much to say-no sufficiently definite stan-
dards or authorities to appeal to-that could or should convince anybody who is not
independently  inclined  toward  a particular  advocate's  point  of view.");  see alo  2
GREENAWALT, suflra note 37, at 438-39 (noting Smith's "skepticism").
43 See Nelson Tebbe, Edec iism, 25 CONST. COMMENT.  (forthcoming 2009)  (book
review)  (manuscript at 1),  available at http://ssin.com/abstiact-1333767  (noting the
meaningful  distinction between  concluding  that interpreting the religion  clauses  is
impossible and "irreducibly intricate").
44 There  is an interesting disagreement among the responses  regarding whether
the limits I propose are narrow or broad.  Smith thinks they are broad, and will ensure
a place in this area for robustjudicial intervention.  Smith, supra note 11, at 132.  Berg,
however, thinks they are narrow, not powerful enough to guarantee the sort of neutral-
ityth at he thinks the religion clauses require.  Berg, supra note 11, at 104-05.
45 See Smith,  supra note  11,  at 132  (asserting that, in fact, "nonpreferentialism
seems to be a corollary of th[e] more general requirement of neutrality, which itself
has been long considered a basic feature of American jurisprudence" (internal quota-
tion marks omitted)).294  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 157: 283
PENNumbra
racy than others, and one might expect government to be able to craft
its subsidy programs accordingly.
First, I do not think it is true that neutrality as between  religion
and nonreligion is as firmly rooted in precedent as the ban oil prefer-
entialism.  While there are plenty of passages in Supreme Court dicta
endorsing neutrality among religions and between religion  and irreli-
gion,"  the actual holdings are less consistent, as I show in the article.
In fact, it is difficult to think of a single free exercise or antiestablish-
ment decision striking down an exclusion of religion  as a whole from
an  aid  program.48   With regard  to differentiation  among sects, how-
ever, the Court has been almost entirely consistent.
Second,  rule  of law  considerations  bolster  the commonsensical
conclusion  that a constitutional democracy ought not draw lines be-
tween  or among religious groups.  In the democratic tradition, there
is a fundamental prohibition on government action that is arbitrary or
irrational.  One way of formulating this ban is that government can-
not take action  based on  reasons  that are accessible  only to  people
who share a certain comprehensive commitment and not to outsiders,
who will view those reasons as senseless or meaningless.  Imagine, for
instance,  that a state establishes a voucher program under which par-
ents can choose to direct government funds to all public and private
schools except to, say, Lutheran ones.  There could be no nonarbi-
trary, accessible reason for officials to craft that sort of exclusion-no
legitimate  ground  to  think that  Lutheran schools  should be treated
differently from any others on  account of their Lutheran  character.
What could possibly lead a government to engage in that sort of tar-
geting?  The action  could be based on unthinking bias, which  is, of
course, anathema  in our constitutional system,  or it could be an ex-
"  See Garnett, supia note 11, at 120-21  ("It would seem noncontroversial that some
faiths are more simpatico with political liberalism than others, so why should the state
not be able to subsidize accordingly?");  Richard W. Garnett, A Hands-O)JApproach  to
feligio'us Doctrine:  What Am' We Talking About?,  84 NOTRE DAME  L. REv. 837, 860-61
(2009)  (discussing my proposed limit on preferential exclusions of religion).
47 See, e.g.,  Everson  v. Bd. of Educ., 330 U.S. 1, 18  (1947)  ("[The First]  Amend-
ment requires the state to be a neutral in its relations with groups of religious believers
and non-believers .... ").
48 Of course, there are fiee speech decisions that do something like that, but the
neutrality language that Smith quotes comes firom religious fireedom cases, not speech
cases.
1,9S ee Nelson Tebbe,  Wilclicnli and Slaleciqla:  Liberal Demociat) in Afiica, 96 GEO.
L.J. 183, 226-27  (2007)  (illustrating how bans on capricious governmental action pro-
mote fieedom, equality, and other liberal ideals).
50 See id.20091 Excluding Religion: A Reply
pression  of an official  theological commitment  that is unavailable  to
those who do not share it-such as the excluded Lutherans, perhaps,
or people who do not speak the language of Christian  theology at all.
Whatever its exact formulation, the rule of law presents an obstacle to
official policy when it is based oil what will seem to many citizens to be
nothing more than capriciousness.)
None of that is to say that officials cannot disfavor undemocratic
practices  free  of this concern,  as  Garnett rightly  suggests  that  they
can.  That is true regardless of whether the disfavored conduct tends
to be engaged in by certain sects more than others, or even exclusively
by some.  So for instance, it would not constitute preferentialism  for a
government to prohibit aid to organizations that conduct terrorist ac-
tivities against the United States, even if calls to violence tended to be
limited to certain  faiths.5,  There  is a crucial  difference between,  on
the one hand, singling out a denomination for definding out of sii-
ple bias or for theological reasons and, on the other hand, declining
to  support  all  organizations  that  engage  in  condemned  practices.
What matters is that the ground for condemnation is accessible to all
citizens, even if they object.
Excluding on the basis of religion as a category is not capricious in
that way.  There are understandable reasons for a government to de-
cide  not to subsidize  observance  as a whole.  Where that is not the
case,  and the exclusion really is based on bias or animus, another of
my limits kicks in.  But when differentiation among sects is at issue, a
general ban is appropriate.  So both as a matter of political tradition
and constitutional  theory, nonpreferentialism  has a place  in our de-
mocracy that is difficult to question.  Doubtless, others will differ with
me on the best way tojustify it, but the rule itself appears to be uncon-
troverted.  To my mind, the other limits on government discretion in
this area are similarly unavoidable, although surely there is also a great
deal of worthwhile thinking to be done regarding their rationales.
51 For a harder hypothetical, imagine a government program that provided finan-
cial support to small, impecunious denominations, citing an interest in fostering reli-
gious  plualism  and  counteracting  the  overwhelning  influence  of majority  faiths.
Would such a policy constitute impermissible preferentialism  or permissible pursuit of
a neutral policy?  I am grateful to Susan Herman for raising this question.
52 See Garnett, suirpi  note  11, at 120-21.  Of course such programs can raise diffi-
cult  constitutional  questions  when  they  pit religious  freedom  against, say,  gender
equality or other values of constitutional stature.  Yet those difficulties must be worked
out independent of the problem of preferentialism.
5.1 John Finnis, Discrimitiation Between  Rehgniorts:  Some  IThoughts oin  Rea,/dig Green-
await's Religion and the Constitution:  Establishment and Fairness, 25 CONST.  COM-
MENT.  (forthcoming 2009).296  University of Pennsylvania Law Review  [Vol. 157: 283
PENNumbra
CONCLUSION
Why do  people  engage  in  scholarship of this sort, asks Smith?5'
He  kindly calls  Excluding Religion "impressive,"  but lie  also  wonders
what motivates its inquiry.  It is interesting to consider what drives a
question like that.  My sense, which could be wrong, is that the ques-
tion presents itself to him precisely because he thinks that it is virtually
impossible  to generate determinate  answers in this area of law on ac-
count of his assessment  that the considerations-text, structure, and
history-stand in equipoise,  or at least allow plenty of room for rea-
sonable  minds  to  differ.  Because  of that situation,  scholars  cannot
generate arguments that will convince people who are not already in-
clined to agree with them.  And if that is your view, you may well won-
der why scholars bother.
But that is not my view.  Rather, I see a collective effort to detect,
describe, and defend the values that underlie  the American  constitu-
tional order.  That  effort is difficult  because political life  is exceed-
ingly intricate,  and because  circumstances  are ceaselessly  changing.
So someone puts forward a view of the Constitution regarding exclu-
sions of religion,  and others disagree,  and over time we  work out a
modus vivendi-or perhaps even an agreement in principle.  While it
may not be possible to convince people who are already committed to
another view, it may well happen that people at the margins will not
have made up their minds and can be swayed.  Moreover, the alterna-
tive is unclear.  Judges, policymakers,  and other constitutional actors
will  make  decisions concerning  exclusions  of religion  regardless  of
what we do in the academy.  Is the better course to remain silent or is
it to do what we can to make the best arguments available to them?
Preferred Citation:  Nelson Tebbe, Response, Excluding Religion:
A Reply, 157 U. PA. L. REV. PENNUMBRA 283  (2009),
http://www.pennumbra.com/responses/05-2009/Tebbe.pdf.
54 Smith, supra note 11, at 133.
5  Id. at 123, 133.