NONBELIEVERS
Nelson Tebbe*
INTRODU CTION .................................................................................  1112
I. N ONBELIEVERS  .............................................................................  1117
A.  Who Are Nonbelievers? .......................................................  1117
1. The Scope of the Study ....................................................  1117
2. D em ographics. .................................................................  1120
B. Are They Outsiders?. ............................................................  1122
II. T H EO RY ........................................................................................  1127
A .M ethod ...................................................................................  1127
B. Defining Religion ..................................................................  1130
1. Academic Study of Religion ...........................................  1131
2. Legal D efinitions .............................................................  1136
C. Religion's Specialness ...........................................................  1140
III. D O CTRINE ...................................................................................  1149
A. Nondiscrimination. ...............................................................  1149
B . E xem ptions ............................................................................  1153
C. Church Autonomy ................................................................  1164
D. Nonestablishment .................................................................  1172
1.  Government Expression .................................................  1172
2. Fu  nding. ............................................................................  1177
C ON CLU SIO N .....................................................................................  1179
* Associate  Professor of Law, Brooklyn Law School. Warm thanks to Miriam H.
Baer, Frederic Bloom, Harlan  G.  Cohen, Caroline  Mala Corbin,  Marc  0.  DeGi-
rolami, Christopher L. Eisgruber, Richard W. Garnett, Kent Greenawalt,  Abner S.
Greene,  Philip Hamburger, Paul Horwitz,  Andrew  Koppelman, Douglas Laycock,
Brian Leiter, Hillel Y. Levin, Ira C. Lupu, Richard A. Primus, Richard C. Schragger,
Micah J. Schwartzman, Christopher Serkin, Steven D. Smith, Winifred Fallers Sulli-
van, and Robert W. Tuttle, as well as to participants in faculty workshops at Fordham
University School of Law, University of Georgia School of Law, and University of
Virginia School of Law, and to those who offered comments at the Religious Legal
Theory Conference at St. John's University School of Law. Finally, I am grateful to
Dean Michael Gerber, President Joan G. Wexler, and the Dean's Summer Research
Fund at Brooklyn Law School.
11111112 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
INTRODUCTION
H 
OW should  courts  handle  nonbelievers  who  bring religious
freedom  claims?  Although  this question  is  easy to  grasp, it
presents a genuine puzzle because  the religion clauses of the Con-
stitution, along with many contemporary  statutes, protect  only re-
ligion by their terms. From time to time, judges and scholars have
therefore wondered whether or how nonbelieving Americans could
benefit from free exercise  protections  or be subject  to nonestab-
lishment limitations.'
Recently,  the  legal  predicament  of  nonbelievers  has  become
more prominent because of the growing visibility of groups that re-
ject  religious  ideas,  identities,  and  institutions.  Public  awareness
has increased  in several ways. President  Obama included them in
his in inaugural address  when he said:  "We  are a nation of Chris-
tians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus, and nonbelievers."2 Following
the President's  lead, Mayor  Bloomberg  invited atheist  leaders  to
his  annual  interfaith  prayer  breakfast  for  the  first  time.'  Mean-
while, writers known as the New Atheists were emerging into pub-
lic  consciousness  with  a series of bestselling books.4 Perhaps  em-
boldened by  events like these, organizations  of nonbelievers  have
'See,  e.g., Kaufman v. McCaughtry, 419 F.3d 678, 681-80 (7th Cir. 2005)  (address-
ing an atheist inmate's claim that an official's refusal to allow him to form a study
group and receive certain publications violated the Free Exercise and Establishment
Clauses); 1 Kent Greenawalt, Religion and the Constitution: Free Exercise and Fair-
ness 147-53 (2006); Douglas Laycock, Religious Liberty as Liberty, 7 J. Contemp. Le-
gal Issues 313, 326-28 (1996).
2 Barack Obama, President of the United States, Inaugural Address (Jan. 20, 2009)
(transcript  available  at  http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/20/us/politics/20text-
obama.html).
'Daniel  E. Slotnik, At Mayor's Breakfast, 'Interfaith' Means Atheists, Too, Posting
to  City  Room,  N.Y.  Times  (Jan.  7,  2010,  10:02  A.M.),
http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/01/07/atheists-attend-mayors-interfaith-
breakfast-for-the-first-time/ (connecting the invitation to Obama's inaugural address).
'See,  e.g., Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion (2006); Daniel C. Dennett, Break-
ing the Spell:  Religion as a Natural Phenomenon  (2006); Sam Harris, The  End of
Faith: Religion, Terror, and the Future of Reason (2004); Christopher Hitchens, God
Is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything (2007); Victor J. Stenger, The New
Atheism: Taking a Stand for Science and Reason (2009). See generally Paul Horwitz,
The Agnostic Age xiv (2011); Peter Berkowitz, The New New Atheism, Wall St. J.,
July 16,2007, at A13.2011]  Nonbelievers  1113
grown progressively more active and vocal.'  During last year's win-
ter holidays, for example, atheist groups sponsored advertisements
that displayed  phrases  such  as  "Good Without  God"  and  "This
Season, Celebrate  Reason."6  Disputes arising from such activities
already have  gone  legal. For instance, freethinkers  sued  to erect
winter  solstice  displays  alongside  traditional  symbols  such  as
creches and menorahs.7 Another group went to court to challenge
the removal of a billboard that read "Imagine No Religion."8
Not  only is  social  conflict  involving nonbelievers  more  visible,
but it may be taking on new qualities as well.'  While atheists and
agnostics have long comprised one of the most reviled minorities in
America,"° they now seem to be garnering antipathy of a different
'See,  e.g., Laurie  Goodstein, More  Atheists Shout It From  the Rooftops, N.Y.
Times, Apr. 26, 2009, at Al ("More than ever, America's atheists are linking up and
speaking out  ... "); G. Jeffrey MacDonald, Ranks of Atheists Grow, Get Organized,
The Christian Sci. Monitor, June 28, 2009,  at 22. On campuses, the Secular  Student
Alliance reported  that it had forty-two chapters in 2003 and  146 in 2009. Atheism,
N.Y.  Times  (Apr. 27,  2009),  http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/
subjects/a/atheism/index.html.
6 See James C. McKinley Jr., For Atheist Ads on Buses, Equally Mobile Reaction,
N.Y.  Times, Dec. 14, 2010,  at A19  (reporting on atheist ad  campaigns  in various
American cities, both during the holiday season and more generally); Daniel E. Slot-
nik, For the Holidays, an Atheism Billboard, Posting to City Room, N.Y. Times (Nov.
29,  2010,  8:00 A.M.),  http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/11/29/for-the-holidays-
an-atheism-billboard/  (reporting on a sign posted by the American Atheists outside
the Lincoln Tunnel: "You Know It's a Myth: This Season, Celebrate Reason!").
See Ark.  Soc'y of Freethinkers  v.  Daniels, No.  4:09CV00925SWW,  2009  WL
4884150,  at *1, *6 (E.D. Ark. Dec. 16, 2009)  (ruling in favor  of freethinkers who
wished to erect a winter solstice display). But see Wells v. City and County of Denver,
257 F.3d 1132, 1136-38, 1153 (10th Cir. 2001)  (allowing a city to reject a winter sol-
stice display under different facts). See also Debra Cassens Weiss, Courthouse Holi-
day Display Includes 'Star Wars' Message and Atheist Contributions, A.B.A. J., (Dec.
13,  2010),  http://www.abajournal.com/news/article/courthouse-holiday-display-
includes  star warscharacterand-atheist-contrib.
8Raja Abdulrahim,  Group Files Suit Against City Over Billboard  Removal, L.A.
Times, Nov. 29, 2008, at B3; see also Brady Gillihan, Atheist Group Wins Battle to
Place  Ads  on  City  Buses,  Herald-Times  (July  28,  2009),
http://www.heraldtimesonline.com/stories/2009/07/28/news.qp-8620169.sto.
'See  Laycock, supra note 1, at 327 ("The emergence of a vocal nontheistic minority
in a predominantly theistic society causes serious social conflict.").
10S ee, e.g., Penny Edgell et al., Atheists as "Other": Moral Boundaries and Cultural
Membership in American Society, 71 Am. Soc. Rev. 211, 217 (2006) ("Americans are
less accepting of atheists than of any of the other groups  we asked about, and by a
wide margin."). Not only are nonbelievers less accepted  than any other religious mi-
nority, including Muslims after 9/11, but they are the most disfavored minority of any
type, at least according to this study. Id. at 217-18.1114 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
kind. Chiefly,  that  is  because  attitudes  toward  most other  small
sects have improved  in recent years."  Social scientists have found
that  Americans  increasingly  understand  themselves  to  share  a
sense of "spirituality,"  however individualized  or syncretistic, that
is important  for cultural  and  political  membership."  Despite  this
increased religious tolerance, negative views of nonbelievers  have
persisted-and the result may be a growing acceptance  gap. Non-
believers  are  virtually  the only Americans  who  dissent from this
conception  of common American  religiosity, in  other words,  and
they therefore may occupy a newly singular sort of outsider status.
Even  though  discriminatory  attitudes  toward  them  are  largely
symbolic, many Americans  nevertheless can have concrete effects
on individual nonbelievers  in settings like employment relations or
child  custody proceedings  because  they have never  met someone
who openly identifies as an atheist or agnostic.
Judges  therefore  will face  the  difficulty that I described  at the
outset, namely that religious freedom laws typically reference relig-
ion alone. That is true not only of constitutional provisions such as
the Free Exercise, Establishment, and Test Oath Clauses, but also
of relatively recent statutes, such  as the powerful  Religious Land
Use  and  Institutionalized  Persons  Act  ("RLUIPA")."  Virtually
everywhere  that  American  law  protects  free  exercise  and  non-
establishment it focuses on religion. Does our legal regime there-
fore exclude  Americans who distance themselves  from traditional
religious beliefs and institutions, including atheists, agnostics, secu-
lar humanists,  brights, and freethinkers?  For example, should the
American  Humanist  Association  qualify  for  special  protection
from zoning laws on the same terms as traditional  congregations?
Could  a  local  government  display  a  sign  declaring  "Reason's
Greetings" during the holiday season?4
"Id. at 213-15.
For full support, see infra Section I.B.
12 
"42 U.S.C. §§ 2000cc-2000cc-5 (2006).
4 Leading thinkers have devoted thoughtful sections of longer works to these ques-
tions. See Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 147-53; Laycock, supra note 1, at 326-37; see
also Norman  Dorsen, The Religion  Clauses and Nonbelievers,  27 Wm. & Mary L.
Rev. 863, 867-68 (1986) (providing a short but insightful treatment). A helpful work-
ing paper appreciates the growing salience of nonbelievers,  but unlike this Article it
asks  what their prominence  means for familiar establishments  of religion. Caroline2011] Nonbelievers 1115
In this Article, I argue that no wholesale solution is appropriate.
Instead, courts should handle nonbelievers differently according to
the different constellations of considerations  that animate particu-
lar doctrines within religious freedom law. Multiple  values count,
and some of them cut against protecting nonbelievers in some con-
texts.  Factual  variations  can  make  a  difference  as  well.  Only  a
polyvalent approach captures everything that should matter, from
principled commitments to practical concerns.
Two arguments, however, oppose this piecemeal solution to the
predicament of nonbelievers. Both come out of theoretical debates
that  are  central  to scholarship  on religious  freedom  today. First,
some have argued that the term religion should simply be defined
to include (or exclude) nonbelievers,  so that courts can determine
whether to treat them  like conventional  practitioners  in advance
and for all purposes. Here, I argue that definitional approaches  to
the problem are not likely to be helpful. After testing leading defi-
nitions both in law  and in another discipline-the academic study
of religion-I conclude  that they do little independent conceptual
work.  I do  take  from the religion literature  a  useful  metadefini-
tional  argument, however,  namely that religion  is  a protean con-
cept  that courts  may deploy  with reference  to their  own  institu-
tional objectives. If that is right, then the effort to define religion is
not so much wrong as incomplete: when courts ask whether some-
thing counts as religion in a particular doctrinal and factual context
they  are  really asking whether it should be protected,  which is  a
substantive  matter. That inquiry  is likely to yield variegated  out-
comes. Judges should avoid using definitions as shortcuts past me-
ticulous doctrinal analysis.
A second argument is that religious believers  should not enjoy
special status in American law. On this view, there is no principled
reason  to protect  religion  differently  from  other beliefs that  are
deep and valuable. Even if nonbelief does not fall within the defini-
tion  of religion,  it should  receive  equivalent  legal  solicitude  be-
cause religion cannot claim any distinctive legal standing."  My take
is different. Whether religion is special as compared to nonbelief in
Mala Corbin, Nonbelievers and Government Speech, 97 Iowa L. Rev. (forthcoming
2011) (on file with the Virginia Law Review Association).
,"F  or sources, see infra Section II.C.1116 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
a particular area should depend  on a range  of considerations,  in-
cluding not  only constitutional principles  but  also history, prece-
dent, popular  opinion, and practicality. Careful judges will neither
always treat religion just like other cultural  formations nor always
distinguish it from them. Instead, they will sift through the ration-
ales that drive individual provisions and decide whether those rea-
sons justify treating nonbelievers similarly in specific scenarios. Ul-
timately,  then, neither contemporary  academic  debate--over  the
definition of religion or over its specialness-offers much to courts
confronting the problem of nonbelievers.
When it comes  to doctrinal  specifics,  I  propose  solutions  that
both reflect  and  reveal  the  complexity  of  the  relevant  commit-
ments. For example,  I argue  that while courts ought to presump-
tively  prohibit  government  discrimination  against  nonbelievers,6
they should not give every atheist institution extraordinary protec-
tion  against  state  interference  even  though current  law  protects
churches  and synagogues  in  that way."  And while public schools
cannot  teach  the  truth  of secular  humanism  or  freethinking,8  a
progressive town conceivably could display an atheist slogan under
some circumstances.9 These outcomes are more particularized than
those offered  by others who  have addressed  the place  of nonbe-
lievers in the American scheme of religious freedom.
Part I describes the study's subject matter, which includes athe-
ists, agnostics, secular humanists, and freethinkers.'  It then argues,
working  from the social  science  literature, that nonbelievers  face
challenges to equal citizenship that have relevance for legal protec-
tion.  Part  II  describes  the  polyvalent  method  that  this  Article
adopts, and it goes on to reject the two arguments I have just out-
lined: that the term religion should be defined to include all nonbe-
lievers  and  that, even  if nonbelief  does  not count  as religion,  it
should receive equivalent protection because religion is not special.
Part III  applies the polyvalent method to the problem of nonbe-
6 See infra Section III.A.
See infra Section III.C.
'7 See infra Subsection III.D.1.
18 
See infra Subsection IJI.D.1.
19 
'0T  his is not a legal definition that carries real consequences but rather a description
of the Article's topic. I acknowledge significant fuzziness at the margins of this cate-
gory, but I focus on its core.2011] Nonbelievers 1117
lievers across  a variety of legal  doctrines. Whether  readers agree
with its specific recommendations  matters  less than whether  they
are attracted to the general approach.
In the Conclusion, I point out an implication for a larger matter.
If this Article's analysis is sensible-not necessarily  convincing  in
every detail but reasonable overall-then it provides some reason
to think that the endeavor of protecting religious freedom in a par-
ticularized way is not invariably meaningless  or impossible, despite
the fears of some influential thinkers.
I. NONBELIEVERS
Nonbelievers occupy  a precarious position in American society.
Atheists, agnostics,  and  the like comprise  a small segment of the
population.  Moreover,  they  continue  to  elicit  aversion from  the
majority that is stronger than, and arguably different from, the dis-
taste that  is directed  toward any  other minority. At a time when
Americans are, on some accounts, converging around tolerance for
virtually  all religious  people,  nonbelievers  stand  virtually  alone.
Their position in the social structure  is therefore tenuous, though
somewhat  complicated,  and it presents  a risk of unequal  citizen-
ship. This Part pursues those claims.
A. Who Are Nonbelievers?
1. The Scope of the Study
When I refer to nonbelievers here, I mean to include people who
take  negative  or skeptical  positions on the existence  of superhu-
man  beings  and  supernatural  powers.21  Atheists  are  commonly
thought  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  deity,"  while  agnostics  are
21 Although it is possible to think of this as a definition of the term nonbelievers, it
operates only to frame the problem. It carries no legal consequences, unlike the defi-
nitions of the term religion that I address below.
' See, e.g., Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions 87 (Wendy Doni-
ger ed., 1999) (defining atheism as "[t]he critique and denial of belief in God"); 1 The
Encyclopedia of Religion 479-80 (Mircea Eliade ed., 1987) (entry by George Alfred
James) ("[A]theism is the doctrine that God does not exist, that belief in the existence
of God is a false belief."); The HarperCollins Dictionary of Religion 88 (Jonathan Z.
Smith ed.,  1995)  ("[A] critical stance  towards divinity.... Modern  naturalistic athe-
ism ...  denies the existence of any superhuman beings, of any form of transcendent
order or meaning in the universe.").1118 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
doubtful or think that there is no way of resolving  the question on
the  available  evidence.23  Also included  are  most  secular  human-
ists,24 freethinkers,  and the like-to the degree that they take nega-
tive or skeptical positions on such issues.5 There will be messiness
at the edges of this group, but for this project I concentrate  on its
center.
Nonbelievers  is a problematic  term with no preferable  alterna-
tives. Taken literally, it might suggest that atheists or agnostics do
not  believe  in  anything  at  all.  That  erroneous  connotation  has
driven  some  skeptics  to  invent  a  new  term  for  themselves-
"brights."26  Despite  such  difficulties,  the  term  nonbelievers  has
gained social currency, exemplified  by its appearance in President
Obama's  inaugural  address.  Moreover,  some  influential  religious
skeptics do call themselves  nonbelievers."  Finally, the obvious  al-
ternatives, like atheists or unbelievers, are either too specific or too
pejorative.  For all these reasons, I use  the term despite  its draw-
backs.
23S ee, e.g., Merriam-Webster, supra note 22,  at 23 (defining agnosticism as "[t]he
doctrine that humans cannot know the existence of anything beyond the phenomena
of their experience"  but also noting its association with "skepticism  about religious
questions" and opposition to Christian beliefs); HarperCollins, supra note 22,  at 32
("[T]he view that there is insufficient evidence  to posit either the existence or non-
existence of God."). Others have defined these terms differently. Durkheim, for in-
stance, thought of an  atheist as someone who  "does not concern  himself with the
question whether gods exist or not." Emile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of the
Religious Life: A Study in Religious Psychology 31 (1915).
24H  arperCollins, supra note 22, at 970 (defining secular humanism as "a term, often
pejorative, used to describe the belief that ultimate values reside solely in the human
individual and possess no supernatural origin or grounding,"  and including organiza-
tions such as the Ethical Culture Society and the nontheistic wing of Unitarianism but
also describing it as a "highly diffuse force in American culture").
Deists are thought to be different because they commonly "acknowledge[]  the ex-
istence of a God upon the testimony of reason," even though they reject "revealed
religion." Oxford English Dictionary (last visited Aug. 21, 2011), http://www.oed.com/
view/Entry/49206?redirectedFrom=deist#.  Understood this way, deism does not fall
within my subject matter here.
26 The term "bright"  includes atheists, agnostics,  and secular  humanists. See Den-
nett, supra note 4, at 21; see also The Brights' Principles, The Vision, The Brights'
Net, http://www.the-brights.net/vision/principles.html  (last visited Mar. 3, 2011)  ("A
bright is an individual whose worldview is naturalistic (free  from supernatural and
mystical elements).").
'See, e.g., Dawkins, supra note 4, at 15 (quoting Albert Einstein as saying "I am a
deeply religious nonbeliever. This is a somewhat new kind of religion.").2011] Nonbelievers 1119
Several sorts of people are excluded from this study. First, I put
to one side those who identify with a particular religious tradition
but who care little about its fundamental  doctrines, who have not
given  such matters  much  thought,  or who  would hesitate  before
committing to their tradition's beliefs or wholeheartedly engaging
in its practices.  Unenthusiastic,  doubting,  and even  nonbelieving
practitioners  of recognized  religions should be treated  separately
for analytic clarity. Part of the reason is that many doctrines of re-
ligious  freedom  apply  without  difficulty  to, say,  practicing  Jews
who nevertheless do not believe in God. Enough of the doctrine is
based  on  the historical  position and  importance  of familiar  reli-
gious  traditions that it easily  includes  doubters  who nevertheless
are  meaningful  members  of those  denominations.  (Of  course, if
they  brought claims  as  nonbelievers,  rather  than  as members  of
their recognized faith traditions, they would be considered here.)
Neither  do  I include  the growing  numbers  of syncretists  and
spiritualists  who  assemble  their  own  notions  and rituals  in indi-
vidualistic  or  idiosyncratic  ways.  Although  they  are  unaffiliated
with any recognized  religion, they do incorporate  elements of dif-
ferent faiths and they consider  the result to be sacred or spiritual.
These  people  are  analytically  distinct  from  nonbelievers,  even
though  their  creeds  and  observances  may  be  highly  nontradi-
tional.28
Finally, I put to one side beliefs or actions grounded in morality
or conscience, independent of any conception of God or the super-
natural. Rather, I use the word nonreligious to refer to freestand-
ing tenets. Avowed  Lutherans, for example,  may be pacifists for
reasons of morality or conscience  that are only weakly  connected
to their faith. Such  people  need not identify  with  a familiar  reli-
gious tradition at all, but to the extent that they do they may see lit-
tle connection  between  a particular  practice  and  their religiosity.
Nonreligious people present legal problems that are different from,
Is there  any  real difference between  idiosyncratic  spiritual people  and nonbe-
8 
lievers? In practice, they may be difficult to separate out. I am interested here, how-
ever, in people who hold a noticeably skeptical attitude toward the existence of su-
pernatural  beings  or forces  and  not  in those  who  distance  themselves  from  any
recognizable  religion  but generally  are  happy to assent  to the existence  of other-
worldly powers or persons.1120 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
and  in  some  ways  more  complicated  than,  the  ones  I  consider
here.29
In short, I concentrate on committed nonbelievers and I ask how
courts should evaluate their religious freedom claims.
2. Demographics
It is sometimes said that the number of Americans who have no
religion  has doubled  in recent  years, but this claim  is misleading
unless it is qualified in important ways. While it is true that about
fourteen  percent  of Americans  report that they have no religious
affiliation, up from about seven percent in the early 1990s, many of
these so-called "nones"  also say that they believe in God and have
a prayer practice.'  When the  question is  asked in a more  telling
manner, the number of nonbelievers is small but not insignificant.
Few people asked about their beliefs report real incredulity. Be-
tween two percent  and five percent of Americans  say they do not
believe in God," while between three percent and six percent say
that there is no way to know whether  God exists.2 When people
are asked about their identity rather than their beliefs, the number
of nonbelievers falls even further. Less than two percent call them-
selves atheists,  and less than three percent say they are agnostic.
Notwithstanding  questions about  whether these measures capture
" For a leading treatment that includes the problem of nonreligious commitments of
conscience and their relationship to religious ones for First Amendment purposes, see
Abner S. Greene, The Political Balance of the Religion Clauses, 102 Yale L.J. 1611,
1640-41 (1993).
30See Edgell et al., supra note 10, at 214; Michael Hout & Claude S. Fischer, Why
Americans Have No Religious Preference: Politics and Generation, 67 Am. Soc. Rev.
165, 166-67, 173-75 (2002).
31 Hout & Fischer, supra  note 30, at 174 (2.9%, reporting  on data from the 2000
General Social Survey); Barry A. Kosmin & Ariela Keysar, American Religious Iden-
tification  Survey:  Summary  Report:  March  2009  at  8  (2009)  [hereinafter  ARIS]
(2.3%); Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life, U.S. Religious  Landscape Survey,
Religious Affiliation: Diverse and Dynamic 162 (2008) [hereinafter Pew] (5%); Rod-
ney Stark, What Americans Really Believe: New Findings from the Baylor Surveys of
Religion 117 (2008) [hereinafter Baylor] (4%).
32See  Hout & Fischer, supra  note 30, at 174 (4.1%); ARIS,  supra note 31,  at 8
(4.3%); Baylor, supra note 31, at 62 (6%).
3 See ARIS, supra note 31,  at 5 (0.7%  in 2008, up from 0.4%  in 2001); Pew, supra
note 31, at 5 (1.6%).
3 ARIS, supra note 31,  at 5 (0.9%  in 2008, up from 0.5%  in 2001); Pew, supra note
31, at 5 (2.4%).2011] Nonbelievers 1121
the  full  range  of  religious  skepticism,  it  seems  clear  that  few
Americans identify themselves as nonbelievers."
Although  the  identification  numbers  are  modest,  they  seem
more significant  when they are  compared to current statistics  for
familiar  religious  groups.  For  example,  Jews  also  comprise  less
than two  percent of the population,  as do  Episcopalians.36 More-
over, agnostics are about as numerous as Presbyterians."  If it is le-
gitimate  to combine  those who identify as  atheist and agnostic-
something  that is  far  from  clear-then  their  numbers  approach
those of Lutherans or Pentacostals 8
Although few in number, nonbelievers are relatively privileged.
Atheists and agnostics are more likely to be men than are members
of the general population, and they are more likely to be white or
Asian, at least according to one study.9 Geographic distribution of
atheists and agnostics is skewed toward the west and northeast.4" A
disproportionate percentage  of them have college or graduate de-
grees as compared to the total population, although they are out-
ranked  in  both  categories  by  people  who  identify  as  Jewish  or
Hindu.4" Nonbelievers also earn somewhat more than other Ameri-
cans, though again not as much as self-identified Jews or Hindus4.2
Moreover,  about ten percent of college professors  are atheist and
about  thirteen  percent  are  agnostic-numbers  that  are  several
times higher than those for Americans  overall.4 Professors  at elite
"' Of course, some people may avoid the label atheist because of the social stigma
that is often attached to it, even when they are answering confidential survey ques-
tions.
36 ARIS, supra note 31, at 5 (Jewish: 1.2%; Episcopalian/Anglican:  1.1%); Pew, su-
pra note 31, at 145 (Jewish: 1.7%; Episcopalian/Anglican Family: 1.5%).
37 See ARIS, supra note 31, at 5 (Presbyterian:  2.1%); Pew, supra note 31, at 145
(Presbyterian Family: 2.7%).
" For example, Pew polled atheists and agnostics at 4%, while Lutherans and Pen-
tecostals totaled 4.6%  and 4.4%, respectively. Pew, supra note 31, at 5. But see ARIS,
supra note 31, at 5 (atheists and agnostics totaling 1.6%, and Lutherans and Pentecos-
tals/Charismatics totaling 3.8%  and 3.5%, respectively).
31S ee Pew, supra note 31, at 63 (gender), 44 (race).
40 See id. at 71.
4 See  id.  at  56;  see  also  The  Ass'n  of  Religion  Data  Archives,
http://www.thearda.com/quickstats/qs-63.asp  (reporting on the Baylor Religion Sur-
vey, Wave 2,2007) (last visited Mar. 3,2011).
See Pew, supra note 31, at 60.
Neil Gross & Solon Simmons, The Religiosity of American College and Univer-
sity Professors, 70 Soc. Religion 101, 113 (2009).1122 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
institutions are even more likely to be nonbelievers,'  and biology
professors  express  the  highest  rates of religious  skepticism  (per-
haps not surprisingly)."
Overall, this empirical  work presents a complex picture. On the
one  hand,  nonbelievers  comprise  a  fairly  tiny  minority.  On the
other hand, they are better educated and more affluent than many
other  Americans.  In  the  next  Section,  I ask  whether we  should
conclude  that  nonbelievers  are  meaningfully  excluded  from
American  society,  and I  show that, although  the answer  again is
somewhat complex, there may well be reason to consider them dis-
advantaged, at least for certain legal purposes.
B. Are They Outsiders?
What is the place of nonbelievers in contemporary American so-
ciety?  The  answer  may  have  legal  significance.  Most  obviously,
equal  protection  and nonestablishment  doctrines  are  sometimes
sensitive to the  social location  of minority groups  and to the risk
that they may be relegated to second-class status within the politi-
cal community. The endorsement  test, for example, asks  whether
religious government  expression is likely to send a message of fa-
vor or disfavor to citizens.46 Knowing whether atheists and agnos-
tics are vulnerable to social subordination may be relevant to those
sorts of constitutional determinations. This Section draws on stud-
ies  of public  perceptions,  rather  than  the  demographic  data  re-
ported above.
Americans  hold strong negative attitudes  toward  nonbelievers,
though it is unclear whether and how they translate those attitudes
into actual discriminatory actions. As a starting point, it is notable
that  people  disfavor  atheists  and  agnostics  more  than any  other
minority,  religious  or otherwise."  Respondents  in one  study said
'Elaine  Howard Ecklund & Christopher P. Scheitle, Religion Among Academic
Scientists: Distinctions, Disciplines,  and Demographics, 54 Soc. Probs. 289, 293, 296
(2007); Gross & Simmons, supra note 43, at 114.
" Ecklund & Scheitle, supra note 44, at 296.
v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668, 688  (1984)  (O'Connor, J., concurring).  For a
6Lynch 
scholarly  approach to  nonestablishment  that resembles  the endorsement  test,  see
Christopher L. Eisgruber & Lawrence G. Sager, Religious Freedom and the Constitu-
tion 122-24 (2007).
4 Edgell et al., supra note 10, at 217 ("Americans are less accepting of atheists than
of any of the other groups we asked about, and by a wide margin.").2011] Nonbelievers 1123
that they were least likely to share a vision of society with atheists,
and that they were less likely to approve of their children marrying
an atheist than a member of any other marginalized group.8 Most
Americans  would  refuse  to  vote  for  an  atheist  for  president.49
Moreover, such  attitudes are persistent:  acceptance of atheists has
not improved in recent decades."  While bias toward Muslims did
intensify in the wake of the attacks of 9/11, rejection of atheists re-
mained stronger, according to one team of researchers."  And while
the same-sex  marriage debate  has  highlighted  discomfort  around
gay men and  lesbians,  it has not  led to antipathy on  the level  of
what atheists experience.52
These perceptions are somewhat more complex than they might
seem at first, however, because nonbelievers  are also seen to be el-
ites. Courts have credited this perception53 even though it probably
outpaces the  actual demographics  that I described  above.4  More-
over, the perception of privilege is accompanied by moral critique.
There is a sense that unbelief correlates with unwholesome behav-
ior by members of the privileged classes, such as unbridled materi-
alism  and selfish individualism.  Attitudes  toward  religious skep-
tics  are therefore  intricate.  In any  event, one social  fact remains
uncontroverted:  unbelief is not simply a private matter for Ameri-
cans, but it is thought to have important public implications: 6
Id. at 212, 218 (tbl.1). Responses to those two questions, concerning shared visions
of America and marriage of children, are taken by the study's authors to be standard
measures of public and private acceptance, respectively.
"Jeffrey  M. Jones, Some Americans Reluctant to Vote for Mormon, 72-Year-Old
Presidential Candidates, Gallup News Service (Feb. 20, 2007), http://www.gallup.com/
poll/26611/some-americans-reluctant-vote-mormon-72yearold-presidential-
candidates.aspx#1.
OE  dgell et al., supra note 10, at 212; Jones, supra note 49 (reporting that fifty-three
percent of respondents said they would not vote for an atheist for president in 2007, a
number that was exactly the same in 1978).
"' Edgell et al., supra note 10, at 230.
52 Id.
" For example, one judge remarked: "[I]t  appears to be generally realized that some
of the world's foremost philosophers, scientists, and artists have been avowed atheists
and that the increase in atheism has gone hand in hand with the spread of education."
Welsh v. Boy Scouts of Am., 742 F. Supp. 1413, 1434 app. C (N.D. Ill. 1990) (quoting
P. Edwards,  "Atheism,"  The Encyclopedia  of Philosophy  174-75  (P. Edwards ed.,
1967)).
4See supra Section I.A.
'
" Edgell, supra note 10, at 227-30.
561 d. at 229.1124  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
Antipathy  toward  nonbelievers  is  particularly  interesting  be-
cause few citizens identify as atheists or agnostics,  and those who
do  largely  keep  their views  quiet. Thirty-nine  percent  of atheists
are uncomfortable discussing their beliefs, according to one report,
and sixty-eight percent erect a Christmas tree each year.57 So non-
belief is not a visible characteristic for many individuals.  Sociolo-
gists therefore describe majority sentiments toward nonbelievers as
largely symbolic-though nevertheless  important, both for society
and for  affected  individuals.8  Moreover,  there  is qualitative  em-
pirical  evidence  that nonbelievers  themselves  are  aware of these
attitudes and see themselves as an embattled minority.59
Although these findings come as a surprise to many, they are not
new-Americans  have long despised nonbelievers.  More  novel is
that tolerance for other forms of religious divergence has grown in
recent years.6  Citizens today report an expanded  sense of the va-
rieties  of religious practice,  a willingness  to build coalitions  with
other  observant people,  and  even  a  recognition  of commonality
based on individual spirituality rather than denominational  identi-
fication. Prejudice  among religious groups has eased  and, accord-
ing  to  some  social  scientists,  "the  idea  of  a  unified  'Judeo-
Christian' tradition-once considered a radical myth-is now wide-
ly accepted by conservatives  and liberals alike  as a core aspect of
American culture.'61
An ingredient of that common culture is a sacred orientation ex-
pressed  through prayer.62 Some degree  of "spirituality"  is seen  to
be a natural part of human life.63 Specific belief systems may vary
Baylor, supra note 31, at 161, 163-65.
'7 
56 Edgell et al., supra  note 10, at 212 ("Americans'  views  of atheists tell us little
about atheists themselves."); id. at 214, 230 ("[R]espondents  were not, on the whole,
referring to actual atheists they had encountered, but were responding to 'the atheist'
as a boundary-marking cultural category.").
" See Richard Cimino & Christopher Smith, Secular Humanism and Atheism Be-
yond Progressive Secularism, 68 Soc. Religion 407, 411  (2007) (noting that atheists
and agnostics "have internalized..  .their minority status" and feel "embattled").
" Edgell et al., supra note 10, at 214 (citing sources).
61I d. at 213.
62 Id.a t 213-14 (quoting Hout & Fischer, supra note 30).
63 Increased numbers of people say they have no religion, and that they are not reli-
gious, but many of these people nevertheless describe themselves as "spiritual." Hout
& Fischer, supra note 30, at 176. For a depiction of American spirituality that is con-
sonant with this shift, see Gary Laderman, Sacred & Profane: ARIS Survey Gets 'Re-2011] Nonbelievers 1125
greatly because they are assembled in ways that may be highly in-
dividual  and  idiosyncratic,  drawing  on a range  of religious,  con-
templative,  and philosophical traditions.  Nevertheless,  the search
for sacredness itself is increasingly thought to be a universal aspect
of being a moral person.'
This shift in American religiosity has had important implications
for perceptions  of political citizenship  and cultural membership.65
Neither  the relaxation of religious prejudice nor the convergence
of citizens around a set of shared beliefs and practices means that
religion has ceased to form the basis for strong social and cultural
identification.6  On the contrary, those developments  may help  to
explain  why  the few  perceived  dissenters  from  this  scheme  still
draw powerful negative sentiments. Heightened religious diversity
may actually have sharpened the importance of basic belief for so-
cial belonging and it may have increased antipathy to nonbelievers,
who occupy an  unusual position outside this conception of shared
spirituality and morality.67  If American  religiosity  is  morphing  in
the ways these scholars suggest, then nonbelievers  today occupy an
unusual  type of subordinate  status-especially  insofar as they  are
seen not as spiritual seekers themselves, but instead as people who
reject the view that all good Americans have some sort of spiritual
life.
On this view, the government sees naturalized religiosity or spiri-
tuality  as  a  legitimate  object  of material  and  symbolic  support.
There has been a shift in the meaning of ideas like separation and
the secular, so that both now are shaped by state support and rec-
ognition for individual seeking-despite or because of its impact on
ligion',  Misses  Boat,  available  at  http://www.religiondispatches.org/archive/culture/
1209/sacred%26profane  %3A-aris survey-gets_%E2%80%98religion%E2%80%
99,_missesboat!.
6T See Winnifred Fallers Sullivan, We Are All Religious Now. Again., 76 Soc. Res.
1181, 1192-94 (2009) [hereinafter Sullivan, Religious].
65 Id.; see also Edgell  et al., supra note 10, at 212-14; Winnifred  Fallers Sullivan,
Requiem  for the  Establishment  Clause,  25  Const.  Comment.  309,  315-16  (2009)
[hereinafter Sullivan, Establishment Clause].
6 Edgell et al., supra note 10, at 230-31.
67 Id. at 231 ("It is possible that the increasing tolerance for religious diversity may
have heightened awareness of religion itself as a basis for solidarity in American life
and sharpened  the  boundary between believers and  nonbelievers  in our collective
imagination.").1126 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
cultural citizenship and moral membership.68 For example, "In God
we  trust"  serves  as  the  national  motto.69  Moreover,  legislatures
across the nation  open with an official prayer, a practice  that the
Supreme Court has upheld  as a rooted aspect of American  tradi-
tion.'  And, of course, the Court's own sessions begin with the in-
vocation "God save the United States and this Honorable Court."'"
Public hospital chaplaincies  now  often perform  "spiritual  assess-
ments" and provide guidance to anyone who wishes to receive it as
part of an approach to overall health.2 Patients can opt out, but the
default assumption is that everyone  shares the capacity for such a
quest.  President  Obama  has  accepted  or  expanded  government
programs  that  may  send  similar  messages,  such  as  the  White
House's  faith-based  initiative.3  Official  messages  and  programs
like these apparently are not thought to be intolerably divisive.
In sum, condemnation of nonbelievers is pervasive and may well
carry importance for public life. One plausible story about these at-
titudes is that citizens have  come to define  their  shared  sense of
cultural and  political  membership  against the imagined boundary
figure of the  atheist  or agnostic.  Do these perceptions  have con-
crete consequences for nonbelievers that manifest in the actual be-
havior of others toward them? Unfortunately, I do not know of any
reliable empirical work on that question. I suspect that a rigorous
study would show some statistically significant  effects. But even if
those perceptions  are  largely  symbolic,  they  can  still  have  legal
relevance.4 After all, at least a few nonbelievers experience  actual
discrimination-we know this because their cases show up on court
dockets. And when  they do,  Americans'  intense  and widespread
antipathy sometimes  has relevance  for individual  litigation. So al-
6 Sullivan, Religious, supra note 64, at 1192; cf. Charles Taylor, A Secular Age 3
(2007) (making a historical argument that the term secular has come to describe a so-
ciety in which belief is an individual choice among alternatives).
6936 U.S.C. § 302 (2006).
7" Marsh v. Chambers, 463 U.S. 783, 792 (1983).
71Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  The  Court  and  Its  Procedures,
http://www.supremecourt.gov/about/procedures.aspx  (last visited June 28, 2011).
7 Sullivan, Establishment Clause, supra note 65, at 314-15.
' Sullivan, Religious, supra note 64, at 1191-92.
7,S ee Horwitz, supra note 4, at xv-xvi (discussing the New Atheists and suggesting
that in  an "age  of contestability"  the fight between  believers and  nonbelievers  is
mostly discursive, but it is still important for law).20111 Nonbelievers 1127
though I do not rely on it heavily below, nonbelievers'  unique out-
sider status may impact legal analysis.
II. THEORY
This Part concerns theory and method. Section A first describes
the polyvalent  approach.  Although  this short  Section  cannot de-
fend this methodology in full, it begins the work of showing how it
operates and why it is  preferable  to its competitors-particularly
for addressing the problem of nonbelievers.
This Part then confronts two theoretical arguments that threaten
to circumvent the detailed substantive analysis that this Article un-
dertakes. Section B resists the temptation to say that nonbelievers
are included within (or excluded from) the definition of religion for
all  purposes.  Section  C questions  the  argument  that  even if  the
term  religion does  not include  atheists or  agnostics,  nonbelievers
should be afforded similar solicitude because religious practitioners
should not enjoy  a  special  legal  status.  Both moves  could  settle
specific  doctrinal  questions  about nonbelievers  at  the outset,  be-
fore  a  multidimensional  analysis  can  get  going.  I  maintain  that
definitional  approaches  are not likely to generate  any conceptual
yield  independent  of  underlying  questions  surrounding  whether
protecting  nonbelievers  comports  with  the  substantive  principles
driving one rule or another, and that whether religion is special as
compared  to nonbelief should be determined  rule by rule,  again
taking into  account  all  the  commitments  and  considerations  that
count.
A. Method
Using a polyvalent method, judges consider and apply a range of
values  that  properly matter in  religious freedom  cases,  including
those  brought  by nonbelievers.  Considerations  include  constitu-
tional principles-such  as  liberty of conscience,  government  neu-
trality, substantive equality, and separation of church and state-as
well as  other concerns-such  as  American  history  and traditions,
legal precedent,  pragmatic workability,  public opinion, and court
legitimacy.  Different  doctrinal  areas  feature  different  mixes  of
these principled and pragmatic concerns, and different factual sce-
narios call for different applications of them to real problems. Con-1128 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
stitutional actors take into account all relevant values, at times pri-
oritizing one over another, and they come to a reasoned, reflective
conclusion. No algorithm or formula is available to direct the final
decision, which  counts as an opinion both in the sense that it is a
pronouncement from an authoritative  legal institution and  also in
the sense that it is the product of human assessment. Isolated judg-
ments can, however, crystallize over time into site-specific rules or
frameworks that do give guidance in subsequent cases.
This polyvalent  method  differs from approaches  that feature  a
single value, rubric, or rule. Many prominent judges and academics
bemoan  the current  state of the doctrine, which  they reasonably
consider to be convoluted or contradictory, and they try to impose
order by proposing a concept that they think can capture virtually
everything worth preserving in the case law while releasing aspects
that are  not. Leading examples of unitary theories include  "equal
liberty"  and "substantive  neutrality."75 Although these views  have
powerful  appeal,  they generally  ignore  or undervalue  important
factors. Part III will cash out this contention  in several  doctrinal
domains, performing an analysis that would not work under a more
focused model. While it is possible to give courts guidance in spe-
cific areas-and Part III will generate frameworks  wherever feasi-
ble-overall  decision  making  seldom  can be reduced  to  a single
standard without unacceptable  cost. Scholars should stay  open to
the possibility that the complexity of existing precedent  faithfully
reflects the  multifaceted  nature  of the American  scheme  of reli-
gious freedom.
Although it is, of course, not possible to fully defend this project
here, it is  feasible  to show  that it enjoys  a respectable  pedigree.
Prominent  academics  have  argued-and  argued  recently-that
value monism works poorly  in the area of religious freedom,  and
instead  they have proposed  varieties  of pluralism.6 Although  my
"' See Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 51-77 (equal liberty); Douglas Laycock,
Formal, Substantive  and  Disaggregated  Neutrality Toward  Religion, 39 DePaul L.
Rev. 993, 1001-06 (1990) (substantive neutrality).
76 See, e.g., 2 Kent Greenawalt, Religion and the Constitution: Establishment and
Fairness 1-15 (2008); Steven H. Shiffrin, The Religious Left and Church-State Rela-
tions 9-60 (2009) [hereinafter Shiffrin, Relations] (describing and defending the "plu-
ralistic foundations of the religion clauses"); Alan Brownstein, Why Conservatives,
and Others, Have Trouble Supporting the Meaningful Enforcement of Free Exercise
Rights, 33 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 925, 929 (2010) ("[R]eligion is a multidimensional2011] Nonbelievers 1129
analysis comes out differently from theirs in important places, as I
show at several points in Part III, it shares their general theoretical
orientation and is strengthened  by their defenses of it. Moreover, I
argue  below  that  the  most  skilled  monists  do  in fact  consider  a
wide range of values when considering real-world scenarios-wider
than their theories can comfortably admit.77
Courts likewise  often work in a polyvalent  way  when  deciding
religious freedom  cases. I take  it  to be relatively  uncontroversial
that judges actually  do consider a wide range  of concerns in  this
area-the fighting question today is not whether they are deploy-
ing polyvalent  adjudication  but  instead  whether  they  should  be.
Taking free exercise cases as an example, Justices have cited objec-
tives as varied as avoiding burdens on religious practice," ensuring
neutrality toward religion7,9 respecting original meaning,'  following
precedent,8'  avoiding  religious  divisiveness  and  social  conflict,'
constitutional interest which  subsumes  and implicates several  independently recog-
nized constitutional principles."); Steven H. Shiffrin, The Pluralistic Foundations  of
the Religion Clauses, 90 Cornell L. Rev. 9, 41 (2004) [hereinafter  Shiffrin, Founda-
tions] (defending a similar thesis with respect to the Establishment Clause  alone);
Marc 0. DeGirolami, Tragic Historicism: A Theory of Religious Liberty 3-6 (Jan. 22,
2010) (unpublished  manuscript, on file with the Virginia Law Review Association).
Some authors who recognize the indispensability of something like polyvalence, such
as DeGirolami, also consider this situation regrettable  or tragic. Cf. Horwitz, supra
note 4, at xxv (noting the "tragic choices" that his position entails).
" See generally Nelson Tebbe, Smith in Theory and Practice, 32 Cardozo L. Rev.
2055, 2062-66 (2011)  (arguing that several academic defenders of the unitary rule of
Smith in fact are willing to compromise when considering actual cases in ways that
their theories struggle to justify).
8 Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 403 (1963)  (asking whether the disqualification
of a claimant from employment benefits "imposes any burden" on religious practice).
" Church of the  Lukumi Babalu  Aye v. City  of Hialeah, 508  U.S.  520,  533-34
(1993).
'0E mp't Div. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 901-02 (1989) (O'Connor, J., concurring in the
judgment) (arguing that the First Amendment was enacted to protect religious mi-
norities).
8 Id. at 878-79 ("Our decisions reveal that [the reading of the Free Exercise Clause
under which incidental burdens do not offend the First Amendment]  is the correct
one.").
' Van Orden v. Perry, 545 U.S. 677, 698 (2005)  (Breyer, J., concurring in the judg-
ment) ("[The religion clauses] seek to avoid that divisiveness based upon religion that
promotes social conflict, sapping the strength of government and religion alike.").1130 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
maintaining  consistency  with  other  areas  of constitutional  law,83
and preserving the rule of law.'4 If anything, Establishment Clause
decisions are even richer.85 Lower court opinions likewise reflect a
multiplicity of concerns, perhaps even in places where the Supreme
Court has mandated unitary standards.86
So while this polyvalent method is controversial, I believe that it
is at least good enough for the project at hand. Objections  are  of
course easy to anticipate. One will come from skeptics who doubt
whether any coherent approach to religious freedom cases is possi-
ble. For them, polyvalent adjudication does not count as a method
at all-it amounts to nothing more than ad hockery or the rudder-
less search for a modus vivendi.87 Another might be that polyvalent
adjudication makes  it too easy for courts to smuggle  in personal
preferences. For now, I simply flag these objections and note that
those who sympathize  with them may not warm to the polyvalent
method that I adopt and apply.
There  are two theoretical positions  that stand more directly in
the way of this  Article's argument, however.  Both of them  offer
one-size  solutions  to the predicament  of nonbelievers.  I consider
them in the next two Sections.
B. Defining Religion
Because  the Constitution and many statutes  use the term relig-
ion to describe  their subject, it is tempting to solve the puzzle by
83 Smith, 494 U.S. at 886 n.3 (citing equal protection cases); Nelson Tebbe & Robert
L. Tsai, Constitutional Borrowing, 108 Mich. L. Rev. 459, 479-80 (2010) (describing
the Court's explicit effort to align free exercise and equal protection law in Smith).
84 Smith, 494 U.S. at 885 (warning against allowing each free exercise claimant to
"become a law unto himself" (quoting Reynolds v. United States, 98 U.S. 145, 167
(1878))).
See, e.g., Van Orden, 545 U.S. at 700 (Breyer, J., concurring in the judgment) (ar-
8 
guing that no simple rule or test can adequately  resolve difficult  antiestablishment
cases); Shiffrin, Foundations, supra note 76, at 41 (noting the many values that drive
nonestablishment deicions).
See, e.g., Tebbe,  supra note  77  (speculating  that the relatively  unitary rule of
Smith has made little difference in subsequent free exercise cases, which continue to
reflect a multiplicity of principled and nonprincipled considerations).
87 Cf. Winnifred Fallers Sullivan, The Impossibility of Religious Freedom 8 (2005);
Steven D. Smith, Discourse in the Dusk: The Twilight of Religious Freedom?, 122
Harv. L. Rev. 1869, 1871 (2009) (reviewing 2 Kent Greenawalt, Religion and the Con-
stitution: Establishment and Fairness (2009)).2011] Nonbelievers 1131
saying that nonbelief either does or does not fall within one or an-
other definition of that concept.'  If atheism and agnosticism count
as religions, the theory goes, then practitioners will be affected  by
the full range of religious freedom provisions,  including both free
exercise  benefits  and  nonestablishment  burdens.  Although  that
definitional perspective has sometimes been adopted by courts, it is
ultimately not too helpful. To see why, it is necessary to understand
the best available attempts to define the term religion.
One tendency of courts and lawyers has been to look to the aca-
demic  study  of religion,  an  outside  discipline  that  also  has  at-
tempted  to draw boundaries  around the  concept  of religion.  For
example, the Supreme  Court once relied on the scholar and theo-
logian Paul Tillich for guidance.89  Although that crossover  makes
some intuitive sense, I show below that the religion literature actu-
ally is of little use in law. On the other hand, I do find some helpful
thinking there on the metaquestion of what it means to define the
term religion. Turning next to the legal literature, I conclude  that
the definitional project, while not necessarily harmful, cannot sub-
stitute for an effort to answer the substantive question of whether
nonbelievers  should fall within one or another area of the doctrine.
Definitional  attempts to solve  the problem  of nonbelievers  there-
fore obscure more than they clarify, and even the best of them in-
corporate  substantive  concerns  that  should  be more  openly  ad-
dressed. An implication is that much of the current anxiety around
the definition of religion is unwarranted.
1. Academic Study of Religion
While  there is no consensus among scholars of religion  on how
to define  the  term, it is fair to say that the main alternatives  fall
into  three  main  camps-functionalist,  critical,  and  substantive-
and that the third attracts the most adherents. I will give a sense of
each one before arguing that none is of substantial use in legal set-
tings.
For an example of the former, see Laycock, supra note 1, at 326. For an example
of a definition of religion that would result in the latter, see Greene, supra note 29, at
1640, 1642-43 (distinguishing religious claims from all secular claims of conscience in
a way that includes atheist and agnostic claims).
89 United States v. Seeger, 380 U.S. 163, 187 (1965).1132 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
First,  religious  beliefs  and  practices  are  sometimes  associated
with the power to delineate and unify communities and even whole
societies. This way of thinking-often called functionalism'-goes
back at least as far as tmile Durkheim. He argued that all "really
religious  beliefs"  are  held  collectively,  not individually,  and they
work to unite members of the group.9' Later, functionalism took a
linguistic turn in the important anthropological  writing of Clifford
Geertz.'  Today,  functionalists  are sometimes  taken  to argue  not
only  that all  religion  works  to structure  collectivities  but further
that all societies are religious in some way, since some sense of sa-
credness  is  necessary  for  social  cohesion.93  Unsurprisingly,  this
strong version is not popular among academic scholars of religion,
but even weaker forms of functionalism find few adherents today.94
That is largely because  of a subsequent critique that proved to be
highly effective.
Talal Asad  led the reaction to functionalism. Drawing on post-
modern and postcolonial theory as well as his knowledge of Islam
and Christianity, Asad questioned the entire project of defining re-
ligion. "My argument,"  he wrote, "is that there cannot be a univer-
sal definition of religion  ....  "" Two arguments for that conclusion
90S ee, e.g., Martin Riesebrodt, The Promise of Salvation: A Theory of Religion 72
(2010) ("The primary distinction to be drawn in developing a theory of religion is that
between a content-based and a formal or functional determination  of the concept of
religion....  Functional definitions explain the alleged contribution of religion to the
constitution and reproduction of society.").
9 Durkheim, supra note 23, at 43. Durkheim described religion as "a unified system
of beliefs and practices  relative to sacred  things, that is to say, things set apart and
forbidden-beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral community ...a ll
those who adhere to them." Id. at 47. Magical beliefs, by contrast to religious ones, do
not serve to unify groups in Durkheim's view. Id. at 44 ("[Magic]  does not result in
binding together those who adhere to it, nor in uniting them into a group leading a
common life. There is no Church of magic.").
'  Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures 90 (1973)  (emphasizing the social
utility of language). Other examples of works that stand within the functionalist line
of thinking arguably include Pierre Bourdieu, The Logic of Practice 66-75 (1990)  and
Thomas Luckmann, The Invisible Religion: The Problem of Religion in Modern Soci-
ety 51-56 (1967).
3 Riesebrodt, supra note 90, at 74 (characterizing Luckmann's theory this way).
9'A possible exception is James Beckford, who advances a "social constructionist"
conception of religion. James A. Beckford, Social Theory & Religion 3 (2003).
9Talal Asad, Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christi-
anity and Islam 29 (1993).2011] Nonbelievers 1133
have  been  particularly  influential.'  First,  Asad  pointed  out  that
functionalist  definitions  tended  to center  on individual  belief  or
private  inwardness.'  That emphasis  reflected  an implicit orienta-
tion toward Protestant culture, and it worked poorly for traditions
that seem indisputably religious-for example, Judaism or Islam-
but  that often  feature  practice  and  community  more than  belief
and individuality.98 Second, the very idea that religion is a distinct
cultural form, set apart  from other aspects of society like politics
and economics, has its roots in "Western modernity" and cannot be
disassociated  with that provenance."  Moreover, the idea of relig-
ion's distinctiveness reflects  power differentials  between the West
and  other  contemporary  societies,  as  well  as  within Western  na-
tions. Asad concluded that applying a universal definition to other
cultures distorts them in ways that are politically problematic. He
urged  scholars to abandon the  definitional  effort and  encouraged
them instead to devote themselves to the study of particular tradi-
tions.1"
A third approach, which has won substantial academic support,
is substantive-it renews  the effort  to identify the content  of the
category of religion without lapsing  into  essentialism or Western
bias. Defenders of substantive definitions hope to improve on func-
Bruce Lincoln, Holy Terrors: Thinking About Religion After September 11, at 1-
' 
2 12003).
Asad, supra note 95, at 45-47; id. at 47 ("Geertz's treatment of religious belief,
which lies at the core of his conception of religion, is a modern, privatized Christian
one because and to the extent that it emphasizes the priority of belief as a state of
mind rather than as constituting activity in the world.").
"For  examples of Asad's influence even among his critics see, e.g., Lincoln, supra
note 96, at 2 (endorsing Asad's observation that the dominant definitions of religion
have been historically specific); Riesebrodt, supra note 90, at 8 ("There is much in
Asad's critique that is noteworthy and justified. I absolutely share his opinion that re-
ligion is not a transhistorical phenomenon  that is sui generis and inherent in the hu-
man species or that slumbers in human inwardness. I also agree with Asad's view that
in each case the institutionalization of religion must be analyzed in connection with a
society's political structures of power.").
" Riesebrodt, supra note 90, at 8.
'" This critical approach has influenced some interesting legal scholarship. For ex-
ample, Winnifred Sullivan's argument that meaningfully protecting religious freedom
is impossible draws on the idea that the category of religion is culturally specific. Sul-
livan, supra note 87, at 3,  8. She concludes that "legal protection for religion is cer-
tainly theoretically incoherent and possibly unconstitutional."  Id. at 10. This kind of
legal writing probably would not have taken the same form before Asad's work and
the critical wave of writing on religion that followed.1134 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
tionalist ones, which they feel were both over- and under-inclusive:
too broad because they included community-forming practices that
are not normally or profitably understood to be religious, such as
sports, political movements, civic rituals, and the like, and too nar-
row because they excluded phenomena that were widely said to be
religious but did not work to bind groups together, such as magical
practices or divination."' Here is the leading substantive definition:
"Religion is a system of communal beliefs and practices relative to
superhuman  beings."1"2 A few features of this formulation are im-
portant to note. First, religion as such is distinguished from discrete
traditions  such  as  Buddhism,  Islam,  Judaism,  or  Christianity. °3
There are strains  of Buddhism, for example,  that make no refer-
ence to superhuman beings or powers, and they are simply not re-
ligious on this  definition."°  Second, substantivists  often highlight
practices and institutions as much as beliefs. Partly because they do
not privilege belief, they claim that the project works tolerably well
across  all  cultures,  including  traditions outside the modern West.
Third, they sometimes claim that their definition derives from the
'0R'i esebrodt, supra note 90, at xi (overinclusiveness); 74 (underinclusiveness);  see
also Asad, supra note 95, at 46 ("One consequence [of Geertz's approach] is that this
view  would  in principle  render  any philosophy  that  performs  such  a  [meaning-
making] function into religion....").
Merriam-Webster, supra note 22, at 915 (calling this "[a]  definition that has re-
1o2 
ceived reasonable acceptance among scholars"); see also HarperCollins, supra note
22, at 893 (offering as an "[a]dequate"  definition: "a system of beliefs and practices
that are relative to superhuman beings").
Riesebrodt defines religion as "a complex of practices that are based on the premise
of the existence  of superhuman  powers, whether personal or impersonal,  that  are
generally invisible."  Riesebrodt, supra note 90, at 74-75 (discussing and citing Mel-
ford E. Spiro, Religion: Problems of Definition and Explanation, in Anthropological
Approaches  to the Study of Religion 85, 96 (Michael  Banton, ed., 1966)); see also
Jonathan  Z. Smith, Religion,  Religions,  Religious, in Critical Terms for Religious
Studies 269, 281 (Mark C. Taylor, ed., 1998)  [hereinafter Smith, Religion] ("The an-
thropological definition of religion that has gained widespread assent among scholars
of religion ...is  that formulated by Melford E. Spiro, 'an institution consisting of cul-
turally patterned interaction with culturally postulated superhuman beings."')  (cita-
tion  omitted). Lincoln proposes a similar definition that  nevertheless  is "polythetic
and flexible." Lincoln, supra note 96, at 5.
103L incoln, supra note 96, at 8; Riesebrodt, supra note 90, at xii.
104L incoln, supra note 96, at 111 n.16. Some with a substantive orientation respond
that Buddhism as it is actually practiced does always include some conception of su-
perhuman forces. Riesebrodt, supra note 90, at 78.20111 Nonbelievers 1135
self-conception  of religious practitioners themselves.0"5 It can claim
universal  status because  all societies  differentiate  between  super-
human and ordinary phenomena, even ones that lack a concept of
religion  as  such."°  Because  that  distinction is universal  and time-
less, it is legitimate to apply the category of religion to every soci-
ety.
Even this definition, with its widespread support within the so-
cial sciences, is not likely to be of much help to judges or lawyers.
The reason is simple: it does not serve legal purposes. Most criti-
cally, it bears an imperfect relationship to commonsensical notions
of  what  courts  ought  to protect.  After  all,  American  courts  are
likely to adjudicate claims  by congregants  irrespective  of whether
their beliefs or practices  reference the  superhuman or supernatu-
ral. Buddhists, for example,  will doubtless  be able to invoke free
exercise  and  statutory  guarantees  even  if  their  particular  school
does not happen  to subscribe to conceptions  of theistic beings or
spiritual forces. Similarly, practicing Jews will count as religious in
courts,  although  they  hold  diverse  views  about  the existence  of
God  or  other  supernatural  phenomena.  Simply  identifying  as  a
Buddhist  or a  Jew will be  enough  to  win legal  protection-that
seems beyond debate.
Yet there are resources within the academic study of religion for
thinking about religion beyond the bounds of that discipline. Some
scholars  have recognized that their definitions are not designed to
set  religion  apart  from  other  social  phenomena  for  all  possible
purposes. Jonathan Z. Smith, for example,  recognizes that religion
is  an  abstract  analytic  category  that scholars  tailor to  their own
academic  objectives. 7  He  sees  in  this  no reason  for  skepticism.
0RS iesebrodt, supra note 90, at xiii ("Whatever I say about religions is taken from
their own self-representations."). Here he is drawing on the tradition of Weberian in-
terpretive sociology.
Id. at xii, 1-2, 77.
'°7"'Religion,"'  he says, "is  not a native term; it is a term created by scholars for
their intellectual purposes and therefore is theirs to define." Smith, supra note 102, at
281; see also id. at 269 ("'Religion' is an anthropological not a theological category.");
cf. Jonathan  Z. Smith, Imagining  Religion: From Babylon  to Jonestown xi  (1982)
("Religion  is solely the creation  of the scholar's study. It is created for the scholar's
analytic purposes by his imaginative acts of comparison and generalization. Religion
has no independent existence  apart from the academy."). Other scholars of religion
seem to  agree  that definitions  of religion ought  to  be  institutionally specific  and1136 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
Saying that religion should be defined in a way that is specific to in-
stitutional objectives is not the same as saying that the endeavor is
impossible.'  The  point is  only that  a substantive  definition that
works quite well for comparativists may not work for courts.
That is not to say that courts can interpret the term religion to
mean anything at all. Of course there are limits. Correspondence
with commonsensical  understandings  of religion provides one sort
of outer boundary,"°  and the background  requirement  of reason-
ableness  provides  another. However, courts have enough  latitude
within these  constraints  to  hand down  decisions  required  by the
commitments and concerns that underlie religious freedom guaran-
tees.  In  difficult  cases  where  it  really  matters,  definitional  ap-
proaches should not circumvent meticulous substantive determina-
tions.
2. Legal Definitions
Perhaps more surprising, even legal attempts to define religion
hold little promise  for courts faced with questions like whether to
protect nonbelievers against government discrimination or whether
nonestablishment  prohibits  a  town  from  expressing  support  for
atheism. Definitions of religion, while interesting and not necessar-
ily harmful, do little work independent of an analysis of how non-
believers should fare with respect to one or another doctrine. Here,
rather  than  reviewing  multiple  definitions,  I  focus  on  the  best
available attempt.
To my mind, the most persuasive theory  of how to define the
concept  of  religion  for  legal  purposes  is  Professor  Kent
Greenawalt's  analogical  approach.  Greenawalt  advises  courts  to
ask how closely an unfamiliar  system of beliefs  and practices  re-
sembles undisputed religions-looking for a Wittgensteinian  "fam-
ily resemblance.""'  He lists  characteristics  or conditions  that may
pragmatically  oriented. See Beckford, supra note 94, at 4; Riesebrodt, supra note 90,
at 1.
Smith, Religion, supra note 102, at 281.
10S ee 1 Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 143 (arguing that correspondence with nonle-
gal understandings of religion is desirable in a definitional approach).
"0 Id. at 139. Greenawalt built on the approach of Judge Adams of the Third Cir-
cuit. In Malnak v.  Yogi, 592 F.2d 197, 207-09 (3rd Cir. 1979) (Adams, J., concurring),
he wrote that courts should proceed by analogy: they should assess an unfamiliar set2011] Nonbelievers 1137
be helpful in that comparison, but he emphasizes  that none is in-
dispensible or even usually present, and even a single one could be
enough."' They include: a conception of a god or gods; belief "in a
spiritual  domain that transcends  everyday  life;"  a comprehensive
worldview; an account of the afterlife; communication with the di-
vine  through  liturgy  or  worship;  a  morality;  and  sacred  texts,
among others.'2 Greenawalt  acknowledges  a potential for bias  in
the analogical method, depending on the religion that is chosen as
the  baseline  for  comparison,  and  he  therefore  urges  courts  to
choose religions that are sufficiently nonwestern."'3 He rightly says
that judges  should  employ  the  analogical  method  in a  context-
sensitive way, meaning that what counts as religion could differ de-
pending on the particular legal issue, but he resists any sharp  dis-
tinction between free exercise and nonestablishment  cases."'  Step-
ping back, he calls his method a "flexible analogical approach.""'5
Greenawalt's  project  has  many  virtues.  It  is  flexible  and  nu-
anced, and it resonates with his broader eclectic theory of religious
freedom, a perspective that has significant benefits (as well as some
drawbacks)."6 Like that general methodology, his way of defining
religion appreciates  the complexity  of judicial decision making in
this area of law.
I wonder, however, whether his  definitional  enterprise helps to
solve the puzzle of nonbelievers. Does it tell us anything independ-
ent of substantive analysis concerning, for instance, whether non-
believers  ought  to  receive  exemptions  from  general  laws  or
of beliefs and practices by reference to known religions. In doing so, they could con-
sider that traditional religions  commonly  share three elements:  (1)  they speak  to
"fundamental problems of human existence," (2)  they claim to establish a "compre-
hensive truth," and (3)  they tend to exhibit certain external  or formal signs of relig-
iousness. Id. at 208-10. Judge Adams clearly disclaimed any effort to establish a test
for religion, and he suggested (less clearly) that none of these factors was necessary or
sufficient for a finding of religiousness. See also Africa v. Pennsylvania, 662 F.2d 1025,
1032 (3d Cir. 1981) (Adams, J.).
..1. G reenawalt, supra note 1, at 139-41.
Id. at 139-40.
112 
11I d.a t 140 & n.57 (responding to Eduardo Penalver, Note, The Concept of Relig-
ion, 107 Yale L.J. 791, 815-16 (1997)).
Id. at 141-42.
114 
"' Id. at 142.
116S ee Nelson  Tebbe,  Eclecticism,  25 Const.  Comment. 317  (2008)  (reviewing 2
Kent Greenawalt, Religion and the Constitution: Establishment and Fairness (2008)).1138  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
whether  atheist groups  can  receive  government  funding  or other
support? To the degree that proceeding by analogy generates the
right results,  is  that because  it  incorporates  judgments  regarding
the best application  of legal values and pragmatic  considerations?
Perhaps asking whether nonbelievers count as religious in one legal
domain rather than another is a less direct way of asking whether
they deserve protection there.
These  questions  follow from  the  metadefintional  point  above.
Religion  can and should be conceptualized differently  in different
institutional  settings in  order to  serve  their  particularized  objec-
tives.  When the  institution is a court,  those  objectives will differ
somewhat from rule to rule. Greenawalt  is therefore  correct  that
courts should appreciate the differences between doctrinal contexts
when determining the scope of religious freedom rules. But if I am
right that the matter of whether nonbelievers count as religious for
the purposes of a particular doctrine turns on the purposes or val-
ues that courts properly take into account in interpreting that pro-
vision-the same  values that determine the result-then  the con-
ceptual  yield  of  defining  religion  in  an  analogical  way  is  not
obvious. It might be more straightforward  and transparent to sim-
ply consider whether nonbelievers ought to be included on the me-
rits, rather than asking whether nonbelief counts as a religion for
the purposes of a given rule.
Interestingly, Greenawalt  himself seems to recognize the limited
utility of even his own method  when he applies it to a particular
case.  And  the example  that  he  chooses  to test  his  theory  in the
chapter on defining religion is the problem of nonbelievers. There,
he resists the conclusion-endorsed  by Laycock, among others117-
that atheism ought to count as religion  for all  constitutional pur-
poses, at least within the bounds  of reason and common sense.118
But he also says that "[t]he  idea that atheists and agnostics have no
rights of religious  exercise available to believers  is deeply disturb-
ing."1'19 Not surprisingly, he seeks a middle path.
It is striking that when it comes down to the particular matter of
nonbelievers he does not consistently analogize to undoubted relig-
Laycock, supra note 1, at 326.
17 
1181 Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 140 & n.58.
19 Id. at 149.1139
2011] Nonbelievers
ions in the way that his approach to defining religion seems to re-
quire."'  Rather, he refers to the complex  of substantive  religious
freedom values, in the manner of his more general approach to re-
ligious freedom.12 When  he discusses, for instance,  whether  non-
1 
establishment bars official teaching of atheism, he observes that it
would be unfair to prohibit the government from endorsing posi-
tive  assertions  about religious  truth while  allowing  it  to endorse
negative ones.122 That unfairness has constitutional implications be-
cause  of equality norms grounded  in nonestablishment  and  equal
protection."  In another place, Greenawalt says that atheists enjoy
basic free  exercise  rights, "whether  or not atheism  is a religion,"
because the right to free exercise includes the right not to be forced
to observe a religion, regardless of whether you are religious.  In
sum, Greenawalt's  method works well in practice partly because it
is  not  definitional  at  all  in  the  conventional  sense-instead,  it
sometimes  answers  difficult  questions  about  the  coverage  of the
free exercise  and nonestablishment  clauses by reference to values
and principles driving those provisions.
A likely explanation is that a concern for equality  or evenhand-
edness  informs  Greenawalt's  definitional  project.'2  Finding a way
to  define  the concept  of religion helps to  ensure that unfamiliar
groups  are treated  fairly  by  courts. Definitions  are  desirable,  on
this view, because they help discipline judges who might otherwise
be subject to bias when dealing with nonbelievers or other spiritual
minorities. That is a laudable objective. My sense, however, is that
it might be clearer  to simply ask whether nonbelievers  should be
protected in each doctrinal area, taking all the relevant values into
account-including equality or fairness. After all, a sufficiently nu-
anced definitional approach like Greenawalt's is not likely to effec-
tively constrain judges who are otherwise inclined to disfavor non-
120A  fter all, his discussion of nonbelievers  comes within his larger defense of the
flexible analogical approach to defining the concept of religion. That suggests that he
is approaching the problem from a definitional perspective. Yet he seldom reasons by
analogy to recognized religions.
121 1 look at his substantive arguments in Part III, infra, where I lay out my own doc-
trinal analysis.
122 1 Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 150.
..I.d . at 150-51.
2'4 Id. at 149.
I2a1m  grateful to Douglas Laycock for bringing this possibility to my attention.1140 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
believers. Moreover, drawing attention to the concerns that in fact
drive  judicial  determinations  in  such  cases  could  actually  bring
greater transparency-and thus accountability-to those decisions.
I conclude that definitional approaches to the problem of nonbe-
lievers, whether grounded in the study of religion or in the study of
law, are not likely to be particularly helpful,  even if they are also
not particularly harmful. The most promising of them is attractive
only to the degree that it is not rigidly definitional, but instead al-
lows consideration of how nonbelievers  should be treated in spe-
cific doctrinal  contexts.  So  there  is  little  to be  gained  by asking
whether  nonbelief "is"  religion in a given legal setting, as opposed
to asking whether it should be protected there. Moreover, there is
a potential cost,  namely  distraction from  the substantive matters
that should be (and perhaps in fact are) driving the analysis. If all
that is correct, then the search for a legal definition of religion, so
often called for if not actually undertaken, may not be as pressing
as it is commonly said to be.
C. Religion's Specialness
Some prominent thinkers are arguing that religion is not special
and should neither be privileged nor uniquely burdened in Ameri-
can law. There is no reason, they say, to single out religion either
for advantages under free exercise or for disadvantages under non-
establishment.2'6 Nonbelievers often provide the paradigm case, but
consequences  for them vary, with some arguing  that free  exercise
law should be leveled up to include them'27 and others saying that
the only  workable  solution is to  level  down, so  that neither reli-
gious nor nonreligious people can claim  exceptional protection  in
For recent examples, see Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 124; Brian Leiter,
126 
Foundations of Religious Liberty: Toleration or Respect?, 47 San Diego L. Rev. 935,
957-59 (2010) (noting that "no principled argument" supports treating religion as spe-
cial in law); Brian Leiter, Why Tolerate Religion?, 25 Const. Comment. 1, 2, 15 (2008)
(defining religion narrowly and arguing there are no good principled reasons to toler-
ate religion as such).
27For instance, the probable nonbelievers in  United States v. Seeger, 380 U.S. 163,
164-66 (1965), and Welsh v.  United States, 398  U.S. 333, 343-44 (1970),  were given
conscientious-objector status even though the statute limited relief from conscription
to religious  pacifists. Eisgruber  and Sager would extend  this approach to all  deep
commitments. Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 112-14.2011] Nonbelievers 1141
court."  This question is distinct from the matter of whether nonbe-
lievers fall under a definition of religion.29 Although the two issues
are related, they are not the same. Most obviously, people who de-
fine religion narrowly, so that it does not include nonbelievers, may
still  argue  that atheists  or agnostics  should be  protected  (or bur-
dened) on the ground that there is no good reason to separate out
religion.
In this Section, I argue that how courts answer  the question  of
whether  religion  is  special-specifically  with  regard  to  nonbe-
lievers-depends  on a  range  of considerations,  including history,
precedent,  practicality,  and  constitutional  values.  Moreover,  the
answer may vary from doctrine to doctrine. Judges  should neither
always treat religion just like other cultural formations nor always
consider it to be distinct. Instead, they should carefully sort out the
rationales  that  drive  particular  areas  of  law  and  then  decide
whether these reasons justify treating nonbelievers similarly.
I organize this Section around a powerful contemporary critique
of the idea that religion is unique for legal purposes. Eisgruber and
Sager offer a theory that is principally designed to reject most spe-
'  For instance, Justice Stevens has argued that the Religious Freedom Restoration
Act ("RFRA") violates the Establishment Clause because it gives special protection
to religious landowners as against "atheist" landowners. City of Boerne v. Flores, 521
U.S. 507, 536-37 (1997)  (Stevens, J., concurring). Some theorists have argued against
exemptions for any group, in several contexts. See, e.g., Stephen G. Gey, Why is Re-
ligion Special?:  Reconsidering the Accommodation of Religion  Under the Religion
Clauses of the First Amendment, 52 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 75, 79 (1990)  ("Religious belief
and practice should be protected under the first amendment, but only to the same ex-
tent and for the same reason that all other forms of expression and conscience  are
protected ....) .
129T hat the term religion appears in the text of the First Amendment and in many
recent statutes is a challenge to the position that religion should not occupy a special
status in American law. Its adherents, however, do not find that objection difficult to
overcome. See, e.g., Christopher L. Eisgruber & Lawrence G. Sager, The Vulnerabil-
ity of Conscience: The Constitutional Basis for Protecting Religious Conduct, 61 U.
Chi. L. Rev. 1245, 1270 (1994)  (criticizing the textual argument for special constitu-
tional treatment of religion); Gey, supra note 128, at 148 (same); Andrew Koppelman,
Is it Fair to Give Religion Special Treatment?, 2006 U. Ill. L. Rev. 571, 577-78 (fol-
lowing the common assumption that the text of the First Amendment is vague, that
political theory can help to specify its content, and that "[i]f singling out religion for
special treatment is unfair, then the ambiguous words of the First Amendment should
not be construed to require, or perhaps even to permit, this unfairness"). But see Mi-
chael W. McConnell, The Problem of Singling Out Religion, 50 DePaul L. Rev. 1, 9-
10, 12-16 (2000) (making the textual argument).1142  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
cial  protection  for religion.  I  will  argue,  however,  that  when  it
comes down to the specifics of difficult cases, they do in fact allow
for differential treatment of believers and nonbelievers. At least in
those  places, they  acknowledge  that religion  occupies  a  singular
place in society-even though that acknowledgment  cannot easily
be squared with their overall scheme. I conclude that the most per-
suasive critics in fact employ a disaggregated approach to the ques-
tion of whether religion is special, at least in certain practical appli-
cations, if not as a matter of ideal theory.
Eisgruber  and  Sager  defend  an  approach-"equal  liberty"-
under  which  constitutional  guarantees  of religious  freedom  are
best read as requiring government evenhandedness toward all deep
and  valuable  commitments.  A  central  feature  of  equal  liberty,
therefore,  is that  religion  should be  subject  to neither  extraordi-
nary protections nor extraordinary burdens in law. That goes both
for free exercise and for nonestablishment.
Judges  need  not  be  completely  blind  to  religion,  however.13°
They can and must cognize it to the degree necessary to combat ex-
isting discrimination, both against religious minorities and in favor
of religious majorities. In this way, religion is similar to other iden-
tity characteristics  that have provided the basis for exclusion from
the political  community,  such as  race  or gender. Law  may target
remedies to this sort of bias. Otherwise, however, special treatment
for observant people and congregations is inappropriate."' In other
words, the only  reason to treat  religion specially  is  to guarantee
that it is not treated especially badly.
Their critique aims to decimate some familiar arguments for re-
ligion's unique place in constitutional law.'32 What is more, the core
30 Cf. Philip B. Kurland, Religion and the Law: Of Church and State and the Su-
preme Court 17-18 (1962)  (arguing that the First Amendment prohibits the govern-
ment from classifying on the basis of religion).
131E isgruber  and Sager explain: "Religious  faith receives special constitutional so-
licitude..,  only because of its vulnerability to hostility and neglect ....  Equal [Iliberty
insists that aside from this deep and important concern with discrimination, we have
no constitutional reason to treat religion as deserving special benefits or as subject to
special disabilities."  Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 52. In an earlier piece, they
put the point this way: "What properly motivates  constitutional  solicitude for reli-
gious practices  is  their  distinct  vulnerability  to  discrimination,  not  their  distinct
value .... " Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 129, at 1248.
132F or a summary of the traditional arguments for the specialness of religion, as well
as a critique of each, see Michael E. Smith, The Special Place of Religion in the Con-2011] Nonbelievers 1143
intuition  of equal liberty pertains  directly to nonbelievers.  In one
representative passage, Eisgruber  and Sager explain that the "vul-
nerability of non-mainstream religious views-including views that
repudiate religion in any of its recognizable forms-to discrimina-
tion is what justifies the special constitutional treatment of religion
on some  occasions."'33 If believers  deserve  specific protection  be-
cause they have been particularly susceptible to disadvantage, then
nonbelievers  deserve  that same  sort of solicitude.  After all,  they
have experienced  exclusion  and neglect  on par with  the most re-
viled religious minorities. Therefore, the way law handles believers
is  not so  special  after  all-every  group  that has  experienced  ex-
traordinary prejudice  on the basis of deep  and valuable  commit-
ments deserves extraordinary constitutional concern.
Conversely, privileging familiar religion over atheism or agnosti-
cism  is  impermissible.  For  instance,  they  applaud  the  results  in
United States v. Seeger and Welsh v. United States, where the Court
extended conscientious  objector status beyond religious pacifists to
draftees who arguably  based their opposition  to war on  commit-
ments  other than  religious  ones."M  Opposition to  giving  religious
claimants protection  that nonreligious people cannot receive, even
if they are driven by deep commitments, is in fact the main point of
their entire argument. '  So equal liberty is a good example of the
type of theory that I am addressing in this Section: it does not seek
to define  religion to include nonbelief, but instead it argues that
regardless  of  how  religion  is  defined,  atheism  and  agnosticism
should be treated in an equivalent way.36
What is wrong with this approach, if anything? Focusing on non-
believers  brings  out  an  interesting complication.  Although  equal
stitution,  1983  Sup. Ct. Rev. 83;  see also Gey, supra  note 128,  at 120-66  (1990);
McConnell, supra note 129, at 16-31.
"' Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 62; see also id. at 53 ("Equal  [l]iberty asks
how government should treat persons who have diverse commitments regarding relig-
ion (including, in some cases, a commitment to reject religion)  and for whom those
commitments are important components of identity and well-being.").
'"4I d. at 113-14.
,3F'o r example, zoning laws should not exempt a religious person who wishes to op-
erate a soup kitchen in a prohibited area while barring someone who wants to run a
soup kitchen for reasons that are profound and worthwhile but not religious. Id. at 11.
address the definition of religion, and argue that it should not matter in any
16They 
detailed way for legal  analysis, in Christopher L. Eisgruber & Lawrence G. Sager,
Does It Matter What Religion Is?, 84 Notre Dame L. Rev. 807, 829-30 (2009).1144  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
liberty holds that belief  and nonbelief should virtually always  be
handled  the same way  (outside  antidiscrimination law), it does in
fact sometimes  allow greater care  for belief, even as compared  to
nonbelief,  and  certainly  as  compared  to  nonreligion  or  simple
moral conscience.137 Although  there  is some  ambiguity  here, as I
will explain below, the best reading of the work is that it does actu-
ally assimilate at least a few widespread  intuitions that religion is
singular.  Therefore,  at  least  in practice,  it  compromises  its  pur-
ported  single-mindedness  more  freely than many  suppose. I may
disagree  with  how  Eisgruber  and  Sager  draw  particular  lines-
whether  or not religion is exceptional  in one doctrinal  context or
another-but here the key point is methodological:  their approach
to the question of specialness is, at a minimum, somewhat polyva-
lent.
Church  autonomy  is  a  key  doctrine  for  illustrating  this  point.
Many Americans  share a sense  that churches and synagogues de-
serve customized legal treatment-a social fact that Eisgruber and
Sager acknowledge  and seek  to incorporate.  In particular, con-
gregations should enjoy a relatively free hand in hiring their lead-
ers. They  should be able to hire only men as clerics,  for instance,
even though antidiscrimination laws prohibit other employers from
discriminating on the basis of gender. This sentiment is written into
constitutional law in the "ministerial exemption" rule, which forms
an  important  component  of  the  broader  church-autonomy  doc-
trine."9 Eisgruber and Sager agree that congregations  should have
..P.r ofessor Andy Koppelman has argued forcefully and influentially that protect-
ing religion against discrimination is a kind of privileging because not all human con-
cerns are protected against discrimination. All those that are protected are privileged
relative to those that  are not. Therefore  Eisgruber and Sager's claim that  religion
should not be privileged, only protected, is not quite right, according  to him. See
Koppelman, supra note 129, at 581-83. I go a bit further here and contend that per-
haps  Eisgruber  and  Sager are  willing  to  tolerate  some  legal  differentiation  even
among deep commitments-belief and nonbelief.
13'sEisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 57 ("[A]lmost everybody believes that in
some cases religion requires special treatment. Almost everyone believes, for exam-
ple,  that, unlike other private employers, a church  should be  able to insist that its
priests be men."); see also McConnell, supra note 129, at 20 ("Most people would find
it shocking for the government to tell the Catholic Church or an Orthodox synagogue
that it must hire women as priests or rabbis. This exemption is a fundamental aspect
of the separation between church and state.").
"' I explain this rule more fully below, in the doctrinal discussion. See infra Section
III.C.2011] Nonbelievers 1145
wide latitude  to  hire  clergy  without regard  to  antidiscrimination
laws. They say that this is one place  where "[e]qual  [1]iberty  sup-
ports  our  strong  sense  that  religion  sometimes  requires  special
treatment."'4
To  reconcile  church  autonomy  with  equal  liberty, they  try to
show that it is actually  not so  special. The ministerial exemption
can be harmonized with equal liberty, they say, because the consti-
tutional values that give churches  autonomy in hiring-autonomy
and freedom of association-also  apply broadly  to plainly secular
organizations.14' They point out that the Supreme Court also ruled
for the Boy Scouts, who excluded  gay men from scoutmaster posi-
tions despite  local  antidiscrimination  laws.142 So  for  them institu-
tional autonomy in employment is something enjoyed not only by
churches, but also by other voluntary associations-or at least the
ones that provide  "private  relational benefits"  such  as  wise guid-
ance and friendship.43 Outcomes  depend  on the "structure  of ac-
tivities and leadership" in the association, as well as on the expec-
tations of participants.'"  Thus, religious congregations  are  special
only in the way that all such voluntary associations are special vis-
-vis other organizations. 5
,40Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 66.
141I d. at 64-65. Autonomy is a principle that they root in cases concerning privacy or
substantive due  process. As they acknowledge,  however, those cases all concerned
intimate decisions, such as how to educate a child or whether to terminate a preg-
nancy, which  seem to have little relevance  for church  management. They therefore
place more emphasis on freedom of association, which does concern organizations as
such. Cf. McConnell, supra note 129, at 19 (challenging the view that churches receive
protection only insofar as they are examples of private institutions and observing that
"the aspects of human life that are deemed sufficiently 'private' to be shielded from
state power are few").
142E isgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 64-65 (discussing Boy Scouts of Am. v. Dale,
530 U.S. 640 (2000)).
143I d. at 65.
"Id.  Their language here is specific to the Boy Scouts, but they do also suggest that
it applies more widely to all voluntary associations.
This is what they mean when they say that equal liberty "seeks to understand the
widely-held view that churches should be free from state interference  in their choice
of clergy by drawing on constitutional values of autonomy and freedom of association
that run to the benefit of all members of our constitutional community." Id. at 63 (em-
phasis added). In one place, Eisgruber and Sager suggest that the application of the
principle  of freedom of association differentiates churches because they are "struc-
tural anomalies" in regard to the type and range of associational services that they1146 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
What troubles this conclusion is that churches are in fact more
exceptional than that, according to the commonplace intuition that
Eisbruger and Sager seek to capture-in at least two distinct ways.
First, congregations  can make a broader range of hiring decisions
under the ministerial exemptions doctrine than can voluntary asso-
ciations, even under their broad reading of the law on associations.
As courts have  repeatedly held, parishes are free to hire and fire
their clerics, even if those decisions are not theologically mandated
or even recommended."4 It is inappropriate, under these cases, for
government to interfere  in clergy employment-not just when de-
cisions are motivated by religious reasons, but more generally. This
marks  an  important  difference."7  It  captures  a  sense  that  faith
communities  really  do  enjoy  extraordinary  institutional  auton-
omy.'8 By contrast, I doubt whether Eisgruber and Sager would al-
low the Boy Scouts to make any sort of discriminatory hiring deci-
sion  they  like,  no  matter  how  poorly  connected  to  the
organization's objectives.1"9
provide. Id. But later it seems that organizations like the Boy Scouts also qualify for
protection. Id. at 65.
,' Virtually every circuit court has applied the ministerial exemption and has inter-
preted it to have this broad scope. See Petruska v. Gannon Univ., 462 F.3d 294, 307
(3d Cir. 2006)  ("The ministerial exception, as we conceive of it, operates to bar any
claim, the resolution of which would limit a religious institution's right to select who
will perform particular spiritual functions."); id. at 304-05 & n.7 (listing other circuit
court cases). The only possible exception among federal appellate courts is the Elev-
enth Circuit, which has applied the exemption without addressing whether it applies
to employment decisions that are not religiously motivated. See Gellington v. Chris-
tian Methodist Episcopal Church, Inc., 203 F.3d. 1299, 1303 (11th Cir. 2000). But see
McKelvey v. Pierce, 800 A.2d 840, 851 (N.J. 2002) (ruling that the church autonomy
doctrine only prohibits review of a breach of contract claim brought by a prospective
cleric where it involves conduct "rooted in religious belief") (internal quotation marks
omitted); Marci A. Hamilton, God vs. the Gavel: Religion and the Rule of Law 190-
91  (2005)  (arguing  that  the ministerial  exemption  should be  limited  to  situations
where employment discrimination  is required by the organization's  beliefs and ob-
serving that an "increasing number of courts" follow this approach).
"' See McConnell,  supra  note  129,  at 20-21  ("[T]he  religious  exemption  is  far
broader than [the exemption in Dale and similar cases]. A church or synagogue does
not need to demonstrate that employment of any particular person would be inconsis-
tent with its expressive purpose ....  The religious exception is sui generis.").
..F.o r a similar argument, see Andrew Koppelman  & Tobias Barrington Wolff, A
Right To Discriminate?  How the  Case of Boy  Scouts of America v.  James Dale
Warped the Law of Free Association 142 n.26 (2009).
"9E  isgruber and Sager resist the need to find some expressive aspect to an associa-
tion in order to win protection, but they do think that a court's decision to exempt2011] Nonbelievers 1147
The ministerial exemption rule stands apart in another way, too.
Whereas freedom of association can be overbalanced by important
government objectives, the ministerial exemption is virtually abso-
lute. Courts addressing clergy employment claims do not seriously
consider the state's countervailing  interest in, say, preventing dis-
crimination.5° By contrast, freedom of association must give way to
sufficiently compelling government interests.'
At  least  two  conclusions  could  follow  from  these tensions.  If
Eisgruber  and  Sager really  support  the entire ministerial  exemp-
tion rule, then they are granting religion a more distinctive consti-
tutional  status than their theory of equal liberty  can comfortably
explain. If, on the other hand, they think that churches  and syna-
gogues should be able to make discriminatory hiring decisions only
in  the  same  way  as  other  voluntary  associations  like  the  Boy
Scouts, then they are not fully capturing  the intuition, shared  by
virtually  every  circuit,  that  congregations  deserve  extraordinary
protection from government interference. Either way, the ministe-
rial  exemption  branch  of the  church  autonomy  doctrine  poses  a
problem for their equality-based  attack on the singular treatment
of religion in contemporary constitutional law. Overall, my impres-
sion is that Eisgruber and Sager do indeed mean to accommodate
the  whole  ministerial  exemptions  rule,  even  though  that  special
concern for religion is hard to square with equal liberty.
Nonestablishment  of religion  in government  expression  is  an-
other place where Eisgruber and Sager seem to think that constitu-
tional  law rightly  treats religion differently. They  say it is imper-
missible for the government to endorse religion because that would
send a message  of exclusion or disparagement to others. This is a
matter of what they call  social meaning-the  significance  that an
endorsement will have for people living in a particular society with
a particular  history, regardless  of the subjective intent of officials
employment  discrimination should  "turn on"  certain factors,  such as the organiza-
tion's activities and leadership structure. Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 65. That
suggests that even under their theory groups like the Boy Scouts would not have the
same degree of hiring autonomy as congregations do under the ministerial exemption
rule.
McConnell et al., Religion and the Constitution 318 (2d ed. 2006) (citing cases).
151I d. (citing Boy Scouts of Am. v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000) (explaining that the
compelling state interesttest applies to expressive association claims)).1148 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
or the actual perception of individual citizens.'52 And as a matter of
social meaning in America today, endorsing religion has something
of a distinctive  impact on  social and political  membership.  Here,
Eisgruber and  Sager's method for determining whether religion is
special is disaggregated in a couple of ways. First, it allows for dis-
tinctions among scenarios. Judges  must stay alert to the details of
particular disputes-they have to decide in each case whether gov-
ernment expression constitutes an endorsement of religion that of-
fends equal liberty. Second, it allows for doctrinal differentiation.
Religion  is  distinct  in  the  nonestablishment  area  in  ways  that  it
does not appear to be in other areas, such as nondiscrimination or
free-exercise  exemptions,  if only as  a consequence  of contingent
understandings.  With  regard  to  nonestablishment,  equal  liberty
generates  distinct outcomes  for recognized  religious  groups,  but
when it  comes to free-exercise  exemptions  all  deep and  valuable
convictions  receive similar  constitutional concern,  without  regard
to group understandings.
If my understanding of equal liberty is right, then the methodo-
logical takeaway is that figuring  out whether religion is special, as
against nonbelief, might well  be something of a particularized in-
quiry, even for Eisgruber  and Sager.  Church autonomy  and gov-
ernment  endorsement  are two  areas  where  that seems  to be the
case. At a minimum, Eisgruber and Sager's inquiry  may be more
polyvalent and disaggregated than many think, given their outspo-
ken opposition to the special place of religion in constitutional law.
In fact, equal liberty may well apply differently to nonbelief than to
recognizable  religious forms-if only in a particular case,  decided
in a particular  society, under a particular branch of religious free-
dom law.
My conclusion is that judges should take a piecemeal approach,
rather than a wholesale one, to the question of whether nonbelief
should  be  protected  under  religious  freedom  provisions.  Defini-
..E.i sgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 124-28;  see also Eisgruber & Sager, supra
note 136, at 830-31. For an interesting treatment of their theory of government en-
dorsement, see Abner S. Greene, Three Theories of Religious Equality...  and of Ex-
emptions, 87 Tex. L. Rev. 963, 980-81 (2009).2011] Nonbelievers 1149
tional  approaches  are unhelpful,  and they  risk masking  the  sub-
stantive work that properly determines  outcomes in the most nim-
ble theories. Nor does the argument that religion is not special of-
fer judges a palatable way around careful doctrinal work. A range
of principled and pragmatic considerations  should and do matter,
and they matter in different ways in different areas of doctrine, as I
will now show.
III. DOCTRINE
Should nonbelief be protected alongside traditional religion? In
this Part, I argue that the answer should vary from doctrine to doc-
trine and from situation to situation. Neither an approach that lim-
its protections  to believers,  nor one that  handles  nonbelievers  in
the  same  way  as conventional  believers  is  ultimately convincing.
The latter conclusion will probably prove  more  surprising, yet in
fact there are some areas in which legal rules are specific to famil-
iar religions, given existing American traditions, constitutional un-
derstandings, and social practices.
I  begin  by  showing  that  antidiscrimination  protection  for so-
called unbelievers or infidels presents perhaps the easiest case for
similar legal treatment. Harder is the question of exemptions from
general  laws, which I address  in Section B. Although it is possible
to imagine strong exemption claims, courts may approach some of
them  with a  degree of skepticism  not appropriate  for recognized
religions. Section C describes why rules protecting the autonomy of
religious institutions should not extend to organizations of atheists,
agnostics, or humanists. Finally, I present  arguments against  easy
application of all nonestablishment rules to nonbelief.
A. Nondiscrimination
Perhaps the most fundamental  rule of religious freedom  is that
explicit or purposive  discrimination on the basis of religion is pre-
sumptively unconstitutional. Whatever  else the Constitution holds
for nonbelievers,  it protects  them  from unwarranted  government
discrimination.
To a degree, this position follows from precedent. The Court has
warned against governmental disfavor not only of religion but also1150  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
of irreligion.'53 The most significant decision is Torcaso v.  Watkins,
where it held that the Maryland Constitution could not limit public
office to  those who were  willing to declare  a  "belief  in the  exis-
tence  of God."'' 4 While  the Maryland  text did not target nonbe-
lievers as such, since  polytheists  (and other believers) would  also
have been unwilling to agree to the declaration, the Court's reason-
ing would apply to clearer exclusions of nonbelievers  as well. Not
only the Religious Test Oath Clause of Article VI, along with the
provision that allows federal and state officials to choose an affir-
mation rather than an oath, but also the religion provisions of the
First Amendment  bar the  government  from forcing  persons  "to
profess a belief or disbelief  in  any religion."'55  More  specifically,
these  provisions  work  together  to prohibit  exclusions  of nonbe-
lievers from public office.
Instances of discrimination against  nonbelievers-past  and pre-
sent-are regrettably  easy to find. Courts have prohibited nonbe-
lievers from testifying,'56 judges  have refused  to credit their dying
declarations,"7  atheists have  been prohibited  from serving  on ju-
ries,"8 states have barred nonbelievers from public office with vary-
' Van Orden v. Perry, 545 U.S. 677, 734-35 (2005)  (Stevens, J., dissenting)  ("The
evil of discriminating today against atheists, polytheists, and believers in unconcerned
deities, is in my view a direct descendent of the evil of discriminating among Christian
sects. The Establishment Clause thus forbids it .... ") (citation and quotation marks
omitted); Wallace v. Jaffree, 472 U.S. 38, 52-53 (1984) ("[T]he Court has unambigu-
ously  concluded  that  the individual freedom  of conscience  protected by the First
Amendment embraces the right to select any religious faith or none at all.").
Interestingly, Justice  Scalia has suggested  that Ten Commandments displays are
constitutional  even if they endorse belief over nonbelief. McCreary v. ACLU, 545
U.S. 844, 893 (2005)  (Scalia, J., dissenting, joined by Rehnquist, C.J. and Thomas, J.)
(calling "demonstrably false" the "principle that the government cannot favor religion
over irreligion").
'u Torcaso v. Watkins, 367 U.S. 488, 495 (1961).
Id. at 493 (quoting Everson v. Bd. of Educ., 330 U.S. 1, 15 (1947)).
'5 
'  See, e.g., B.H. Hartogensis, Denial of Equal Rights to Religious Minorities and
Non-Believers in the United States, 39 Yale L.J. 659, 668 (1929); Paul Kaufman, Dis-
believing Nonbelievers:  Atheism,  Competence,  and  Credibility in the Turn of the
Century American  Courtroom, 15  Yale J.L. & Human. 395, 403  (2003); Charles E.
Rushing, The  First Amendment  and  Civil Disabilities  Imposed  Upon Atheists,  3
Duke B.J. 137, 138 (1952).
157 See, e.g., Carver v. United States, 164 U.S. 694, 697 (1897); Rushing, supra note
156, at 145-46.
158 See, e.g., State v. Mercer, 61 A. 220, 221 (Md. 1905); Rushing, supra note 156, at
145.20111
Nonbelievers 1151
ing degrees  of specificity,"9 parents  who reject religion  have been
disadvantaged in child custody cases,"6  aspiring parents have faced
obstacles to adoption,"'  inmates allegedly have been denied medi-
cal treatment because of their atheism,'62 soldiers have claimed that
they were berated and discharged because  of their disbelief,6'3 and
some  nonbelievers  have  been  discriminated  against  in  employ-
ment.'"  So not only have nonbelievers  been the target of negative
attitudes,  but some  number of them have  also long suffered  dis-
criminatory acts.
Commentators  mostly agree  that nonbelievers  deserve  protec-
tion against discrimination,  although they  locate that rule in vari-
ous constitutional provisions.6  Eisgruber  and Sager,  for instance,
59 See, e.g., Ark. Const. art. 19, § 1 ("No person who denies the being of a God shall
hold any office in the civil departments of this State, nor be competent to testify as a
witness in any Court."); Rushing, supra note 156, at 146 (citing other examples).
" See, e.g., Pountain v. Pountain, 503 S.E.2d 757,761 (S.C. Ct. App. 1998) (granting
custody to a mother in part because of the father's agnosticism); Eugene Volokh, Par-
ent-Child Speech and Child Custody Speech Restrictions, 81 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 631, 727-
28  (2006) (citing additional cases);  Agnostic Man Claims Religious  Bias Cost Him
Custody, USA Today (Dec. 5, 2010), http://www.usatoday.com/news/religion/2010-12-
05-agnostic05-ST _N.htm.
See, e.g., In re Adoption of E, 279 A.2d 785, 791 (N.J. 1971).
161 
,' See, e.g., Hauschild v. Powers, No. 09-015-GPM, 2010 WL 1251265, at *1 (S.D.
Ill. 2010) (noting that a prison doctor allegedly had stated "I  don't treat Atheists.").
Although the claims brought were for Eighth Amendment deliberate indifference and
First Amendment retaliation, a religious freedom claim would have survived as well.
163S ee,  e.g.,  Neela  Banerjee,  Soldier  Sues  Army,  Saying  His  Atheism  Led  To
Threats, N.Y. Times, Apr. 26, 2008, at A14.
164 See, e.g., Young v. Sw. Sav. & Loan Assoc., 509 F.2d 140, 141, 144 (5th Cir. 1975)
(finding that an atheist employee was "the victim of religious discrimination" and was
constructively discharged  after she refused  to attend regular prayer meetings); U.S.
Comm'n on Civil Rights, Religious Discrimination:  A Neglected Issue 94-96 (1979)
(statement of Charles Reams, Jr., President, Humanist Association of the National
Capital Area) (describing additional instances); cf. Richard H. Sander & Jane Yako-
witz, The Secret of My Success: How Status, Prestige and School Performance Shape
Legal  Careers  38  (Oct.  22,  2010)  (unpublished  manuscript,  available  at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=  1640058) (noting some empirical data that suggest that non-
believing and unaffiliated lawyers earn less than religiously affiliated lawyers).
6' See, e.g., Gail Merel, The Protection of Individual Choice: A Consistent Under-
standing of Religion Under the First Amendment, 45 U. Chi. L. Rev. 805, 813 (1978);
Shiffrin, Foundations, supra note 76, at 62; cf. Alan E. Brownstein, Harmonizing the
Heavenly and Earthly Spheres: The Fragmentation and Synthesis of Religion, Equal-
ity, and Speech in the Constitution, 51 Ohio St. L.J. 89, 112 n.109 (arguing that state
discrimination  against  nonbelievers  should receive  something  less than  strict scru-
tiny); Carl H. Esbeck, Religion and the First Amendment: Some Causes of the Recent
Confusion, 42 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 883,  896-97 (2001); John H. Garvey, An Anti-1152  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
think a primary purpose of free exercise is to ensure that citizens
are  not  devalued  on the  basis  of their  spiritual  commitments-
including  nonbelief.'6  If  religious  groups  deserve  constitutional
protection  because  they have  long been the targets of discrimina-
tion, then nonbelievers, who arguably  have experienced  compara-
ble exclusion, deserve similar protection.'67 To my mind, it matters
little where the right is located within the Constitution-regardless,
nonbelievers  deserve  a legal  presumption  against  targeted  disfa-
168
vor.
Do antidiscrimination rules include nonbelievers because nonbe-
lief counts as "religion"?  The answer could be yes, in the sense that
it  would be  possible  to say that  nonbelief  counts  as  religion  for
antidiscrimination  purposes.69  Yet  nothing  much  turns  on  that
formulation. One could just as easily say that although nonbelief is
obviously not religion it deserves similar protection, according  to
our considered constitutional traditions, because of a freestanding
equality principle  that does  not tolerate exposing  atheists and ag-
Liberal Argument for Religious  Freedom, 7 J.  Contemp. Legal Issues 275, 288-89
(1996)  (suggesting that antidiscrimination rules would be among those that apply to
nonbelievers).
166 Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 46, at 52, 114; see also Dorsen, supra note 14, at
869. Just as basic  as nondiscrimination  is the rule that government  cannot compel
nonbelievers (or anyone else) to observe religious practices, so Greenawalt points out
that a law requiring people to attend Roman Catholic Mass each week would be ob-
viously unconstitutional. Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 149.
,67Eisgruber and Sager seem to have drawn this conclusion themselves. See Eisgru-
ber & Sager, supra note 136, at 830 (reasoning that if "the Religion Clauses prevent
the forms of mistreatment historically associated with religious conflict," rather than
protecting religion itself, then "[t]hose mistreatments include injuries inflicted on the
ground that the targeted activity is viewed as not religious"). But see Brownstein, su-
pra note 165, at 112 ("[W]hile the nonreligious are a minority in American society and
have been the subject of discrimination in specific circumstances,  far less prejudice
and mistreatment has been directed at them historically than is the case for perse-
cuted religious minorities.").
68F or instance, there is a fixed sense among the Justices that official bias on the ba-
sis of religion is presumptively prohibited by the Equal Protection Clause. That pro-
hibition should extend to government discrimination against nonblievers.
..J.u dge Wood, writing for the court in Kaufman v. McCaughtry, 419 F.3d 678 (7th
Cir. 2005), held that atheism was a religion for First Amendment  purposes, but then
turned away the free exercise complaint of an inmate who had requested a weekly
meeting of atheists. Id. at 682-83. Judge Wood reasoned that the inmate's practice
was not burdened. It is not clear, however, that it is necessary for an inmate to show a
burden when discrimination among faiths is at stake. The panel did find a nonestab-
lishment violation. Id. at 683-84.2011] Nonbelievers 1153
nostics to governmental targeting. So again a definitional approach
here  generates  little  conceptual  or practical  yield.  As Eisgruber
and Sager  have  put it, for purposes  of  an antidiscrimination  ap-
proach like theirs, "[W]e  need not decide whether atheism is itself
a religion, or whether atheistic or agnostic convictions might ever
count  as  religious."'7° What  matters is  that nonbelievers  are pro-
tected from governmental discrimination.
So  far, I  have  been  speaking of  laws  that discriminate  in  the
sense that they isolate nonbelievers for disadvantageous treatment.
What about unequal allocation of accommodations,  such as when
officials  relieve  specific  believers from regulations  but  fail to  ac-
commodate nonbelievers? Here too, and for similar reasons, equal-
ity rules ought to protect nonbelievers. For example, an atheist in-
mate  claimed that his request for a weekly study group had been
denied, even though similar requests from familiar religious groups
had been  granted.7' Strict limits were placed on  all gatherings  in
the prison, but  religious  groups were given  special permission to
congregate,  probably in order to comply with RLUIPA, and per-
haps also for policy reasons.'72 Judge  Wood, writing for the panel,
held that the disparity was unconstitutional in the absence  of any
secular reason why the  atheist group presented  a greater security
risk.'73 That was the correct result. Nondiscrimination rules of both
types-those  that ban  outright  targeting  and  those  that  prohibit
unequal administration of accommodations-apply to nonbelievers
in the same way as they apply  to familiar observers. That conclu-
sion  should  generate  little  controversy.  But  consensus  will  be
harder  to  find  around  other  questions,  beginning  with  whether
nonbelievers should be able to win exemptions from general laws.
B. Exemptions
American  religious freedom  law sometimes includes  a  right to
relief  from general  laws  that  incidentally  burden  observance.  In
other words, even regulations that do not explicitly or purposefully
170E isgruber & Sager, supra note 136, at 827.
"' Kaufnan, 419 F.3d at 680.
,72 Id. at 683-84 (noting that "normal  social groups" who wish to hold meetings face
toufher regulations than religious groups do under RLUIPA).
Id. at 684.1154  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
target  religious  groups may be invalidated  insofar as  they thwart
free  exercise.  In such  situations, government  will  be  required to
carve out exemptions.'74  While this principle is no longer a part of
core free exercise doctrine-due  to the Court's controversial turn-
about in Employment Division v. Smithm7-it  nevertheless persists.
First  of  all,  Smith preserved  certain  important  exceptions  to its
general  rule.76  Moreover,  federal  statutes  like  RFRA  and
RLUIPA provide for exemptions.77 And on the state level, about a
quarter of all constitutions  have been construed  to presumptively
guard against laws that impose incidental burdens on free exercise
and sixteen states have enacted statutes  like the federal  RFRA 78
All told, American law still promises relief for many religious ac-
tors whose observances are burdened only incidentally.
Can  nonbelievers  win  this  sort  of relief from  general  regula-
tions? Considerations differ from those that are at play in antidis-
crimination  doctrine. Here,  I  will  argue  for  a nuanced  approach
that gives significant protection, but that also recognizes  religion's
partial  distinctiveness  and  therefore  stops  short  of extending  to
nonbelievers  exactly the same level of deference  that courts show
toward ordinary exemption claims.
Some guidance  has come from the Court. In two cases concern-
ing military conscription,  it ruled that draftees named Seeger  and
Welsh, who probably were not religious, could qualify for conscien-
tious objector status, even though Congress  had explicitly limited
relief to people whose pacifism was grounded in religion. Federal
statutory  law  permitted  conscription  but  accommodated  people
"who by reason of their religious training and belief [were] consci-
This is different from an equal treatment claim, described in the last paragraph, in
"7 
that it works even in the absence of any existing exemptions for religious groups.
494 U.S. 872 (1990).
For a description of these exceptions, see Tebbe, supra note 77, at 2057-58.
'7Religious  Freedom  Restoration  Act  of  1993,  42  U.S.C.  §§ 2000bb-2000bb-4
(2006);  Religious  Land  Use  and  Institutionalized  Persons  Act  of 2000,  42  U.S.C.
§§ 2000cc-2000cc-5 (2006).
,7C hristopher C. Lund, Religious Liberty After Gonzales: A Look at State RFRAs,
55 S.D. L. Rev. 466, 467-69, 477 & n.67 (2010) (citing statutes but observing that they
are rarely used); Eugene  Volokh, Freedom of Expressive Association  and Govern-
ment Subsidies, 58 Stan. L. Rev. 1919, 1950 & n.116 (2006)  (listing state court con-
structions of state free exercise provisions).2011] Nonbelievers 1155
entiously opposed to participation in war in any form."'79 Arguably,
both  men were  nonbelievers.  But even  if their objections  to war
were  grounded in conscience  or morality, unconnected  to any be-
lief about the supernatural, the Court's opinions implied that true
atheists  and  agnostics  also would be  able  to  win exemptions,  at
least in some situations.
Today,  these  decisions  provide  clues  to  how  the  Court might
treat  exemptions  for identified  nonbelievers.  For one  thing, they
suggest an  equality  concern,  namely  that granting  exemptions  to
believers  alone  could  impermissibly  advantage  them  relative  to
nontraditionalists like Seeger or Welsh.'"  Yet elsewhere  the Court
has  suggested  limits on the ability  of nonbelievers  to win exemp-
tions, even  where  religious  observers  enjoy  them. In Yoder,  the
Court explained  that although Amish children had a free exercise
right not  to attend  school  after the  eighth grade  despite  truancy
laws,  that  right  would not  extend  to someone  driven  by "purely
secular" convictions-someone like Henry David Thoreau)" There
appears to be a genuine  tension between  this statement in  Yoder
and the rule of Seeger and Welsh, which protects nonreligious peo-
ple.  How  can  courts  accommodate  both  the  impulse  to  exempt
nonbelievers  evenhandedly and the intuition that familiar religious
claims are different?
79 United  States v.  Seeger,  380  U.S.  163,  164-65  (1965)  (citing  50 U.S.C.  app.
§ 456(j) (1958); see also Welsh v. United States, 398 U.S. 333, 339-41 (1970).  Congress
defined religion to mean: "[A] belief in a relation to a Supreme Being involving duties
superior to those arising from any human relation, but [excluding] essentially political,
sociological,  or philosophical  views or a merely personal  moral code."  Seeger, 380
U.S. at 172 (quoting the statute). After Seeger but before Welsh, Congress amended
the statute to remove the requirement that objectors hold  "a belief in relation to a
Supreme Being."  See Historical and Statutory Notes, 50 U.S.C.A.  app. § 456, at 110
(1990) ("Pub. L. 90-40, § 1(7),  struck out provision that religious training and belief
stem from the individual's belief in a relation to a Supreme Being involving duties su-
perior to those arising from any human relationship."). The statute retained the re-
quirement that the objection stem from "religious training and belief." See Welsh, 398
U.S.  at  335  (quoting  the statute).  I thank  Kent  Greenawalt  for  pointing  out this
change in the law.
" Conventional  wisdom  holds  that the  two  decisions  must  be  constitutionally
driven. Particularly in Welsh, but also in Seeger, the fit between the outcome and the
statute's  language  was poor.  Justice  Harlan,  for example,  deplored  the  "liberties
taken with the statute" in both majority decisions. Welsh, 398 U.S. at 345 (Harlan, J.,
concurring in the result). He concurred in the judgments only on the ground that ex-
ermpting traditional believers but not nonbelievers would offend the Constitution. Id.
Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 215-16 (1972).1156  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
Some  scholars  have  argued  that the tension is  in fact not  that
strong  because  nonbelief  itself  generates  few  actual  practices."
Mere  denial  of the  existence  of  the supernatural,  or  skepticism
about it, does  not generate  demands  of action  or inaction.  And
only practices that are closely connected to nonbelief itself deserve
protection that is equivalent to what traditional observances enjoy.
Seeger and Welsh were correctly decided, on this view, but that was
either because they protected moral claims of conscience that were
freestanding of either belief or nonbelief or because they presented
virtually  the  only  imaginable  examples  of practices  that  were
closely integrated into systems of humanism or freethinking.183
Yet in fact nonbelievers can and do claim exemptions. They may
do so  under the  Constitution  or  under  statutes  like  RFRA and
RLUIPA or state equivalents. Possible claims  are in fact not diffi-
cult to imagine. Atheist  inmates might  sue to compel prison offi-
cials to  allow them to wear  atheist symbols  on necklaces despite
prison  dress  regulations,"  they  could  claim  a  right  of access  to
nonbelieving literature despite censorship rules,8'5 they conceivably
could request vegetarian meals, 6 or they might ask to be  allowed
to hold weekly meetings for study and  discussion  of atheist ideas
despite  general  restrictions  on  gatherings."  Freethinkers  could
bring a free exercise  claim  (as well as a speech claim)  when they
1821  Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 151; Michael McConnell, Accommodation of Re-
ligion, 1985 Sup. Ct. Rev. 1, 10-11  ("[U]nbelief entails no obligations and no obser-
vances. Unbelief may be coupled with various sorts of moral conviction ....  But these
convictions  must  necessarily  be derived  from some source  other than unbelief it-
self."). Laycock agrees that the tension between nonbelief and most general laws are
not particularly  strong because the morality of nonbelief shares much with the mod-
em sensibility that also underlies many legal obligations. Douglas Laycock, The Reli-
gious Exemption Debate, 11 Rutgers J.L. & Religion 139, 170-71 (2009).
"' See Thomas Berg, Minority Religions and the Religion Clauses, 82 Wash. U. L.Q.
919, 976 (2004) ("[The draft cases involved] conduct that was not just permitted by a
belief in God's nonexistence, but followed from the belief. Atheists or agnostic draft
objectors can plausibly assert that the nonexistence  of a theistic god or an afterlife
means that this life is of utmost importance, and therefore that the worst thing a per-
son can do is end another's life.").
1" See Kaufman  v. Karlen, No. 07-2712, 2008 WL 744140, at *1 (7th Cir. Mar. 20,
2008).
,8 See id. at *3.
Cf. Koger v. Bryan, 523 F.3d 789, 793-94 (7th Cir. 2008) (ruling in favor of an in-
'86 
mate who adhered to Thelema, a nontheistic belief system with the sole tenet "do
what thou wilt," even though the creed did not explicitly prohibit eating meat).
' See Kaufman v. McCaughtry, 419 F.3d 678, 682-83 (7th Cir. 2005).2011] Nonbelievers 1157
are  prohibited  from  erecting  a  winter  solstice  display  on  town
property."  Organizations  of secular  humanists may request relief
from landmark laws so that they can more freely use their property
to pursue their missions.9  Nonbelieving  students may seek to be
excused from studying the Bible, even as literature."  And, as we
have  already  seen,  conscientious  objectors  could  claim  constitu-
tional immunity  from  military conscription.9' These  are  straight-
forward examples  demonstrating a realistic possibility that nonbe-
lievers will continue  to ask courts for relief from general laws for
activities that they take to be demanded by their nonbelief.
Moreover, American varieties of nonbelief may be evolving in
ways that  make  them  more capable  of generating  commands  of
conduct-and thus exemption claims that closely track familiar re-
ligious ones. At the very least, nonbelievers  themselves are claim-
ing this sort of connection,  partly in  response  to the widespread
perception  that atheism  and agnosticism promote  amoral or even
immoral ways of living. For example, the American Humanist As-
sociation's  ("AHA")  most recent statement, the Humanist Mani-
festo III, highlights ethics at the very beginning and seeks to show
that ethical ideas are integral to its entire system of thought. It de-
fines  humanism  as  a  life  philosophy  that  "without  supernatural-
ism[]  affirms our ability  and responsibility  to lead ethical lives of
personal fulfillment that aspire to the greater good of humanity.""
It also declares that "[e]thical values are derived from human need
and interest as tested by experience,"  and it sets out a commitment
to "treating each person  as having inherent worth and dignity."'93
Whether claims like these are convincing has traditionally not been
central to free exercise jurisprudence.
"' See Wells v. City and County of Denver, 257 F.3d 1132, 1138 (10th Cir. 2001) (re-
jecting that claim).
89 Cf. Soc'y for Ethical Culture in the City of N.Y.  v. Spatt, 51 N.Y.2d 449, 924
(1980).
" Cf. Religion Clause Blog, School Excuses Atheist Student From Reading Bible as
Literature (Dec. 17, 2009), http://religionclause.blogspot.com/2009/12/school-excuses-
atheist-student-from.html.
191C  f. United States v. Seeger, 380 U.S. 163, 187 (1965).
192H  umanism and its Aspirations: Humanist Manifesto III, a Successor to the Hu-
manist  Manifesto  of 1933 (2003),  http://www.americanhumanist.org/system/storage/
63/238/HumanismandltsAspirations.pdf.
"' Id. (emphasis added).1158  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
Moreover, although the connection between religious skepticism
and ethics is not as clear  as it could be in the AHA's short state-
ment, Richard Dawkins, a prominent signer of the manifesto, says
more  in  his  bestselling  book.  There  he  argues  that  humanity's
moral sense can be derived from its past through a theory of evolu-
tionary  biology."'  Although  the  details  are  not  critical  here,
Dawkins  essentially  believes  that  the theory  of natural  selection
can account for the widespread  human impulse to be good to one
another-a moral sense capable of carrying content that is signifi-
cant and specific."' Because evolutionary biology also plays a large
role in Dawkins's argument  against religion, it appears that he  is
attempting to lay the foundation for ethical obligations that are in-
tegral  to  his entire  humanist  project  and  are  capable  of issuing
practical  commands for action and inaction. If something like this
description is accurate then it might soon make sense for religious
freedom law to protect practices that are demanded by this form of
contemporary humanism in much the same way that it protects fa-
miliar religious observances."
So far, I have argued that a distinction should be drawn between
exemption claims for practices that flow from nonbelief itself and
claims  that  are  freestanding  from  belief or nonbelief. I have  fo-
cused on the former, where I believe that equality considerations
point  toward  similar  constitutional  and  statutory  protection  for
nonbelievers.  Successful exemption claims will be infrequent, but
they may be less rare than some have supposed, partly because  of
developments in some strands of American atheism.
Assuming all of that, should nonbelievers be able to win exemp-
tions whenever they claim that general laws conflict with practices
that are integral to their nonbelief? This is the more difficult ques-
tion.  My answer  is  that  where  nonbelievers  can  show that  their
nonbelief itself conflicts  with general  regulations,  their claims for
exemptions should be treated as  seriously as claims  by traditional
religious  practitioners.  Courts,  however,  retain  some  ability  to
194 Dawkins, supra note 4, at 245 ("Several  books.., have argued that our sense of
right and wrong can be derived from our Darwinian past. This section is my own ver-
sion of the argument.").
"' Id. at 241-54.
'"  Again, that protection would not depend on a finding that Dawkins's account is
particularly convincing.2011] Nonbelievers 1159
skeptically examine whether a particular obligation is in fact inte-
gral to  someone's  atheism or humanism-at  the  very least, they
may do so where the adherent plausibly claims a connection that is
solely rational, scientific, or otherwise accessible to outsiders.
Let me add support and specificity to that second claim. Where
ordinary believers  are concerned, courts generally defer to claims
that  actions  or inactions  are  demanded  of  individual  adherents.
That  is one aspect  of what has  come to be known  as the "hands
off"  doctrine.1"  Common justifications  include:  (1)  that  religious
claims are not subject to rational or objective evaluation;'  (2) that
judges are not competent to assess such claims;'99 (3) that court in-
termeddling in theology could harm religious congregations (which
have  special  value  and/or  are  particularly  susceptible  to govern-
ment  intrusion);'" (4)  that  matters  of  doctrine  are  private  and
should be of no interest to civil officials;"' and (5)  that secular au-
thorities lack jurisdiction to answer questions properly left to reli-
gious institutions. 2
Without taking a position on whether and how these arguments
apply to ordinary religious practitioners-something  about which I
" See Thomas v. Review Bd., 450 U.S. 707, 716 (1981)  (holding that courts will not
second-guess a practitioner's claim that conduct is prohibited by scripture); Samuel J.
Levine, The Supreme Court's Hands-Off Approach to Religious Doctrine: An Intro-
duction, 84 Notre Dame L. Rev. 793, 795 (2009) ("[T]he Court generally eschews de-
cision making that requires adjudication of religious doctrine.").
" Serbian E. Orthodox Diocese v. Milivojevich, 426 U.S. 696, 714-15 (1976) ("[I]t is
the essence of religious faith that ecclesiastical decisions are reached and are to be ac-
cepted as matters of faith[,] whether or not rational or measurable by objective crite-
ria.") (footnote omitted); Richard W. Garnett, A Hands-Off Approach to Religious
Doctrine: What Are We Talking About?, 84 Notre Dame L. Rev. 837, 855-56 (2009).
What follows in the text relies on Garnett's summary of the doctrine.
"' Thomas v.  Review Bd., 450 U.S. at 715  (noting that courts  are  "singularly  ill
equipped"  to resolve intrafaith disputes concerning doctrine); Serbian E. Orthodox
Diocese, 426 U.S. at 714-15 n.8 (noting that civil judges are not competent to apply
religious law); Watson v. Jones, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.)  679, 729 (1871)  ("It is not to be
supposed that the judges of the civil courts can be as competent in the ecclesiastical
law and religious faith of [church] bodies as the ablest men in each are in reference to
their own.").
2See Andrew Koppelman, The Troublesome Religious Roots of Religious  Neu-
trality, 84 Notre Dame L. Rev. 865, 869-70 (2009); Garnett, supra note 198, at 858.
'oLemon v. Kurtzman, 403  U.S. 602, 625 (1971)  ("The Constitution decrees that
religion must be a private matter for the individual, the family, and the institutions of
private choice .... ").
Garnett, supra note 198, at 861.
202 1160 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
have some doubts-I can say that they do not apply comfortably to
all suits by all nonbelievers.  Regarding (1) rationality and (2) judi-
cial competence,  two rationales  that often work together, it is sig-
nificant that certain claims that exemptions are required by nonbe-
lief will not involve the sort of nonrational impulses that ostensibly
characterize traditional religions and that courts disclaim the com-
petence to assess. Eisgruber and Sager once said that nonbelievers
and state officials  "in principle share a common epistemic founda-
tion.2°3 Regardless  of whether that is true, some nonbelievers  do
themselves  disavow  nonrational  impulses,  and that  admission re-
moves one obstacle to judicial inquiry into the connection between
a claim  and a central  tenet of atheism or agnosticism.  Humanists
like Dawkins, for example, may well argue that moral impulses like
pacifism or vegetarianism can be accounted for by evolutionary bi-
ology in a way that supports their status as imperatives for action.
Of course, judges may want to independently  assess whether  a
tie to nonbelief is actually as rationally  accessible  as the adherent
claims  it is. Where  the  question  is close,  they may want to  steer
clear of even deciding whether a claim is accessible enough to ad-
judicate.  But  again,  to  the  extent  that  nonbelievers  plausibly
ground their entire system of thought in accessible reasons, courts
may have greater power to interrogate a particular claim that con-
duct is required by that system. °
Not every nonbeliever is as avowedly rationalistic as Dawkins-
many surely do rely on impulses or commitments  that are not ac-
20E isgruber  & Sager,  supra  note  129,  at  1293  ("With  secular  claims  of con-
science,..  .the believer and the state in principle share a common epistemic founda-
tion."). They are speaking here of all conscience, but their point pertains to claims by
nonbelievers that prohibited practices are demanded by nonbelief. Cf. Laycock, supra
note 182,  at 171  ("On the whole,  nonbelievers  take their morality  from the same
modern milieu that drives democratic decision making and government regulation.").
More recently, Eisgruber and Sager seem to have moved away from the epistemol-
ogy-based defense of the hands-off doctrine and have instead embraced a disestab-
lishment rationale. See Eisgruber & Sager, supra note 136, at 812-13. I am grateful to
Micah Schwartzman for pointing out this shift in their thinking.
204" Rational" has different meanings in the literature on this question. Here, I side-
step these  distinctions and  use the word to describe a form of thinking and talking
that courts may use without triggering any serious controversy (whether over faith-
based reasoning, over engaging in value judgments, or over privileging a particular
comprehensive  commitment  in  a  liberal society).  Judges  will  count as rational  all
claims that everyone can agree are  accessible to all people. Elements of traditional
religions may be rational in this regard, and elements of nonbelief may not be.2011] Nonbelievers 1161
cessible to all."5 And where they do, courts will properly defer. In
fact, judges currently yield to groups'  interpretations of their own
values in comparable secular situations. In the Boy Scouts case, for
instance,  the  Court inquired  only  "to  a  limited extent"  into  the
connection  between  the  Scouts'  expressive  purposes  and  their
claimed  need  to exclude  gay  men  from  scoutmaster  positions."
Similarly,  nonbelieving  actors  who claim  exemptions  for conduct
that is based on felt impulses or commitments will benefit from ju-
dicial  deference. Robust atheists who simply  believe that there is
no such thing as supernatural beings or forces, and who further be-
lieve that commands of action or inaction follow from their nonbe-
lief, will receive comparable  judicial deference. But where nonbe-
lievers  plausibly  admit  a  solely  rational  connection  between
particular  practices  and  their  foundational  commitments,  courts
should feel freer to interrogate that connection than they do in tra-
ditional exemption cases.
Regarding (3),  the concern that harm to nonbelief might follow
from judicial examination  of exemption claims,  it is  important to
recognize that nonbelievers  would only risk harm to the same de-
gree that obviously secular  institutions of civil society  suffer from
court intrusion.  Courts  are  less hands-off toward  groups  like the
Boy Scouts than they are toward religious congregations-they  in-
vestigate  their  exemption  claims  "to  a  limited extent"2"°  whereas
they defer to religious claims  almost completely. While in theory
this difference could incentivize  nonbelievers to make  claims  that
seem  less  susceptible  to judicial  examination-perhaps  because
they are grounded in inaccessible  value commitments-in practice
that would require a pretty sophisticated ex ante understanding of
legal  doctrine  that  ordinary  nonbelievers  are  not  likely to  have.
2051 do not subscribe  to the common but wrongheaded juxtaposition of faith and
reason,  according  to  which  religious  beliefs  are  inherently or always nonrational,
while atheist and agnostic commitments never are. My point is narrower: whereas one
common justification for the hands-off doctrine has been that believers'  claims that
conduct is religiously required are not subject to rational evaluation and therefore not
suitable for judicial scrutiny, wherever nonbelievers plausibly admit that the connec-
tion between their core commitments and particular conduct is purely a rational mat-
ter that anyone can evaluate, courts have greater latitude to question whether some-
one's nonbelief really requires a free-exercise exemption from a general law.
2"B'o y Scouts of Am. v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640, 650 (2000).
207I d. at 650-51 (writing that "it is not the role of the courts" to reject a group's val-
ues because they are irrational or inconsistent).1162  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
And courts so far have not worried too much that the greater def-
erence  they extend  to  exemption  claims  by  traditional  believers
will push all expressive associations to claim a religious grounding
for their exemption claims. Consequently, worrisome  harm to non-
believers is not likely to result.
Finally, on (4) and (5),  American  political authorities have not
historically  carved out the same zone  of privacy  or jurisdictional
autonomy  for  secular  practitioners  and  organizations  that  they
have for conventional believers and their congregations. Put differ-
ently, there is no long American tradition of a separation of nonbe-
lief and state. 8 That difference may be historically contingent, but
it is nevertheless  persistent. While  some  of the  American history
toward nonbelievers  is  discriminatory  and unworthy  of legal  re-
spect, the longstanding distinction between religious and obviously
secular associations  seems free of bigotry-and there  is no appar-
ent reason why courts cannot differentiate  between objectionable
and unobjectionable aspects of that tradition."  If, however, judicial
scrutiny of nonbelievers'  claims came to be directed  by antipathy
toward atheists or agnostics, that would be  a reason to hew even
more closely  to a hands-off  approach that  is quite  similar to the
familiar one for recognizable religions.
In short,  one  legitimate  distinction  between  nonbelievers  and
traditional religious observers is that courts may have greater lati-
tude to question at least certain claims that practices are demanded
by nonbelief itself and therefore  are  eligible for free-exercise  ex-
emptions. Some courts are already applying just this sort of skepti-
cism. For example, Judge Wood refused to credit an inmate's claim
that weekly study groups were essential to the practice of his athe-
ism.210 This brings claims  by nonbelievers into line with  claims by
208I am grateful to Douglas Laycock for suggesting this formulation, with which he
nevertheless may well disagree.
20 Some nonbelievers may view this difference in treatment as simple discrimina-
tion, and they may point out that tradition alone could not justify disadvantageous
government behavior toward other minorities-nonwhite people, for instance, or gay
men and lesbians. My response is that while antagonistic discrimination toward non-
believers is  unconstitutional,  even though it may  be longstanding  and  widespread,
there are certain distinctions between religious actors and others that are not based in
that type of antipathy and that courts may take into account. Not every American in-
tuition that believers and nonbelievers are differently situated is driven by a discrimi-
natory purpose and lacks a justifiable basis.
"' Kaufman v. McCaughtry, 419 F.3d 678, 683 (7th Cir. 2005).20111 Nonbelievers 1163
people with  deeply held  secular commitments,  at least  in this re-
spect. Assertions by nonbelievers should be examined in much the
same way. Yet it is important to reiterate that where nonbelievers
do object to regulations because of convictions that are in fact inte-
gral to their nonbelief-something  that is increasingly possible  to
imagine-then  courts  should  give  their  exemption  claims  equal
weight  and  careful  consideration,  under both  constitutional  and
statutory religious freedom provisions.
My approach to the problem of exemptions for nonbelievers  dif-
fers from those of both Laycock  and  Greenawalt.  It shares  Lay-
cock's  general  commitment  to  evenhandedness,  agreeing  that
many nonbelievers will be eligible for presumptive relief from gen-
eral laws."' Yet at certain points it resists the conclusion that non-
belief should be treated in exactly the same way as religion. With
regard to exemptions, it gives courts room to more closely examine
whether exemption claims by certain nonbelievers concern conduct
that is integral to their nonbelief"'
Greenawalt's  argument  contains  an  ambiguity  that  makes  it
slightly more difficult to assess. On the one hand, he seems to sug-
gest that nonbelievers should not enjoy exemptions, even for prac-
tices required by nonbelief as such. "Unless atheism is a religion,"
he says, "atheists  do not have free exercise rights that are equal in
all respects  with those of religious believers."'  Someone who be-
lieved  that  compulsory  school  attendance  after the  eighth grade
conflicted with  his or her atheism, for example, would not neces-
sarily  win the  same sort  of free  exercise  protection  that was  ex-
tended in Yoder."' For him, exemptions should not all be treated in
the same way, and the principles of equality that govern may allow
2" Laycock, supra note 1, at 335-36; cf. Laycock, supra note 182, at 170-71 (arguing
that exemptions should only be extended to nonbelievers who hold their convictions
with "religious intensity").
212S o while Laycock rightly says that government "should not decree that anyone
who crosses the line [between belief and nonbelief] forfeits his right to conscientious
objection and loses protection for his deepest moral commitments,"  there is a differ-
ence in how courts look at exemption claims by theists and some atheists-a differ-
ence that reflects the different epistemology of at least some forms of nonbelief, as
well as the peculiar place of religion as such in American legal, political, and social
traditions. Laycock, supra note 1, at 336.
2131 Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 150.
2  Id. Greenawalt does say that they would receive conscience-based protection, but
again I leave that more complicated issue to one side here.1164 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
courts to extend some relief only to believers2.15 On the other hand,
Greenawalt may be relying on the assumption that few commands
or  prohibitions  on  action will  flow  from nonbelief  itself. In the
schooling example,  for instance, he emphasizes that public educa-
tion  after the eighth grade  is not religious-the  implication being
that any objection to it must be independent of atheism. 6 So, it is
difficult to tell whether he is addressing exemption claims that flow
from nonbelief as such.
Either way, my position is distinct from his. If Greenawalt thinks
that nonbelievers  will  seldom claim exemptions  for practices  that
flow directly from their core beliefs, but that when they  do make
such claims they should enjoy the same protections as ordinary be-
lievers, I differ in two ways: I believe it is becoming easier to imag-
ine such claims, and I think courts should not defer to every one of
them  quite as readily  as  they do  to familiar  religious  exemption
claims. And if he is arguing  that even practices that are indisputa-
bly connected to nonbelief deserve  some lower level of protection,
I think it is difficult to justify weaker protection in those few situa-
tions where practices are found to be demanded by nonbelief itself
and therefore the analogy to core religion cases is strong.
If the law governing exemptions from general laws presents one
place where judicial treatment of atheists and agnostics should be
somewhat distinct from that of familiar theists, doctrine concerning
church autonomy provides another example.
C. Church Autonomy
An interesting and increasingly important area of religious free-
dom law preserves the autonomy of religious institutions with re-
spect to the government. This law differs from standard free exer-
cise  and  nonestablishment  doctrine in significant  respects, and it
has generated interest among scholars. 7 To what degree is it spe-
215I d. at 151.
216 Id. at 150. On the other hand, he does imagine that requiring everyone to attend
high school could be "at odds with someone's atheism," and he allows that their ob-
jection to truancy laws could somehow flow from nonbelief itself.
217S ee Richard W. Garnett, Religious Liberty, Church Autonomy, and the Structure
of Freedom, in Christianity and Human Rights: an Introduction 267 (John Witte, Jr.
& Frank S. Alexander eds., 2010); Mark DeWolfe Howe, Foreword: Political Theory
and the Nature of Liberty, 67 Harv. L. Rev. 91, 94 (1953); Richard W. Garnett, Do2011]  Nonbelievers  1165
cific to religious institutions, as opposed to organizations of nonbe-
lievers?  My  answer  is  that  the best justifications  for  the church
autonomy  doctrine-assuming  that  good  reasons  exist218-apply
more weakly to at least some organizations of nonbelievers.
Central to the church autonomy  doctrine is the "ministerial  ex-
emption" or "ministerial exception" to employment laws.219 Courts
have held that church employers need not observe antidiscrimina-
tion  laws  when  they  make  decisions  regarding  the  employment
Churches Matter? Towards an Institutional Understanding of the Religion Clauses,
53 Viii. L. Rev. 273, 274 (2008); Paul Horwitz, Churches as First Amendment Institu-
tions: Of Sovereignty and Spheres, 44 Harv. C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 79, 83-84 (2009); Ira C.
Lupu & Robert W. Tuttle, Secular Government, Religious People 1-3 (unpublished
book manuscript, on file with the Virginia Law Review Association).
assume here that there are good reasons for the church autonomy doctrine in its
2181 
current form. My concern is the relative legal status of nonbelievers. If it turns out
that the existence  or extent of the doctrine cannot  be sustained even for religious
groups, that would only strengthen the conclusion that it should not benefit nonbe-
lieving institutions.
219I  do  not focus on another  line  of cases that contributes  to church autonomy,
namely those that govern internecine property disputes. Typically, these cases involve
an  ownership  conflict between  a breakaway  parish  and the  larger ecclesial  body.
Where a congregation is part of a larger denominational organization, with which it is
"more or less intimately connected"  by internal church government, courts have de-
ferred to the ruling of the highest ecclesial tribunal. Watson v. Jones, 80 U.S. 679, 726
(1871); see also Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church, 393 U.S. 440, 449 (1969)  (sug-
gesting a grounding in the "First Amendment");  Kedroff v. St. Nicholas Cathedral,
344 U.S. 94, 107 (1952) (indicating that the rule of deference is grounded in the Free
Exercise Clause). This rule has been applied to internecine disputes outside the prop-
erty context as well. See Serbian E. Orthodox Diocese v. Milivojevich, 426 U.S. 696,
698 (1976) (prohibiting state courts from intervening in the removal of a bishop by the
governing body of a hierarchical church). Later decisions allow state courts to adopt a
"neutral  principles approach,"  under which judges may resolve internal disputes if
they can do so in purely  secular legal  terms, without resorting to theological pre-
cepts-otherwise, courts defer to the determination of the highest ecclesial authority.
Jones v. Wolf, 443 U.S. 595, 602-03 (1979).
Other sorts of cases arguably could be included in the church autonomy category as
well. For example, courts reject claims based on "clergy malpractice" on the ground
that judges lack the competence to "articulate and apply objective standards of care
for the communicative content of clergy counseling." Horwitz, supra note 217, at 123
(internal quotation marks omitted). Finally, although religious organizations  are ex-
empt from taxation only alongside  other nonprofit organizations,  see Walz v. Tax
Comm'n, 397 U.S. 664, 680 (1970) (upholding the exemption against an Establishment
Clause challenge), they do enjoy special tax benefits as a statutory matter. In particu-
lar, churches are exempt from onerous procedural requirements that other nonprofit
organizations must meet. See 26 U.S.C. § 6033(a)(3) (2006) (exempting churches from
ordinary tax return filing requirements).1166 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
status of ministers and  other religious leaders.22° Remarkably,  the
exemption  applies  not  only  where  an  employment  decision  de-
pends on the interpretation of religious doctrine-say, a theologi-
cal  determination  that  women  should  not  be  hired  as  Roman
Catholic priests-but even where  an adverse employment decision
is taken for purely non-theological reasons.22' In fact, almost every
case has involved a church that disavowed discrimination and pur-
ported to be acting on other grounds, such as poor performance.222
And even in those cases, courts have refused to get involved. This
wide  scope  makes the ministerial  exemption more powerful than
the protection from antidiscrimination laws that secular expressive
associations  receive,  because  it  works  even  where  the  church
makes no attempt to show that its discrimination is demanded by
its core beliefs.23 Moreover, its very existence today is notable, be-
cause the  Court's decision in Employment Division v. Smith pur-
ported  to  eliminate  free-exercise  relief  from  general  laws,  pre-
sumably  including  antidiscrimination  statutes  that  apply
evenhandedly to religious and  nonreligious employers. '  And yet
20 Antidiscrimination  statutes themselves  often exempt religious  employers from
bans on discrimination on the basis of religion. See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-1(a) (2006)
(Title VII). The ministerial exemption doctrine also allows them to select clergy on
other grounds, such as sex or gender. For a general discussion and critique, see Caro-
line Mala Corbin, Above the Law? The Constitutionality of the Ministerial Exemp-
tion from Antidiscrimination Law, 75 Fordham L. Rev. 1965 (2007).
221F or citations, see supra note 146.
..I.ra  C. Lupu & Robert W. Tuttle, Courts, Clergy, and Congregations:  Disputes
Between Religious Institutions and Their Leaders, 7 Geo. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 119, 127-
28 (2009).
223F or further discussion of the special protections that religious organizations  en-
joq, as compared to secular voluntary associations, see supra Section II.C.
Some resolve this tension by arguing that the exemption is rooted in the Estab-
lishment Clause. See Lupu & Tuttle, supra note 222, at 122-23. Another way out is to
note that the Smith Court itself cited general church autonomy decisions approvingly.
494 U.S. 872, 877 (1990). Dicta in an earlier case, not overruled by Smith, arguably
supports the exemption as well. See Corp. of the Presiding Bishop v. Amos, 483 U.S.
327, 336 (1987)  ("[I]t is a significant burden on a religious organization to require it,
on pain of substantial liability,  to predict which of its activities a secular court will
consider religious."). For an argument that Smith actually provides support for the
broad understanding of the ministerial exemption, because it supports a conception of
religious freedom for the individual that presupposes and requires the support of a
religious community, see Kathleen A. Brady, Religious Organizations and Free Exer-
cise: The Surprising Lessons of Smith, 2004 BYU L. Rev. 1633, 1636, 1677-79.20111 Nonbelievers 1167
the ministerial  exemption rule has persisted after Smith."5 A final
feature is that the exemption is a creature of lower courts, although
it  almost  certainly  would be embraced  by  a  majority  of justices
serving  on  the current  Supreme  Court.1  6  Together  with  related
doctrines governing church property and other matters, the minis-
terial  exemption  articulates  a  type  of special  protection  for reli-
gious organizations that could be called institutional, jurisdictional,
or structural.
It is not clear that nonbelievers  ought to enjoy a ministerial ex-
emption. To see  this,  consider the  doctrine's justifications.  First,
the Court has said that judges are incompetent to adjudicate  reli-
gious questions-in part because  those questions  are not suscepti-
ble to rational resolution-and therefore courts should defer to re-
ligious  authorities on whether  a candidate  or employee  conforms
to theological teachings."7 For example, an official should not ques-
tion  the  claim  of orthodox  Jews  or  Roman  Catholics  that  only
women may serve as clergy for reasons rooted in scripture and the-
ology. But that reasoning applies somewhat more weakly to nonbe-
lievers.  After  all,  certain  nonbelievers  adhere  only  to  principles
that are fully accessible to outsiders-in fact, limiting themselves to
rationality is close to the whole point for these particular types of
skeptics.28 To the degree that judicial deference  depends  on con-
siderations  of rationality  and competence,  it  does not  apply  per-
fectly to every type of nonbeliever.
A second justification  explains situations where  a religious  em-
ployer does not explicitly discriminate on religious grounds (it may
..F or a recent example, see Alcazar v. Corp. of the Catholic Archbishop, 627 F.3d
1288 (9th Cir. 2010) (en banc). The ministerial exemption likely has constitutional sta-
tus, though some courts have grounded it in employment discrimination statutes. See,
e.g., Schleicher v. Salvation Army, 518 F.3d 472, 475 (7th Cir. 2008). Some courts have
refused to extend it to cases of sexual harassment. See, e.g., Elvig v. Calvin Presbyte-
rian Church, 375 F.3d 951, 969 (9th Cir. 2004).
226T he Supreme Court will soon have an opportunity to pass on the ministerial ex-
emption. See EEOC v. Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical  Lutheran Church and Sch., 597
F.3d 769 (6th Cir. 2010), cert. granted, 131 S. Ct. 1783 (2011).
227 Watson v. Jones, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 679, 729 (1871). Horwitz argues that to even
allow courts to determine whether an employment decision is made for religious rea-
sons would involve them in determinations for which "the government lacks the data
of judgment." Horwitz, supra note 217, at 119 (quoting Abraham Kuyper).
This is similar to the point that I made in the last section  with respect to the
"hands-off" rule for free-exercise exemptions.1168  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
even disavow such  bias),  but takes  an adverse  employment  deci-
sion for other reasons, such as poor job performance. An employee
might charge that the stated reason, inadequate  performance,  was
a pretext for illegal discrimination. One reason to defer to the con-
gregation  is  that  officials  cannot  capably  or  fairly  figure  out
whether a clergyperson was performing well spiritually. Doing so is
not only beyond their abilities, but could involve favoring one de-
nomination's  sense of spiritual qualifications  over another's.229 In-
terestingly, this rationale does not extend to plainly secular associa-
tions-courts  do  not  hesitate  to  investigate  claims  of  pretext
against  them, even  where  the  group is  organized  around  deeply
held values. My sense is that at least some organizations of nonbe-
lievers will more closely resemble secular voluntary associations in
this regard: investigating a claim of pretext will not involve incom-
petence  or impermissible bias. Their assertions  that they took ac-
tion  against  a leader on nondiscriminatory  grounds can be evalu-
ated by courts  and other  administrators competently  and without
communicating an official view that amounts to an establishment.
In  other  cases,  however,  courts  may  not  be  able  to  say  fairly
whether  a particular  leader was, for example, sufficiently commit-
ted to the nonexistence of God or a particular version of skepticism
about the  supernatural,  and in  those  cases judges  could  suspend
employment laws.
A third reason is that it would be inappropriate for government
to interfere with the intimate relationship between a congregation
and its clergy. Government simply should not insert itself into that
connection, even to investigate  whether  illegal discrimination  oc-
curred, because  doing so may well fray the essential bond of trust
between clergy and flock.23  This too is a reason for state officials to
stay out of an employment decision, including in cases where there
is no claim that the decision was taken for explicit theological or
doctrinal reasons. And yet here as well, secular voluntary organiza-
tions do not enjoy the same insulation  absent some claim that ex-
pressive  commitments drove the organization to discriminate (and
even then  the  level  of protection  is  different,  as I  have  shown).
229S ee 1 Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 380; Ira C. Lupu & Robert Tuttle, The Distinc-
tive Place of Religious Entities in Our Constitutional Order, 47 Vill. L. Rev. 37, 91-92
(2002).
230S ee Petruska v. Gannon Univ., 462 F.3d 294, 306-07 (3d Cir. 2006).2011] Nonbelievers 1169
Some number of nonbeliever congregations have relationships with
their leaders that are closer to the ordinary voluntary associations,
in the sense that only the ordinary sense of loyalty exists between
employer and employee, and not the more profound spiritual bond
that current doctrine seeks to shield from government intervention.
In sum, courts should hesitate to extend the ministerial exemp-
tion to every organization of nonbelievers. Factors that they might
consider include:
"  Whether the organization  justifies the employment  deci-
sion on grounds  that are  integral to its core value com-
mitments,  about  which  courts  may lack competence,  or
whether it gives reasons that are accessible and subject to
judicial evaluation;
"  Whether  investigating  a  claim  of  pretext  will  require
courts  to favor some  commitments over others in a way
that amounts to an establishment-for example, assessing
a leader's views in a way that endorses a particular vari-
ety of nonbelief;
"  Whether the community has a relationship with its leader
that is profound in the way that a spiritual connection is,
or whether its leader provides guidance that is more simi-
lar to that found in an secular voluntary association.
Considerations like these can isolate differences between a particu-
lar nonbelieving organization  and the typical church that speak to
the justifications  that underlie  the  ministerial  exemption. If they
do, then courts should hesitate to suspend employment laws.
Without more, however, this approach may be somewhat unsat-
isfying.  Why  exactly  should  recognizable  religious  sects  enjoy
greater  institutional  autonomy  than do  ordinary  secular  associa-
tions, and why are some groups of nonbelievers  closer to the  lat-
ter? The best response draws on the peculiar place of familiar relig-
ions in American history and traditions. According to this way of
thinking,  a  longstanding  custom in  western  politics  differentiates
the  church  from  government,  so  that  each  enjoys  institutional,
structural, or even jurisdictional autonomy within a realm. Differ-
ent scholars have traced this idea through different lines of inheri-
tance  all the  way up through American constitutionalism, noting1170  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
significant alternations along the way.23' They have argued that the
idea  of congregational  autonomy  or  sovereignty  has  influenced
doctrines  concerning  ministerial exemptions  and church property
at the very least, if not religious freedom law more generally.232 The
idea here is that churches  traditionally have occupied  a sphere  of
activity in which government should not have a say.
Two features of this inheritance cast doubt on whether it applies
to nonbelievers  and their institutions. First, the original rationales
for the institutional or structural  approach were  often themselves
religious or theological.3' If theological grounds for church auton-
omy still drive the doctrine today-as they arguably do, if only im-
plicitly-those reasons are not available to nonbelievers  who wish
to argue for a similar measure of institutional autonomy.
Second, much of the intellectual and political history supporting
church autonomy is specific to recognizable  forms of American re-
ligion. Throughout the nation's history, people have  treated reli-
gious institutions  as  structurally distinct-including  in  clergy  em-
ployment.  This  may not  be  principled, but it may  nevertheless
comprise a fixed  and unobjectionable  feature  of American  social
meanings and political practices.35 Nothing as strong as the minis-
terial exemption  applies to  secular voluntary  associations,  for  in-
stance, even  though  some  of them  enjoy a more  limited form of
231S ee, e.g.,  Carl H. Esbeck, Dissent and Disestablishment: The Church-State  Set-
tlement in the Early American Republic, 2004 BYU L. Rev. 1385, 1392; Garnett, Do
Churches Matter?,  supra note 217, at 295 (focusing on the Roman Catholic idea of
libertas ecclesiae, especially as articulated by John Courtney Murray); Horwitz, supra
note 217, at 83-84, 100-01 (tracing the idea through Abraham Kuyper, the American
Puritans, and others); Douglas Laycock, Church Autonomy Revisited, 7 Geo. J.L. &
Pub. Pol'y 253, 258 (2009) (emphasizing historical arguments); McConnell, supra note
129, at 17 (tracing the idea of separate spheres for church and state from Luther and
Calvin, through Isaac Backus and John Locke, to Jefferson).
Garnett, supra note 198, at 848-49; Horwitz, supra note 217, at 115-23.
233H  orwitz, supra note 217, at 94-95.
234S ee McConnell,  supra  note 129,  at 21-22 ("The  special  character  of religion
within the ranks of 'civil society' institutions is based, in large part, on Western his-
torical experience.").
" See Watson v. Jones, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 679, 728-29 (1871)  ("[In this country, the]
right to organize voluntary religious associations to assist in the expression and dis-
semination of any religious doctrine, and to create tribunals for the decision of con-
troverted questions of faith within the association, and for the ecclesiastical  govern-
ment of all the individual members, congregations,  and officers within  the general
association, is unquestioned.").2011] Nonbelievers 1171
protection  against  antidiscrimination  laws  under  existing  First
Amendment principles.236 And few people would push to erase that
distinction and allow all secular voluntary associations the full de-
gree  of latitude  in  hiring that  churches  and  synagogues  enjoy.
Why should an ordinary charity be able to reject all women appli-
cants for its leadership positions, for example, even when it admits
that gender discrimination is in no way integral to its key  tenets?
And yet that is  exactly the sort of autonomy  that virtually  every
circuit  has  extended  to  religious  groups.  Push  against  it  as  we
might,  there  seems  to  be  something  distinctive  in  the  way  that
Americans have long treated religious  organizations  in actual po-
litical and legal practice.38
Should atheist  and  agnostic organizations be treated more  like
churches  in this scheme or more  like secular voluntary  organiza-
tions? My approach above holds that it would be inappropriate to
extend the ministerial  exemption to every organization  of nonbe-
lievers so that they all would be able to employ their leaders free of
antidiscrimination  concerns.  Whether  that  is  because  courts  are
more competent to assess  atheist motivations  for employment  de-
cisions, or whether it is because  they can do so without assessing
spiritual  qualifications,  or whether  it  is  because  they  can do  so
without interfering with anything like the  special relationship  be-
tween congregations and clergy, or whether it is because there is an
underlying American conception of church autonomy that has cus-
tomarily  been  limited  to  recognizable  denominations-in  any
'  See supra Section II.C.
'37Nor would proponents of church autonomy necessarily wish it to be unified with
the law of expressive associations. See, e.g., Richard W. Garnett, The Freedom of the
Church, 4 J. Cath. Soc. Thought 59, Notre Dame Legal Studies Research Paper No.
06-12, at 18  (2007), available  at  http://ssrn.com/abstract=916336  ("[I]t  would seem
crucial to the success of any proposed translation or incorporation of the libertas ec-
clesiae principle  into our law that churches not be assimilated  and reduced to such
[voluntary]  associations.")  [hereinafter  Garnett, Freedom];  see also Garnett, supra
note 217, at 288 ("Religious institutions are more than voluntary associations with a
cause.") (alterations  and quotation marks omitted); Garnett, Freedom, supra at 23
("[I]n the end, the freedom of 'expressive association' is not enough....  because the
claims at the heart of the libertas ecclesiae principle are, for lack of a better word,
'biger' than those animating the free-speech cases.").
SEisgruber  & Sager, supra note 46, at 62 ("[M]ost people-including many  who
lament  these  discriminatory  practices-believe  that  church  policies  about  clergy
should be constitutionally exempt from anti-discrimination statutes.").1172  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
event, the rule will not be available to every organization of nonbe-
lievers. Many  skeptics  have working relationships  with their lead-
ers that are close to those of ordinary secular nonprofits. It would
be hard to justify extending full congregational  autonomy to them
but not to indisputably secular voluntary associations.
Of course, this is a contestable conclusion-some will challenge
it. Yet  it  is more  important to win  agreement  on the method  of
reaching it: a multifaceted  analysis  that leaves  room for courts to
sensibly  find  that  nonbelievers  are  similarly  situated  to familiar
sects only in some settings.  The next Section considers nonestab-
lishment,  another area where judges  may sensibly distinguish  be-
tween nonbelievers and familiar religious practitioners.
D. Nonestablishment
Laycock raises the unhappy  prospect of an established  atheism
along the lines of the Soviet Union, and he argues that "[t]he  only
sensible interpretation is that this would be an establishment of re-
ligion-an establishment of a certain set of views about religion, of
a certain set of answers to the fundamental religious questions.""
Is that right? In this Section, I address both government endorse-
ment and public funding, and I argue that although Laycock's view
reflects an important value, state support for nonbelievers  may be
permissible in at least some situations.
1.  Government Expression
Imagine that a progressive  local  government-say, in Vermont
or northern California-erected  a sign in the town square that de-
clared "Good Without God"  (an atheist slogan).2" This scenario is
politically unlikely but perhaps not completely outside the realm of
possibility2.4'
..L.a ycock, supra note 1, at 330.
240O  r think of a town that erects a winter solstice display during the holiday season,
without displaying other seasonal symbols. Cf. Wells v. City of Denver, 257 F.3d 1132,
1153 (10th Cir. 2001)  (turning away an atheist's challenge to a municipality's refusal
to include a winter solstice symbol in its holiday display).
24,F riends from Vermont tell me that this is conceivable. Cf. Linnemeir v. Bd. of
Trs., 260 F.3d 757, 759 (7th Cir. 2001)  (remarking that a state university could not
adopt a policy of promoting atheism).2011] Nonbelievers 1173
To my mind, it presents a close question for constitutional law.
On the one hand, it could be argued that this municipal policy cuts
against the longstanding American value, iterated in the case law,
of government  neutrality on questions of faith. Signs that endorse
atheism impermissibly take positions on core religious matters, ac-
cording to this view.42 Moreover,  a local  government that favors
atheism also implicitly disfavors  theism, and it thereby risks rele-
gating traditional theists to second-class status within the political
community  in  that  city  or  town.243  Even  avowed  atheists  might
agree that  the Establishment  Clause prohibits a  town policy that
favors their position.2 They may see this as the flip side of the con-
' 
stitutional principle  that ought to prohibit the national motto, "In
God We Trust.25 For separationists like them, a town's endorse-
ment  of  atheism  would be prohibited,  whether  under  an under-
standing of nonestablishment that features neutrality or under one
that features equal citizenship.
22 1 Greenawalt, supra note 1, at 151 ("Every government sponsorship of the truth
of atheism, like every sponsorship of positive religious views, can be treated as for-
bidden. It should be so treated.").
See, e.g., Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668, 688 (1984) (O'Connor, J., concurring)
24 
("Endorsement  sends a message  to nonadherents  that they  are outsiders, not full
members of the political  community...."). From  time to  time, courts have  com-
mented in dicta that an effort to cleanse the public sphere of references to religion
could constitute an "establishment" of atheism-something they have assumed would
be unconstitutional. See, e.g., Lee v. Weisman, 505 U.S. 577, 598 (1992); Newdow v.
Roberts, 603 F.3d 1002, 1016 (D.C. Cir. 2010)  (noting the argument that "stripping
government ceremonies of any references to God or religious expression would re-
flect unwarranted hostility to religion and would, in effect, 'establish' atheism").
"' When I delivered a lecture at a recent meeting of NYC Atheists, a leading local
organization  of nonbelievers,  I  posed  this  hypothetical  and  asked  the  audience
whether a town policy endorsing atheism ought to be constitutional. It was interesting
to me, though not dispositive, that a large majority of attendees thought the atheist
display would be unconstitutional. Agreement on this point fell short of a consensus,
however.
..E.v en people who think the national motto is permissible might oppose the atheist
sign. A special history supports the federal government's association with the phrase,
and that history blunts its impact. See McCreary County v. ACLU, 545 U.S. 844, 893
(2005)  (Scalia, J.,  dissenting) ("[T]he  Establishment  Clause permits  [the]  disregard
of... devout atheists."). On similar grounds, several members of the Supreme Court
suggested that the phrase "under God" in the Pledge of Allegiance does not consti-
tute  an impermissible  endorsement  for various  reasons,  including because  such  a
phrase works mostly to solemnize public places and occasions rather than to alienate
nonbelievers.  See Elk Grove Unified Sch. Dist. v. Newdow, 542 U.S. 1, 31  (2004)
(Rehnquist, C.J., concurring in the judgment); id. at 36 (O'Connor, J., concurring).1174 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
On  the  other  hand,  the  "Good  Without  God"  sign  could  be
viewed as permissible. It could be allowed under at least four dif-
ferent theories. First, people who think that nonestablishment pro-
tects  primarily  against  unequal  citizenship  might  point  out  that
resident believers can take comfort from the knowledge that they
form the majority in the nation  as a whole  and in virtually  every
state, if not in their particular town."6 It is difficult to believe that
mainstream Christians or Jews living in every such town would al-
ways occupy a subordinated political status as a result of the policy.
Citizenship is not purely isolated in that way.
Second, people who believe that mild endorsements  are consti-
tutional if they fall into a de minimis exception  to the normal neu-
trality rule  might  conclude  that believers in my hypothetical  are
not differently  positioned than nonbelievers  now are with respect
to the myriad mild expressions that currently exist on federal, state,
and local levels. Think again of the national motto and the Pledge
of Allegiance. If those endorsements fall under an exception to the
usual  rule  of equality  or neutrality,  a  similar  sort  of exception
should cover the "Good Without God" sign as well.247
Third, those who understand the Establishment Clause primarily
as  protection  for  liberty or  autonomy  for individuals would  take
comfort  from the fact that the town guarantees  full free  exercise
rights for believers (as we can assume it does).248 Given the history
and place of religion in America, members of mainline denomina-
tions are not likely to feel substantially constrained or burdened by
the mere presence of a sign endorsing atheism.
2  On the role of localism in Establishment Clause cases, see Ira C. Lupu & Robert
W. Tuttle, Federalism and Faith, 56 Emory L.J. 19, 60-105 (2006); Adam M. Samaha,
Endorsement Retires: From Religious Symbols to Anti-Sorting Principles, 2005 Sup.
Ct. Rev. 135; Richard C. Schragger, The Role of the Local in the Doctrine and Dis-
course of Religious Liberty, 117 Harv. L. Rev. 1810 (2004).
247A  gain, some have argued that the Pledge is in fact not religious at all, given, its
historical context.  See Newdow, 542 U.S. at 31 (Rehnquist,  C.J., concurring in the
judgment). They might view a sign like "Good Without God" as more theologically
divisive, given its different history. I find this position unconvincing, mostly because
the Pledge and similar mild endorsements are in fact viewed as both religious and di-
visive by leading nonbelievers, such as Newdow himself. See generally Corbin, supra
note 14 (arguing  that the constitutionality of mild endorsements ought to be evalu-
ated from the perspective of nonbelievers).
" See Lee, 505 U.S. at 606 (Kennedy, J.).2011] Nonbelievers 1175
Finally, jurisdictional  or structural theories  of nonestablishment
lean  heavily  on the  contingent history of religion in Western  na-
tions. 9 Part of what makes these theories effective is their founda-
tion in the traditions of European and American theology and poli-
tics.  Arguably, that history  does not require  a  similar  separation
between  government  and  atheism  or  agnosticism.  For  instance,
people like Dawkins are likely to say that their arguments do not
rest  on  ultimate  grounds.  If separationist  traditions  in America
turn on a commitment to keeping officials from making or denying
transcendent claims-a possible albeit contestable  interpretation-
then it would be acceptable for them to endorse Dawkins's reason-
ing.  More  generally,  too, a  town's  display  of the  atheist symbol
would not seem to present the same sort of entanglement concerns
that follow support for recognized churches.2  Now of course there
is a way for jurisdictional theorists to come out the other way: they
could point to the fact that science has been an integral part of the
conflict  between  religion  and  government  for  almost  its  entire
western  history. Yet it is not utterly unimaginable  that a jurisdic-
tional or structural approach to nonestablishment would allow this
hypothetical town to declare its admiration for atheism or secular
humanism.
In sum, there is more to be said for permitting a town's display
of an  atheist slogan  under the Establishment  Clause  than many
might suspect. Whatever the dangers that nonestablishment is de-
signed to avoid, and whatever the values that it promotes, it is con-
ceivable that local endorsement of nonbelief could have low costs
under such circumstances.  It could even  have pragmatic benefits.
In  particular,  allowing  local  governments  freedom  of  self-
determination in this area could do something to blunt the outrage
that atheists and agnostics feel toward national and  state-level en-
dorsements  of mild religiosity. Even if displaying such  a slogan is
not permissible, as most people probably will think, drawing atten-
tion to the modest costs and possible benefits of allowing such ex-
" See, e.g., Lupu & Tuttle, supra note 217, at 15-20 (drawing on the history of the
Western idea of jurisdictional separation).
2501 owe this insight to a conversation with Rick Garnett.1176 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
pression-regardless  of  which  theory  of  nonestablishment  is  at
play-may make it somewhat more thinkable.25'
The  debate  over  government  expression  matters  more  (and
plays out differently)  in the  context of public schooling, but it is
also harder to imagine nonbelief being favored there. Teaching the
truth of atheism or agnosticism  as such in primary and secondary
schools would be unconstitutional, just as communicating the truth
of religious propositions would be. That is so even though endors-
ing, say, the benefits of democracy is unproblematic.  Children are
impressionable,  and public schools therefore  have special  obliga-
tions  and  responsibilities.  Even  arguments  for  atheism  that  are
carefully grounded in scientific ways of thinking could not be pre-
sented to primary and secondary school students without skewing
the competition between religious and antireligious perspectives in
the wider society. Few will disagree with this conclusion.
Evolutionary  theory,  of course,  is  central  in  some  prominent
atheist systems and is famously opposed by some religions. Never-
theless,  teaching  that  theory  in  public  schools  need  not be  con-
nected either to belief or nonbelief. Obviously,  there are reasons
for teaching  evolution that most people  think are independent  of
ultimate  questions.  Therefore,  teaching  evolutionary  biology will
not normally raise serious constitutional questions2.52 I say normally
because  certain contemporary  atheists have made  the connection
between  evolution and  nonbelief even plainer and more essential
to their entire systems of thought. 3 Thus, teaching evolution may
now have the incidental effect of advantaging atheism and agnosti-
cism in the curricular struggle with creationism. Although that ef-
fect alone is not constitutionally significant, it could become so if it
were taught in a way that purposefully promotes nonbelief."4 And
" Conceivably, this approach could allow some local endorsement  of religious ex-
pressions, as well, particularly those of minority faiths. See generally Schragger, supra
note 246, at 1874-92. That topic lies outside the scope of this Article, which concerns
onl Y nonbelievers.
'  See, e.g., Smith v. Bd. of Sch. Comm'rs, 827 F.2d 684, 694 (11th Cir. 1987) (hold-
ing that use of secular textbooks in public schools did not establish secular humanism,
even assuming it was a religion).
23 See supra Section III.B (describing Dawkins's views).
Similarly, forbidding the teaching of evolution is forbidden because, or to the ex-
tent that, it rests on religious  motivations. Epperson  v. Arkansas, 393  U.S. 97, 103
(1968)  (striking down a prohibition on teaching evolution); 2 Greenawalt, supra note
76, at 141.2011] Nonbelievers 1177
the popularity of New Atheism makes that a little easier to imag-
ine, perhaps again in a progressive town with a majority of atheist
or agnostic citizens.255
2. Funding
Most  constitutional  doctrines  concerning  government  funding
now  require  only neutrality  between  religious  organizations  and
nonreligious  ones. Where  that is so, nonbelievers  may enjoy sup-
port to the same degree  as churches and secular nonprofit organi-
zations. For example, a voucher program could include schools run
by the Society for Ethical  Culture, even if children were  directly
exposed to atheist or agnostic ideas there.  If that seems odd, con-
sider the fact that voucher programs may allow parents to use pub-
lic funds at all religious schools,  including ones that include theo-
logical  instruction2.56  Moreover,  a  government  program  of "faith
based initiatives"  or "charitable  choice"  could support  atheist  or
humanist  social  service  providers  on the same terms as religious
ones.
Yet there  are  some ways in  which government cannot  support
religious  entities, even if the funding  is perfectly  evenhanded.  In
particular, direct  aid-money that flows  from the government  to
religious  entities  without  the  intervention  of  private  individual
choice-may not go to support religious activities, such as worship,
prayer, or religious instruction."'  That restriction applies not only
to  schools,  but to  all religious  organizations. 8  Notably, the  law
concerning direct aid was developed under the strong influence of
Justice  O'Connor.  It  therefore  represents  one important  area in
which constitutional doctrine may well shift now that she has re-
tired. But for now, at least, there are strict limits on direct aid to re-
ligious observance, even if perfect neutrality is observed.
255O  f course, it should be perfectly permissible to teach about atheism and agnosti-
cis2m56,Z  jeulsmt aans  ivt . isS tiom mteoacnhs- Habaorruits ,r e5l3ig6i oUn. Sa.n 6d3 9e,v 6e4n3 a-b4o4u (t2 t0h0e2o).logy.
257 Mitchell v. Helms, 530 U.S. 793, 857 (2000) (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judg-
ment) (controlling opinion) (adhering "to the rule that we have applied in the context
of textbook lending programs: To  establish a First Amendment  violation, plaintiffs
must prove that the aid in question actually is, or has been, used for religious pur-
poses").
8Id. at 843-44 (raising the specter of direct aid to churches, even if on a neutral ba-
'1178 Virginia Law Review [Vol. 97:1111
Should  that restriction  on direct  aid  also prohibit government
funding  of nonbelievers'  "observance"?  Reasonable  people  may
answer differently. To the extent that schools run by the Ethical
Culture Society (for example)  teach a form of nonbelief that is in
direct competition with beliefs and practices inculcated by religious
schools, the answer might well be yes. Equivalents of all the dan-
gers of direct government support of religious indoctrination could
be  said to be present, including the  three  that Justice  O'Connor
identified:  that  government  could  be  seen  to  be  endorsing
[non]belief and relegating  others to a subordinate  status; that di-
rect aid used for the advancement  of [non]belief is not wholly in
control of private  individuals;  and that allowing  direct support  of
[nonbelievers']  schooling  could  open  the  door  to  direct  aid  for
[nonbelieving] organizations themselves.259 The obvious assumption
behind the last argument is that direct aid to organizations of non-
believers would be unconstitutional.
Yet it is reasonable to ask whether these justifications for the di-
rect aid rule really do apply forcefully  to nonbelievers.  Would di-
rect  funding  of  any  American  Humanist  Association  schools
(alongside  unaffiliated  ones) really cause religious  people  to feel
like  disfavored  members  of  every  political  community,  thereby
harming  equal  citizenship?  Conceivably,  inclusion  of  religious
schools in a direct aid program could generate such feelings among
nonbelievers  (or  separationists),  as  Justice  O'Connor  implied  it
would.2"  Under  contemporary  conditions,  however,  it  might  be
harder to imagine that including schools run by atheists or agnos-
tics in a direct aid program would have that effect-even in a local-
ity where nonbelievers outnumber traditional believers.
Other justifications for the direct aid rule also conceivably might
not apply to nonbelievers. Arguments exist on either side, and it is
at least possible to imagine  that some courts would not think that
the ban on direct aid to religious instruction in schools would apply
with  the same force  to neutral support of schools run by secular
humanists, for instance.
In sum, I have argued that nonestablishment  might allow more
room for mild government  endorsement  of nonbelief than many
259 Id.
2 Id. at 842-43.2011] Nonbelievers 1179
suspect,  particularly  endorsement  by  certain  small local  govern-
ments. In schools, however, teaching the truth of atheism or agnos-
ticism  ought  to be prohibited, just as  religious  instruction is.  Fi-
nally, there may be arguments for permitting direct aid to private
schools that instruct students in nonbelief, despite the ban on simi-
lar  aid  to  religious schools.  If  these  conclusions  seem  sound,  a
wholesale  approach to the problem of nonbelievers  will seem less
appropriate  even  within  nonestablishment  doctrine, just  as it  is
among broader categories of religious freedom law.
The  picture  that emerges  from this Part is  variegated.  Neither
treating nonbelievers just like familiar religious people nor reject-
ing that analogy altogether is satisfactory. Taking into account all
the principles and pragmatics involved in each area means that re-
sults will vary from rule to rule, as well as from situation to situa-
tion. Even people who disagree with one or another of the particu-
lar recommendations  that I have made may still accept this larger
point: nonbelievers  cannot sensibly be fit into the mold of religion
for all  areas of American  religious freedom  law, nor can they al-
ways be excluded from it.
CONCLUSION
Considering nonbelievers  may  suggest an answer  to an  impor-
tant contemporary critique. Several scholars have recently argued
that the entire project of protecting religious freedom is unsound-
in part because  of the  difficulty  of determining  the  scope  of the
concept of religion and in part because the persistent uniqueness of
religion in American law is indefensible2.6  Courts are striking com-
promises that they cannot conceptually defend. Yet carefully con-
sidering the case of nonbelievers  indicates that there may be little
cause for worry. While  a polyvalent, piecemeal approach may re-
261 See, e.g., Sullivan, supra note 87, at 8 ("This book.., is about the impossibility of
religious  freedom ....  What is arguably impossible is justly enforcing laws granting
persons rights that are defined with respect to their religious beliefs or practices.");
Smith, supra note 87, at 1905-06 (arguing that modern secular discourse cannot justify
religion's legal distinctiveness, which nevertheless persists without a satisfying ration-
ale).1180  Virginia Law Review  [Vol. 97:1111
quire judgments that are irreducibly complex, the endeavor is not
necessarily  irrational or erratic. Courts can and do make  difficult
judgments like the ones required to  adjudicate  the religious free-
dom claims of nonbelievers.  Whether or not those judgments can
be accounted for by a "theory" of religious freedom-assuming for
the moment  that something  significant  turns  on that label-they
may well be reached in a manner that qualifies as both rational and
meaningfully legal.