CONTESTED VISIONS: 
  THE VALUE OF SYSTEMS THEORY FOR CORPORATE LAW 
By Tamara Belinfanti and Lynn Stout 
(forthcoming U. Pa. L. Rev. 2017) 
Despite the dominant role corporations play in our economy, culture, 
and  politics,  the  nature  and  purpose  of  corporations  remains  hotly 
contested.  This conflict was brought to the fore in the recent Supreme 
Court  opinions  in  Citizens  United  and  Hobby  Lobby.  Although  the 
prevailing narrative for the past quarter-century has been that corporations 
“belong” to shareholders and should pursue “shareholder value,” support 
for this approach, which has been justified as essential for managerial 
accountability, is eroding. It persists today primarily in the form of the 
argument that corporations should seek “long-term” shareholder value. 
Yet, as this Article shows, when shareholder value is interpreted to mean 
“long-term”  shareholder  value,  it  no  longer  offers  the  sought-after 
managerial accountability. 
What can? This Article argues that systems theory offers an answer. 
Systems  theory  is  a  well-developed  design  and  performance  measuring 
methodology  routinely  applied  in  fields  such  as  engineering,  biology, 
computer science, and environmental science. It provides an approach to 
understanding the nature and purpose of corporate entities that is not only 
consistent with elements of the many otherwise-conflicting visions of the 
corporation  that  have  been  developed,  but  also  with  important  and 
otherwise  difficult-to-explain  features  of  corporate  law  and  practice.  It 
offers proven methods for measuring corporate performance that recognize 
the possibility of multiple goals and the importance of sustainability. And it 
cautions that, by ignoring the lessons of systems theory, shareholder value 
thinking  may  have  encouraged  regulatory  and  policy  interventions  into 
corporate governance that are not only ineffective, but destructive. 
                                                           
 Professor of Law, New York Law School. 
 Distinguished Professor of Corporate and Business Law, Cornell Law School. The authors would 
like to thank Margaret Blair, David Ciepley, John Coffee, Einer Elhauge, Lisa Fairfax, Joseph 
Grundfest, Henry Hansmann, Lynn LoPucki, Dana Radcliffe, Roberta Romano, and Robert 
Thompson for their comments and suggestions, along with participants at workshops on and 
presentations of this paper given at Cornell Law School, the University of Chicago Law School, the 
University of Arizona Law School, the Annual Meeting of the American Association of Law Schools 
Business Associations Section, and the Annual Meeting of the Law and Society Association. CONTESTED VISIONS: 
  THE VALUE OF SYSTEMS THEORY FOR CORPORATE LAW 
 
Table of Contents 
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 3 
PART I. CONTESTED VISIONS AND THE ROLE OF SHAREHOLDER VALUE THEORY.. 8 
A. CONTESTED VISIONS ............................................................................... 8 
B. THE RISE AND EVOLUTION OF SHAREHOLDER VALUE THEORY .. 11 
C. WHY LONG-TERM SHAREHOLDER VALUE CANNOT BE USED TO 
HOLD MANAGERS ACCOUNTABLE: THE PROBLEM OF 
UNCERTAINTY ......................................................................................... 17 
PART II. THE SYSTEMS ALTERNATIVE ................................................................... 20 
A.  WHAT IS SYSTEMS THEORY? ................................................................ 20 
B.  SYSTEMS THEORY AND THE NATURE OF THE CORPORATION ...... 23 
C.  SYSTEMS THEORY AND THE QUESTION OF CORPORATE PURPOSE
 ................................................................................................................... 28 
D.  SYSTEMS THEORY AND THE PROBLEM OF MEASURING 
CORPORATE PERFORMANCE ............................................................... 34 
PART III. SYSTEMS THINKING IN CORPORATE PRACTICE AND CORPORATE LAW . 41 
A.  SYSTEMS THINKING IN CORPORATE MANAGEMENT ...................... 41 
B.  SYSTEMS THINKING IN CORPORATE LAW ......................................... 43 
C.   ON THE RISKS OF IGNORING SYSTEMS ............................................. 47 
CONCLUSION ........................................................................................................... 52 
 CONTESTED VISIONS: 
  THE VALUE OF SYSTEMS THEORY FOR CORPORATE LAW 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Any  attempt to  answer the question  “what  is  a corporation?” is  an 
exercise in negotiating contested visions of the nature and purpose of the 
corporate form. Some experts say the corporation is a grantee of the state 
and should serve a public purpose (concession theory). Others describe the 
1
corporation as a separate legal entity with the ability to hold property and 
enter  contracts  in  its  own  name  (entity  theory).  Still  others  argue  the 
2
corporation  is  not  “real”  but  rather  is  a  nexus  of  privately-negotiated 
contracts (nexus of contract theory). Or perhaps a corporation should be 
3
viewed as an aggregation of natural persons (aggregate theory) or relatedly, 
4
an aggregation of shareholder property (property theory) or specific assets 
5
(team production)?  
6
The recent twin U.S. Supreme Court cases of Citizens United v. FEC 
7
and Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. bring these contested visions of 
8
the nature and purpose of corporations into sharp focus. In Citizens United, 
Justice  Kennedy’s  opinion  for  the  majority  described  corporations  as 
“associations  of  citizens,  while  Justice  Steven’s  dissent  insisted  that 
9
corporations are not associations of people but legal entities that “have no 
consciences, no beliefs, no feelings, no thoughts, no desires.”  Stevens also 
10
observed there are multiple “recognized model[s]” of the corporate entity, 
including  the  state  grantee,  nexus  of  contracts,  and  team  production 
models.   In  Hobby  Lobby,  Justice  Alito  repeatedly  described  a 
11
corporation’s shareholders as its “owners,”  implying that a corporation is 
12
its shareholders’ property, while Justice Ginsberg’s dissent maintained that 
                                                           
1 See supra text accompanying note 41. 
2 See supra text accompanying notes 34-36. 
3 See supra text accompanying notes 39-40. 
4 See supra text accompanying notes 36-37. 
5 See supra text accompanying notes 52-58. 
6 See supra text accompanying notes 42-45. 
7 558 U.S. 310 (2010). 
8 134 S.Ct. 2751 (2014) 
9 558 U.S. at 354 
10 Id. at 466 
11 Id. at 465 n.72. 
12 134 S.Ct. at 2767, 2771, 2774, 2775.  
corporations were “artificial persons” separate from any individual  and 
13
further  noted  that  not  only  shareholders  but  also  workers  “sustain  the 
operations of” corporations.  In Citizens United, Justice Steven’s dissent 
14
spoke of corporate purpose in terms of “maximiz[ing] shareholder value”  
15
and “maximiz[ing] the returns on…shareholders’ investments.”  In Hobby 
16
Lobby,  Justice  Alito  expressed  a  different  view,  noting  that  “modern 
corporation law does not require for profit companies to maximize profits at 
the expense of everything else, and many do not do so.”  
17
This  judicial  disagreement  illustrates  the  clashes  perceived  to  exist 
among the various “recognized models” of the corporation that have been 
developed.  In  particular,  Anglo-American  corporate  scholarship  and 
corporate governance practice have been dominated for most of the past 
three  decades  by  a  “standard”  economic  account  that  assumes  that 
shareholders  own  and  ultimately  ought  to  control  corporations;  that 
shareholders’ principal interest is increasing their wealth; that the interests 
of other corporate constituencies, like employees and customers, should be 
protected primarily by contract and regulation; and that the market price of 
a  public  company’s  shares  is  the  principal  measure  of  shareholders’ 
wealth.   The  result  has  been  widespread  embrace  of  the  notion  that 
18
corporate  managers  should  seek  first  and  foremost  to  “maximize 
shareholder value,” a philosophy of corporate purpose that might be dubbed 
shareholder  value  theory.   As  the  Citizens  United  and  Hobby  Lobby 
19
opinions illustrate, however, this consensus seems to be falling apart as both 
the  standard  model  and  shareholder  value  theory  have  been  subject  to 
escalating  criticism.   Commentators  have  pointed  out  that  the  standard 
20
                                                           
13 Id.. at 2794. 
14 Id.at 2794. 
15 558 U.S. 64. 
16 Id. at  75. 
17 573 U.S. at 2771. 
18 A classic statement of the standard model can be found in Henry Hansmann & Reinier Kraakman, 
The End of History For Corporate Law, 89 GEO. L.J. 439, 447 (2000–2001)(standard model holds 
that “ultimate control of the corporation should rest with the shareholder class; the managers of the 
corporation should be charged with the obligation to manage the corporation in the interests of its 
shareholders; other corporate constituencies, such as creditors, employees, suppliers, and customers, 
should have their interests protected by contractual and regulatory means rather than through 
participation in corporate governance; … and the market value of the publicly traded corporation’s 
shares is the principal measure of the shareholders’ interests.”)  In other work, Hansmann has 
explored alternative theories of corporate purpose.  See, e.g., The Evolution of Shareholder Voting 
Rights: Separation of Ownership and Consumption, 123 Yale L. J. 948 (2014).  
19 See infra text accompanying notes 46-48 (discussing shareholder value theory).  
20 See generally Statement on Company Law: Summary: Fundamental Rules of Corporate Law, THE 
MODERN CORPORATION, https://themoderncorporation.wordpress.com/company-law-memo/ (last 
4 
  
Anglo-American  model  ignores  the  significance  of  corporate  legal 
personhood;   that  it  does  not  fit  with  the  very  limited  control  granted 
21
shareholders under actual corporate law;  that the standard model leads to 
22
social inefficiency when, as may often be the case, contracts are incomplete 
and regulation is  imperfect;  and that stock market  prices often  fail to 
23
capture  long-term  economic  value.   Moreover,  commentators  have 
24
associated  shareholder  value  theory  with  a  number  of  recent  corporate 
scandals and business failures, including the 2008 financial crisis.  In this 
25
Article,  we  shed  light  on  and  resolve  much  of  the  ongoing  debate  by 
suggesting  a  new  and  more  unifying  approach  to  understanding 
corporations – that of systems thinking. 
Systems  theory  is  a  design  and  assessment  methodology  routinely 
employed  in  a  wide  variety  of  fields,  including  computer  science, 
engineering, biology, and environmental science. It can be applied to any 
process (system) in which multiple elements interact with each other, over 
time,  to  achieve  certain  purposes  or  functions.  We  argue  that  public 
companies  in  particular  can  be  viewed  as  complex  systems  in  which 
multiple  elements  (e.g.,  financial  capital,  physical  capital,  and  human 
capital) interact with each other to perform a variety of useful and desirable 
functions (e.g., providing goods and services, employment opportunities, 
investor returns, and tax revenues) under uncertain  conditions and over 
time. We articulate a vision of the corporation that allows for a better 
understanding of the interaction between an artificial legal entity and its 
human actors/agents; allows room to consider the role of the state, without 
which legal entity status could not be conferred; offers new strategies and 
                                                                                                                                                   
visited Feb. 17, 2017) (memorandum signed by nearly 50 legal experts noting that “certain beliefs 
about corporations and corporate law are widely held and relied upon by business experts, the 
financial press, and economists who study the firm.  Unfortunately, some of these widely held beliefs 
are mistaken”). 
21 See, e.g., William T. Allen, Our Schizophrenic Conception of the Business Corporation, 14 
Cardozo L. Rev. 261, 268-71 (1992); Margaret M. Blair & Lynn A. Stout, A Team Production 
Theory of Corporate Law, 85 Va. L. Rev. 248, 292 (1999); Jean-Phillipe Robe, The Legal Structure 
of the Firm, 1 Accounting, Economics, and Law (January 31, 2011).  
22 See infra Part I.C; Blair & Stout, supra note 21, at 290-308; Daniel J.H. Greenwood, Fictional 
Shareholders: For Whom Are Corporate Managers Trustees, Revisited, 69 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1021, 
1038-43 (1995-96). 
23 See, e.g., JOEL BAKAN, THE CORPORATION: THE PATHOLOGICAL PURSUIT OF PROFIT AND POWER 
(2005); Blair & Stout, supra note 21; Einer Elhauge, Sacrificing Corporate Profits in the Public 
Interest, 80 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 733, 776-817 (2005). 
24 See, e.g., Lynn A. Stout, The Mechanisms of Market Inefficiency: An Introduction to the New 
Finance, 2003 J. Corp. L. 636; JOHN QUIGGEN, ZOMBIE ECONOMICS: HOW DEAD IDEAS STILL WALK 
AMONG US (2010).  
25 See sources cited infra notes 70-76 (discussing destructive effects of shareholder value thinking).  
5 
  
methodologies for ensuring managerial accountability; and helps us better 
understand the relationships between and among stockholders, directors, 
creditors, employees, and the corporate person itself. Thus we demonstrate 
how  systems  theory  offers  many  useful  lessons  about  the  nature  and 
purpose of corporations and the best way to assess their performance—and, 
in the process, helps to integrate many apparently-conflicting elements of 
the various contesting visions of the firm.  
26
In Part I of the Article, we provide a  brief summary of competing 
theories  of  the  corporation.   We  pay  particularly  close  attention  to  the 
27
dominant  shareholder  value  theory  and  provide  an  overview  of  its 
traditional and current justifications.  We show how, while shareholder 
value theory initially was justified by the factual claims that shareholders 
own corporations and that shareholders are the sole residual claimants of 
corporations, today these empirical claims increasingly are being called into 
question.  Instead,  supporters  of  shareholder  value  theory  now  typically 
argue that corporations  ought  to  be run to  maximize shareholder value 
because  only  shareholder  value  offers  the  single,  quantifiable  metric 
supposedly needed to constrain agency costs and hold corporate directors 
and officers accountable. Yet this new justification is also being challenged 
on several grounds, especially the critique that when shareholder value is 
equated  to  stock  price  or  current  accounting  profits,  shareholder  value 
thinking  encourages  short-sighted  business  decisions.  Thus  shareholder 
value  thinking  has  been  associated  with  excessive  risk  taking,  reduced 
investment  and  innovation,  and  diminished  long-term  business 
performance.  In light of these criticisms, many contemporary shareholder 
28
                                                           
26 More specifically, in this Article we apply systems theory to business firms organized as 
corporations. Strictly speaking, a “firm” is not the same thing as a “corporation.” Robe, supra note 
21. However, we employ the common practice of using the words as synonyms to describe large 
firms organized as incorporated legal entities.  The corporate form can be thought of as the legal 
armature or framework upon which many firms are built. Incorporation as a “legal person” allows 
firms to hold assets and incur liabilities in their own names and to operate in perpetuity.  See 
generally Lynn A. Stout, On the Nature of Corporations, 2005 U. ILL. L. REV. 253 (2005); Andrew 
A. Schwartz, The Perpetual Corporation, 80 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 764 (2012). 
27 See infra Part I.  
28 THE ASPEN INSTITUTE BUSINESS AND SOCIETY PROGRAM, OVERCOMING SHORT-TERMISM: A CALL 
FOR A MORE RESPONSIBLE APPROACH TO INVESTMENT (2009), 
https://www.aspeninstitute.org/sites/default/files/content/docs/pubs/overcome_short_state0909_0.pdf;  
CFA INSTITUTE, Shareholder Value Maximization: The World’s Dumbest Idea? (October 23, 2014), 
https://eic:cfainstitute.org/2014/10/23/shareholder-value-maximization-the-dumbest-idea-in-the-
world/; THE CONFERENCE BOARD, Is Short-Term Behavior Jeopardizing the Future Prosperity of 
Business?  (2015), 
www.wlrk.com/docs/IsShortTermBehaviorJeopardizingTheFutureProsperityOfBusiness_CEOStrateg
icImplications.pdf; THE ROOSEVELT INSTITUTE, FINANCIALIZATION PROJECT, Understanding Short-
6 
  
value supporters have “doubled down” and reframed their message and 
justification: they now speak in terms of maximizing “long-term” value 
rather than immediate profit or share price appreciation. While reorienting 
towards long-term value is arguably an improvement over an exclusively 
short-term focus, especially in light of the possibly perpetual nature of the 
corporate entity, we show how a shift to a long-term value focus actually 
reduces  shareholder  value  theory’s  ability  to  ensure  its  stated  goal  of 
accountability. We conclude Part I by suggesting that there may be a better 
approach  for  measuring  corporate  performance  and  achieving  true 
managerial accountability, while honoring the complexity and diversity of 
the corporate form: systems thinking. 
In Part II, we introduce systems thinking and the idea of the corporation 
as a system.  We survey the basic principles of systems theory and consider 
29
what they teach about the nature of corporations; their purpose; and how to 
best  measure  the  performance  of  a  corporate  system  in  order  to  hold 
managers accountable. In particular, we show how systems thinking teaches 
that corporations may serve multiple purposes, and indeed one’s view of 
corporate purpose may depend on one’s perspective.  Nevertheless, systems 
30
theory  has  developed  a  variety  of  methodologies  and  mathematical 
techniques that can be used to measure managerial performance (including 
especially  assessing  sustainability)  so  as  to  determine,  if  not  whether 
managers are doing the best possible job, at least whether they are doing a 
better, or a worse one. Thus the systems approach offers well-developed 
tools and methodologies for promoting managerial accountability. 
In Part III,  we turn our attention to some practical and theoretical 
31
implications  of  such  an  approach.  We  show  how  systems  thinking  is 
embedded in the way managers of many successful corporations talk about 
what they do, as well as the strategies they choose and the performance 
                                                                                                                                                   
Termism:  Questions and Consequences  (2015), http://rooseveltinstityte.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/Understanding-Short-Termism.pdf; 
William Lazonick, Profits Without Prosperity, HARV. BUS. REV. (September 2014),  
https://hbr.org/2014/09/profits-without-prosperity/ar/1; and Roger Martin, Yes, Short-Termism Really 
is a Problem, HARV. BUS. REV. (October 9, 2015),  https://hbr.org/2015/10/yes-short-termism-really-
is-a-problem. 
29 See infra Part II.  
30 Systems thinking treats corporate purpose as complex, fluid, and to some degree subjective.  This 
approach can explain important elements of corporate reality that shareholder value thinking cannot 
explain, just as the theory of relativity (which treats physical reality as complex, fluid, and to some 
degree subjective) explains important physical phenomenon better than Newtonian physics does. See 
Infra Part II.C (discussing corporate purpose under the systems approach). 
31 See infra Part III.  
7 
  
assessment methods they employ. We also show how, in comparison to 
many other models of the corporation, systems theory fits better with state 
corporate codes, the holdings of corporate cases, and the “internal” law of 
corporate charters and bylaws. We point out that while public corporations 
have become more shareholder-centric in recent years, the shift has been 
driven primarily by federal regulations and other external interventions that 
bear the hallmarks of rent-seeking and that have been associated with a 
variety of undesirable outcomes. 
We  conclude  that,  especially  in  light  of  the  close  correspondence 
between  systems  thinking  and  traditional  corporate  law  and  practice, 
systems theory offers an intriguing and indeed compelling approach for 
understanding the nature of corporations, their proper purpose, and the best 
way to hold their managers accountable. In the process, it offers to integrate 
and sometimes reconcile the many competing visions of the corporation 
being debated today. 
 
PART I. CONTESTED VISIONS AND THE ROLE OF SHAREHOLDER 
VALUE THEORY  
 
A.  CONTESTED VISIONS 
Scholars, judges, regulators, and practitioners have long debated the 
questions of what corporations are and what their purpose should be. The 
literature  is  replete  with  different  theories  or  models,  each  of  which  
attempts to reduce the pattern of legal rights, responsibilities, duties and 
privileges  typically  found  in  corporations  into  a  single  readily-
understandable description.  Thus the corporation has been described as: (1) 
32
an  entity;  (2)  an  aggregate  of  people;  (3)  a  web  of  contracts;  (4)  a 
government  concession  or  “franchise  government”;  (5)  a  collection  of 
specific investments and (6) the property of its shareholders.  Each model 
33
offers its own particular vision of how best to describe the corporation, 
given  its  semiautonomous,  perpetual  nature,  legal  personhood,  and  the 
interwoven web of human relationships and interactions that often present 
in the corporate form. 
                                                           
32 See generally, David Millon, Theories of the Corporation, 2 DUKE L. J. 201 (1990); Allen, supra 
note 21; Lynn Stout, The Economic Nature of the Corporation, in OXFORD HANDBOOK OF LAW AND 
ECONOMICS VOLUME II: PRIVATE AND COMMERCIAL LAW, (Francesco Parisi, ed., forthcoming 2017). 
33 See infra text accompanying notes 36-60. 
8 
  
The  entity  theory  is  perhaps  best  encapsulated  in  Chief  Justice 
Marshall’s famous statement in the 1819 case of Trustees of Dartmouth 
College v. Woodward that the corporation is “an artificial being, invisible, 
intangible, and existing only in contemplation of law.”  In the 1933 case of 
34
Liggett  Co.  v.  Lee,  Justice  Louis  Brandeis  expressed  a  similar  view, 
describing the corporation as a “Frankenstein monster which States have 
created  by  their  corporation  laws.”   Entity  theory  captures  certain  core 
35
characteristics of the corporate form, particularly its status as a legal person 
entitled to exercise certain rights (e.g., to own property, enter contracts, and 
incur liabilities) in its own name. Entity theory also is consistent with the 
corporation’s ability to exist into perpetuity. However, entity theory has 
been critiqued on the grounds that the corporate entity is “not real.”  It is 
36
not tangible. It is mere artifice. 
In juxtaposition to entity theory, which treats the corporation as its own 
legal person, aggregate theory views the corporation as an aggregation of 
natural persons. Aggregate theory was perhaps at play in Justice Kennedy’s 
description of corporations in Citizens United as “associations of citizens.”   
37
Aggregate theory captures the reality that corporations must act and make 
decisions through their human agents. However, the aggregate approach 
raises several challenging questions, such as which human agents/natural 
persons  should  we  aggregate?  Everyone  involved  in  the  corporate 
enterprise? Or perhaps only the board, executives, and shareholders? And if 
so, today’s shareholders, or the company’s original shareholders? As this 
last question suggests,  the notion of perpetual  corporate life is  hard to 
reconcile with an aggregation theory. 38 
The nexus of contract theory views the corporation as a “nexus” or web 
of contracts, both explicit and implicit, between and among various parties 
                                                           
34 17 U.S.518, 636 (1819). 
35 288 U.S.517, 568 (1933). 
36 See Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, Limited Liability and the Corporation, 52 U.CHI.L. 
REV.  89 (1985) (“The corporation is not real.  It is no more than a name for a complex set of 
contracts among managers, workers, and contributors of capital.”) See also Michael C. Jensen and 
William H. Meckling, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership 
Structure, 3 J. FIN. ECON.   305, 310-11 (1976)(describing corporation as “legal fiction.”). 
37 558 U.S. at 354 
38 The Delaware Supreme Court recently upheld a decision to require TransPerfect’s founders and 
100 percent shareholders to collectively sell their shares in the company, on the theory that their 
dysfunctional relationship was damaging to the corporation and “its constituencies,” see Shawe v. 
Elting, No. 423 (Del., Feb. 13, 2017), at 22, 25, 
http://www.courts.delaware.gov/Opinions/Download.aspx?id=252550).  This holding is inconsistent 
with any claim that a corporation is comprised only of its current and/or original shareholders. 
9 
  
associated  with  the  corporation,  such  as  the  board,  the  shareholders, 
creditors, and employees.  Like the aggregate theory, the nexus of contracts 
39
theory does not  recognize the corporation as its own separate and real 
entity.  It  emphasizes  instead  the  voluntary  nature  of  most  human 
participation  in  creating  and  pursuing  corporate  endeavors,  and 
acknowledges the generally enabling nature of corporate law (which allows 
significant latitude to corporate participants to engage in private bargaining 
and  contracting  around  various  default  rules).  However,  the  nexus  of 
contracts theory can be critiqued as failing to acknowledge the corporation’s 
legal personhood, and also as failing to emphasize the crucial role played by 
the state in creating the corporation.  
40
The  state  concession  theory  of  the  corporation  and  its  modern 
descendant, the political franchise theory,  recognizes the role of the state in 
41
granting  a  corporation  legal  personhood  and  acknowledges  that  a 
corporation’s  internal  governance  structures  in  many  ways  mirror 
governance  structures  of  a  political  state.  It  also  highlights  how  early 
corporations were granted corporate personhood by the state for expressly 
public purposes and not merely as a means for garnering private profits. A 
main  limitation  of  the  political  franchise  theory  is  that  the  model  is 
primarily focused on the relationship between the corporate entity and the 
governing state, but provides less guidance on which internal governance 
structures are most desirable for corporations. 
The team production model addresses internal governance structure by 
hypothesizing that, at least in public corporations, the firm is governed by a 
relatively  independent  board  of  directors  that  serves  as  a  “mediating 
hierarch” to protect the specific investments not only of shareholders but 
also  employees,  creditors,  customers,  and  other  important  stakeholders 
whose interests in their relationship with the business cannot be completely 
protected by explicit contracts or regulation.  This protection encourages 
42
collective  specific  investment  in  “team  production”  projects  (especially 
                                                           
39 See generally Easterbrook & Fischel supra note 36; Melvin A. Eisenberg, The Conception that the 
Corporation is a Nexus of Contracts and the Dual Nature of the Firm, 24 J. CORP. L. 819 (1998). 
40 See Henry Hansmann, Reinier H. Kraakman, and Richard Squire, Law and the Rise of the Firm, 
119 HARV. L. REV. 1335 (2006)(emphasizing the importance of legal personhood in ensuring that 
shareholders’ creditors cannot reach corporate assets, and arguing that private contract alone cannot 
create legal persons).  
41 See David Ciepley, Beyond Public and Private: Toward a Political Theory of the Corporation, 107 
AM. POL. SCI. REV. 139 (2013) (describing corporate entities as “franchise governments” created and 
authorized by the state). 
42 See Blair & Stout, supra note 21. 
10 
  
long  term,  large  scale,  uncertain  projects)  that  can  generate  significant 
social  wealth.  The  team  production  model  explains  many  aspects  of 
corporate law and structure, including the wide discretion granted directors 
under  the  business  judgment  rule. .  It  has  been  critiqued,  however,  as 
43
applying  mainly  to  public  corporations   and  also  as  undermining 
44
managerial accountability.   
45
While the entity, aggregation, nexus of contract, political franchise, and 
team  production  theories  each  have  influential  supporters  and  each 
contribute  to  our  understanding  of  the  corporate  form,  in  recent  years 
Anglo-American  corporate  law  scholarship  and  policy  discussions  have 
been dominated by yet another theory that might be called the “shareholder 
value” theory. Given this context, the balance of Part I will focus on the 
achievements and critiques of shareholder value theory. 
 
B.  THE  RISE  AND  EVOLUTION  OF  SHAREHOLDER  VALUE 
THEORY 
For the past quarter-century, the dominant albeit not exclusive narrative 
of corporate purpose in the Anglo-American world has been that business 
corporations  have  but  one  goal:  to  maximize  shareholder  wealth  or 
“shareholder value.”   It is difficult to overstate just how much shareholder 
46
value theory has influenced contemporary corporate governance, especially 
in the United States.  This influence is reflected in law review articles; in 
47
the dicta of judicial opinions; in policy reports; and in Federal securities 
regulation.  
48
                                                           
43 See infra text accompanying notes 182-189. 
44 See John C. Coates IV, Measuring the Domain of Mediating Hierarchy: How Contestable are U.S. 
Corporations, 24 J. CORP. L. 837 (1999). 
45 See Alan J. Meese, The Team Production Theory of Corporate Law: A Critical Assessment, 43 
WILLIAM & MARY L. REV. 1629 (2002).  
46 Hansmann & Kraakman, supra note 18; Stephen Bainbridge, Director Primacy: The Means and 
Ends of Corporate Governance, 97 NORTHWESTERN U. L. REV. 547 (2003). 
47 LYNN STOUT, THE SHAREHOLDER VALUE MYTH: HOW PUTTING SHAREHOLDERS FIRST HARMS 
INVESTORS, CORPORATIONS, AND THE PUBLIC, Ch. 3 (2012); Edward D. Rock, Adapting to the New 
Shareholder-Centric Reality, 161 U. PA. L. REV. 1907 (2013); DARRELL WEST, BROOKINGS 
INSTITUTION, THE PURPOSE OF THE CORPORATION IN BUSINESS AND LAW SCHOOL CURRICULA 17–18, 
(2012), www.brookings.edu/~/media/Files/rc/papers/2011/0719_corporation_west.pdf. For a history 
of shareholder value thinking’s rise to dominance, see STOUT, supra at ch. 3. 
48 Thus law professor Jeffrey Gordon has written that “by the end of the 1990s, the triumph of the 
shareholder value criterion was nearly complete.” Jeffrey N. Gordon, The Rise of Independent 
Directors in the United States, 1950–2005: Of Shareholder Value and Stock Market Prices, 59 STAN. 
11 
  
Yet it is only relatively recently that the idea that public corporations 
exist to maximize shareholder wealth has acquired such power.  Why did 
49
this occur?  In part, shareholder value theory  gained traction because it 
served the purposes of powerful interest groups, including newly-emerging 
“activist”  investors   and  executives  whose  compensation,  due  to  1993 
50
changes  in  the  tax  code,  increasingly  was  based  on  share  price.   But 
51
shareholder  value  theory  has  also  been  embraced  because  it  has  been 
perceived as intellectually justified. In particular, shareholder value theory 
has been justified by an evolution of three claims: first, that shareholders 
own corporations; second, that shareholders are the residual claimants in 
corporations;  and  third,  that  shareholder  value  provides  the  single 
quantifiable  metric  that  is  essential  to  constrain  agency  costs  and  hold 
corporate directors and executives accountable.  
It  is  increasingly  recognized  now  that  the  first  two  claims  are 
demonstrably incorrect. The notion that shareholders “own” corporations is 
often associated with Nobel-prize winning economist Milton Friedman’s 
famous 1976 article in the New York Times Magazine, in which he argued 
that because shareholders own corporations, the only “social responsibility 
of business is to increase its profits.”  While this idea that shareholders own 
52
                                                                                                                                                   
L. REV. 1465, 1530 (2007). Justice Steven’s dissent in Citizens United assumed a shareholder value 
framework, see infra text accompanying note 15, and Delaware Chancellor William  
Chandler opined in In Re Ebay Domestic Holdings, Inc.  v. Newmark that corporate directors 
decisions should “ultimately promote shareholder value,” 16 A.3d 1, 33 (Del. Ch. 2010).  A report 
from the National Association of Corporate Directors concluded that “[t]he primary objective of the 
corporation is to conduct business activities with a view to enhancing profit and shareholder gain,” 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CORPORATE DIRECTORS, REPORT OF THE NACD BLUE RIBBON 
COMMISSION ON DIRECTOR COMPENSATION: PURPOSES, PRINCIPLES, AND BEST PRACTICES 1 (1995). 
(Interestingly, and consistent with systems thinking, the report does note that “long-term shareholder 
gain” [depends] on “fair treatment” of non-shareholder constituents.)  At the level of Federal 
regulation, the U.S. Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) recently decided that public companies 
should provide enhanced graphic disclosure of how executive pay relates to a corporation’s financial 
performance, and defined financial “performance” in terms of share price appreciation and dividends 
paid to shareholders (total shareholder return or TSR),17 C.F.R. § 229.402 (c) (2016). 
49 During most of the 20th century and well into the 1980s, corporate directors and executives 
embraced a vision of corporate purpose called managerial capitalism or simply managerialism. 
GERALD DAVIS, MANAGED BY THE MARKETS: HOW FINANCE RESHAPED AMERICA 71 (2009). 
According to the managerialist philosophy, business corporations were important social institutions 
that ought to serve not only shareholders but also employees, customers, suppliers, communities, and 
the nation as a whole, while managers were not shareholders’ agents but stewards or trustees with 
fiduciary duties to these institutions. The managerialist philosophy thus arguably included elements 
of entity theory, state concession theory, and stakeholder and team production theory. 
50 Rock, supra note 47. 
51 STOUT, supra note 47, at 19–20. 
52 Milton Friedman, The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits, N. Y. TIMES 
MAGAZINE, Sept. 13, 1970, at 32 . 
12 
  
corporations retains emotional power among laypersons and many business 
journalists,  legal experts widely recognize it to be empirically incorrect.  
53 54
One of the hallmarks of the corporate form is that corporations are legal 
persons with rights, including the right to hold property in their own names. 
This means that, just as a natural person cannot be owned by another, a 
corporation cannot be owned by its shareholders.  What shareholders do 
55
own  are  shares.  Shares  can  be  viewed  as  a  kind  of  contract  between 
shareholders and the corporate entity, just as an employment agreement or 
bond can be viewed as a contract between the corporate entity and an 
employee or bondholder. The shareholders’ contract, moreover, typically 
gives shareholders only very limited rights. One such right is the right to 
elect and remove directors. But, as has been recognized since at least the 
days of Berle and Means,  this right carries almost no real influence in the 
56
context  of  a  public  corporation  with  dispersed  share  ownership.  
57
Contemporary experts accordingly are often  careful to  avoid  describing 
corporations as “owned” by shareholders.    
58
What  about  the  second  claim:  that  shareholders  are  the  residual 
claimants entitled to  all profits left over after  the business  has met its 
contractual and legal obligations (e.g., interest due creditors, wages due 
employees,  and  taxes  due  governments)?     Again,  experts  increasingly 
59
recognize that, for several reasons, shareholders are not the sole residual 
claimants  of  corporations—at  least  not  of  operating  companies.   First, 
60
                                                           
53 See, e.g., Gretchen Morgenson, Whole Foods’ High Hurdle for Investors, N.Y.TIMES, Jan. 5, 2015, 
at B1 (stating without authority that “shareholders own the companies they invest in.”) 
54 Statement on Company Law, supra note 20. 
55 Id.; Robé, supra note 21.  
56 ADOLF A. BERLE AND GARDINER MEANS, THE MODERN CORPORATION AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 
(1932). 
57 It might be forgivable to describe a corporation with a single individual shareholder as “owned” by 
that individual, on the theory that, despite formal limitations on shareholder power, as a practical 
matter a sole shareholder has both the economic interest and the managerial power of a proprietor.  
This is clearly not the case for shareholders in a public company. See Lucian A. Bebchuk, The Myth 
of the Shareholder Franchise, 93 VA. L. REV. 675 (2007).   
58 See, e.g., ALAN PALMITER & FRANK PARTNOY, CORPORATIONS: A CONTEMPORARY APPROACH 434 
(2d ed. 2014) (“shareholders do not “own” the corporation in the same way the proprietor owns her 
own business”). 
59 See, e.g., FRANK H. EASTERBROOK AND DANIEL R. FISCHEL, THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF 
CORPORATE LAW 36-37 (1991); Eugene F. Fama and Michael C. Jensen, Organizational Forms and 
Investment Decisions, 14 J.  FIN. ECON. 101, 102-03 (1985). 
60 It may be reasonable to describe shareholders as sole residual claimants when a company is being 
liquidated, although even in the bankruptcy context Professor LoPucki has shown that courts often 
require creditors to share in stockholders’ losses to some extent.  Lynn M LoPucki, The Myth of the 
Residual Owner: An Empirical Study, 2004 WASH. U. L. Q. 1341 (2004).  However, companies in 
13 
  
corporations,  as  legal  persons,  are  their  own  residual  claimants.  The 
corporation’s profits are the property of the corporate entity and not the 
property of its shareholders.  Second, modern options theory teaches that 
61
once a corporation has issued debt, its debtholders also have a residual 
interest  in  how  the  company  is  run.   Third,  when  important  corporate 
62
“stakeholders”  make  specific  investments  in  a  corporation’s  continued 
operation (for example, when employees acquire skills uniquely valuable to 
the  company  as  an  employer,  or  customers  become  dependent  on  its 
products),  these  stakeholders  also  acquire  a  residual  interest  in  the 
company’s operations.  Fourth, if social norms and government regulation 
63
cannot perfectly control corporate behavior—a likely scenario—directors’ 
and  executives’  managerial  decisions  can  generate  external  costs  and 
benefits for third parties. These externalities give third parties an interest in 
how the company is managed.  
64
These  flaws  in  the  first  two  claims  traditionally  used  to  defend 
shareholder value theory have led contemporary commentators to rely ever 
more heavily on a third justification: that shareholder value is necessary to 
ensure managerial accountability.  According to this third view, the only 
65
way to ensure managerial accountability is to hold managers’ collective feet 
to the fire by demanding they maximize a single quantifiable metric. As 
influential economist Michael Jensen has put it, “telling the manager to 
maximize current profits, market share, future growth profits, and anything 
else one pleases will leave the manager with no way to make a reasoned 
                                                                                                                                                   
liquidation are subject to different legal rules than operating companies. STOUT, supra note 49, at 39-
40. 
61 STOUT, supra note 47 at 39-41.  See also Harbor Finance Partners v. Huizenga, 751 A.2d 879 
(Del. Ch. 1999) (“…property of the corporation is not typically thought of as personal property of the 
stockholders…”). 
62 If a corporation issues debt as well as equity, it is just as correct to say that the debtholder has the 
right to the corporation’s profits but has sold a call option to the shareholders, as it is correct to say 
the shareholders have the right to the profits but have sold a put option to the debtholder.  Fischer 
Black &  Myron Scholes, The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities, 81 J. POL. ECON.  637 
(1973). 
63 Blair & Stout, supra note 21, at 1205. 
64 BAKAN, supra note 23; EDWARD FREEMAN, STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT: A STAKEHOLDER APPROACH 
(2010).  
65 One of the central problems of corporate law is the problem of ensuring that directors and 
executives do not abuse their corporate powers and employ those powers to serve themselves.  In the 
parlance of economics, this is the problem of “agency costs.”  Jensen & Meckling, supra note 36. 
Whether corporate directors and executives are viewed as agents of the corporation itself, as agents of 
the corporation’s shareholders, or agents of some combination of the two, the basic problem remains 
the same. How do we keep corporate managers from shirking, stealing and running amok?  
14 
  
decision.    In  effect  it  leaves  the  manager  with  no  objective.”   Jensen 
66
concluded  that  a  “true  (single  dimensional)  score”  was  essential.  
67
According to shareholder value theorists, financial returns to shareholders 
provide that single metric. For example, law professor Stephen Bainbridge 
has written that “absent the shareholder wealth maximization norm…the 
board  would  lack  a  determinant  metric  for  assessing  options.”   This, 
68
Bainbridge  fretted,  would  allow  directors  “to  pursue  their  own  self-
interest… Directors who are responsible to everyone are accountable to no 
one.”  
69
Thus  managerial  accountability  has  emerged  as  the  supposed  chief 
advantage of shareholder value theory relative to other competing models of 
the corporation. Yet even this justification has become subject to critical 
scrutiny in recent years. In the past decade, a host of research institutes, 
business leaders, and prominent commentators have protested that when 
shareholder value is defined in terms of share price or other immediately 
quantifiable metrics,  asking managers to maximize “shareholder value” 
70
                                                           
66 Michael C. Jensen, Value Maximization, Stakeholder Theory and the Corporate Objective 
Function, 12 BUS. ETHICS Q.  235, 238 (2002). 
67 Id. at 235. See also Oliver Hart, An Economist’s View of Fiduciary Duty, 43 U.  TORONTO L. J. 299, 
303 (1993) (a prescription for management to take account of the interests of multiple corporate 
constituencies “is essentially vacuous, because it allows management to justify almost any action on 
the grounds that it benefits some group”). 
68 Stephen Bainbridge, A Duty to Shareholder Value, N. Y. TIMES, Apr. 16, 2015, , 
http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2015/04/16/what-are-corporations-obligations-to-
shareholders/a-duty-to-shareholder-value. Mark Roe has similarly written that allowing managers to 
consider non-shareholder interests could “leave managers so much discretion that managers could 
easily pursue their own agenda, one that might maximize neither shareholder, employee, consumer, 
nor national wealth, but only their own.”  Mark J. Roe, The Shareholder Wealth Maximization Norm 
and Industrial Organization, 149 U. PA. L. REV. 2063, 2065 (2001). 
69 Id.  
70 The idea of “shareholder value” raises the obvious problem of how that value is to be measured.  
One possible candidate is share price.  Indeed, based on the theoretical notion of a “fundamental 
value efficient” stock market that perfectly captures the future economic gains from holding shares,  
see generally Ronald J. Gilson & Reinier H. Kraakman, The Mechanisms Of Market Efficiency, 70 
VA. L. REV. 549 (1984), Daniel Fischel and Frank (now Judge) Easterbrook famously argued in 1981 
that directors destroy shareholder value whenever they reject a takeover bid at a premium price. 
Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, The Proper Role of a Target’s Management in 
Responding to a Tender Offer, 94 HARV. L. REV. 1161 (1981).  By the close of the 20th century, 
however, the idea that stock market prices always capture fundamental value had been largely 
abandoned by sophisticated commentators in the face of an enormous and growing empirical and 
theoretical literature demonstrating this often was not true. See Stout, supra note 24.  Today, experts 
typically describe market efficiency in terms only of “informational efficiency,” meaning the speed 
with which prices adjust to new information. See, e.g., Burton G. Malkiel, “Efficient Market 
Hypothesis”, THE NEW PALGRAVE: A DICTIONARY OF ECONOMICS (John Eatwell, Murray Milgate & 
Peter Newman eds. 1987); see also QUIGGEN, supra note 24 (describing the idea of an efficient 
market as a dead “zombie” idea that survives today only in greatly diminished  form.) 
15 
  
generates a host of corporate pathologies, including excessive risk-taking, 
underinvestment,  reduced  innovation,  increasing  disparities  between 
executive and rank-and-file pay, and a general focus on short term results at 
the expense of long-term performance.  An unhealthy managerial focus on 
71
immediate results has been accused of driving companies like Motorola  
72
and  Hewlett-Packard   to  sacrifice  their  resilience  and  long-term 
73
performance  by  restructuring,  selling  assets,  and  cutting  “expenses”  for 
marketing, R&D, and employee development in order to boost the bottom 
line. It was suspected of encouraging companies like BP  and Volkswagen  
74 75
                                                                                                                                                   
  Another possibility is to interpret shareholder value not in terms of share price per se but in terms of 
current shareholders’ satisfaction with that price, as reflected in their willingness to defer to the 
judgment of the corporation’s board.  Thus Lucian Bebchuk has argued in several articles that it is 
desirable to give shareholders greater power over boards, so that directors have greater incentive to 
keep current shareholders happy.  See, e.g., Lucien Ayre Bebchuk, The Case for Increasing 
Shareholder Power, 118 HARV. L. REV. 833 (2005); Lucien Ayre Bebchuk, The Case for Shareholder 
Access to the Ballot, 59 BUS. LAW 43 (2003). This view remains controversial (it has even been 
described as “radical.” see  David Millon, Radical Shareholder Primacy, 10 U. St. Thomas L. J. 1013 
(2013)), as many of the shareholders whom Bebchuk would empower are hedge funds and actively-
managed mutual funds that typically hold positions for only a year or two. Indeed, although 
corporations are perpetual entities, the average holding period for U.S. stocks may be as low as four 
months. STOUT, supra note 47, at 66. 
71 See sources cited supra note 28. 
72 In 2013, Motorola set a goal of cutting $200 billion in expenses by the end of the year, a figure 
raised to $300 billion by 2014 by selling its corporate campus. John Pletz, Motorola Solutions to 
shrink—again, CRAIN’S CHI. BUS., Aug. 5, 2014, 
http://www.chicagobusiness.com/article/20140805/BLOGS11/140809915/motorola-solutions-to-
shrink-again.  In 2015, Motorola then announced plans to cut 25% of its 2000 Chicago employees as 
part of an “overall restructuring.” Motorola Mobility Cutting 500 Jobs in Chicago, NBC CHI. Aug. 
13, 2015,, http://www.nbcchicago.com/blogs/inc-well/Motorola-Mobility-Cutting-500-Jobs-in-
Chicago-321796502.html. 
73 Like Motorola, HP cut 30,000 jobs to reduce expenses, then laid off another 55,000 workers as part 
of a restructuring, producing a short term increase in share price.  Michael Liedtke, Hewlett-Packard 
to cut up to 30,000 jobs in effort to shave expenses, GLOBAL NEWS, Sept. 16, 2015, 
http://globalnews.ca/news/2223329/hewlett-packard-to-cut-up-to-30000-jobs-in-effort-to-shave-
expenses/; Sue Chang, H-P shares rally after company announces big job cuts, MARKET PULSE Sept. 
16, 2015, , http://www.marketwatch.com/story/h-p-shares-rally-after-company-announces-big-job-
cuts-2015-09-16.  HP stock is now down 30% despite the layoffs of the past three years, ibid.  It 
continues to cut jobs in “an effort to reduce costs and protect the bottom line for shareholders,” 
Richard Milam, Hewlett-Packard and Others Reduce Labor Costs by Restructuring Workload, US 
DAILY REV., Sept. 30, 2015, http://usdailyreview.com/hewlett-packard-and-others-reduce-labor-costs-
by-restructuring-workload/. 
74 David Brodwin, The Costs of Corporate Corner-Cutting: Energy disasters are a reminder of why 
good regulations are so important, US NEWS, Sept. 5, 2014, , 
http://www.usnews.com/opinion/economic-intelligence/2014/09/05/bp-and-pacific-gas-and-electric-
show-corner-cutting-causes-disaster;  John M. Broder, BP Shortcuts Led to Gulf Oil Spill, Report 
Says, THE N. Y. TIMES, Sept. 14, 2011, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/15/science/earth/15spill.html; Steve Tobak, BP’s Gulf Oil Spill: 
The Perils of Cutting Corners, CBS NEWS, June 1, 2010, , http://www.cbsnews.com/news/bps-gulf-
oil-spill-the-perils-of-cutting-corners/. 
16 
  
to cut safety and regulatory corners. It has also been identified as a root 
cause  of  the  2008  financial  crisis,  when  it  drove  banks  to  make  risky 
mortgage loans and to leverage themselves to the brink of insolvency and 
beyond.  
76
In response, many supporters of shareholder value have adjusted their 
stance yet again. They now emphasize that what they mean is “long-term 
shareholder  value.”  For  example,  in  a  2015  opinion  piece  Steven 
Bainbridge wrote that “the law requires corporate directors and managers to 
pursue long-term, sustainable shareholder wealth maximization.”  In the 
77
2009 case of In Re Citigroup Inc. Shareholder Derivative Litigation, which 
arose  from  the  2008  financial  crisis,  Delaware  Chancellor  William  B. 
Chandler  opined  that  “[u]ltimately,  the  discretion  granted  directors  and 
managers allows them to maximize shareholder value in the long term.”  
78
Delaware  Supreme  Court  Chief  Justice  Leo  Strine  similarly  described 
shareholder welfare in a recent law review article as served by “that course 
of action [that] will best advance the interests of stockholders in the long 
run.”   The  balance  of  Part  I  examines  this  argument—that  long  term 
79
shareholder  value  provides  the  single  quantifiable  metric  needed  to 
constrain agency costs and hold corporate managers accountable—because 
it  now  stands  as  the  principal  remaining  intellectual  foundation  for 
shareholder value theory today. 
 
C.  WHY  LONG-TERM  SHAREHOLDER  VALUE  CANNOT  BE 
USED  TO  HOLD  MANAGERS  ACCOUNTABLE:  THE 
PROBLEM OF UNCERTAINTY 
On first inspection, the idea of defining “shareholder value” in terms of 
the  long  term  seems  eminently  sensible.  Corporations,  after  all,  are 
                                                                                                                                                   
75 Volkswagen makes a monumental blunder, FT VIEW Sept. 21, 2015, , 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/5828e3c6-6051-11e5-9846-de406ccb37f2.html#axzz3qfZHsOlm. 
76 THE FINANCIAL CRISIS INQUIRY COMMISSION, THE FINANCIAL CRISIS INQUIRY REPORT: FINAL 
REPORT OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE CAUSES OF THE FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC CRISIS IN 
THE UNITED STATES, SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (2011), 
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/GPO-FCIC/pdf/GPO-FCIC.pdf.  
77 Stephen Bainbridge, supra note 68 (emphasis added). 
78 In Re Citigroup Inc. Shareholder Derivative Litigation, 964 A.2d 106, 139 (Del. Ch.  2009). 
79 Leo E. Strine, Jr., The Dangers of Denial: The Need For A Clear-eyed Understanding of the Power 
and Accountability Structure Established by the Delaware General Corporation Law, WAKE FOREST 
L. REV. 761, 764 (2015)(emphasis added). See also Millon, supra note 70, at 1018 (describing 
“traditional” shareholder primacy that focuses on long-term performance); Schwartz, supra note 26 
(describing corporation’s purpose as long-run value creation). 
17 
  
perpetual entities, capable of earning profits and paying dividends into an 
indefinite future.  Throughout history they have pursued projects that lasted 
80
years, decades, or even centuries. In the Middle Ages, corporate entities 
constructed  monasteries,  cathedrals  and  universities.  In  the  seventeenth 
century they opened continents for trade. In the eighteenth, nineteenth, and 
twentieth centuries they built canals, railroads, and electrical grids. Today 
they are developing self-driving cars and commercial space transport.  
81
Yet once we shift from defining “shareholder value” in terms of stock 
price or similar short term metrics, to an amorphous concept like long term 
shareholder value, the claim that shareholder value theory offers a superior 
way to hold managers accountable begins to collapse. This is because, once 
we  abandon  the  fundamental-efficient-markets  presumption  that  today’s 
stock  price  perfectly  captures  intrinsic  value,   the  corporate  entity’s 
82
perpetual nature raises insoluble barriers to objectively quantifying “long-
term  value.”  Over  time,  a  successful  business  corporation  provides 
shareholders  with  a  stream  of  financial  returns  in  the  form  of  share 
appreciation  and  dividends  paid.  Shareholder  value  theory  blithely 
presumes this stream of future returns can be observed, neatly summed up, 
and  discounted  to  present  value,  so  as  to  reach  a  single  agreed-upon 
number.   This  presumption  unrealistically  assumes  away  one  of  the 
83
business world’s most endemic challenges: the problem of uncertainty. 
The  concept  of  uncertainty  is  key  to  understanding  why  long-term 
shareholder value is a vague and indeterminate goal that cannot be used to 
hold  managers  accountable.  Although  laypersons  often  use  “risk”  and 
“uncertainty”  as  synonyms,  finance  economists  view  them  as  different 
                                                           
80 Schwartz, supra note 26 at 773. 
81 See generally Lynn A. Stout, The Corporation as Time Machine: Intergenerational Equity, 
Intergenerational Efficiency, and the Corporate Form, 38 SEATTLE U. L. REV. 685, 696-98 (2015). 
82 See supra note 70 (discussing decline of fundamental value efficiency idea). 
83 Discounted cash flow (DCF) is an example of this valuation technique. Finance theory teaches that 
the further into the future a payment is received, the more it should be discounted.  On this basis 
some might argue that it is efficient for managers to focus on short-term results.  Yet corporations are 
perpetuities; short-term strategies that harm long-term results reduce not just one future payment, but 
an infinite stream of future payments.  This makes long-term results more significant. For example, 
assuming a 5% annual discount rate, a company with annual profits of $1,000 has a present value of 
$20,000.  A corporate investment that doubles future profits to $2,000 annually increases the 
company’s present value to $40,000--a 100% increase in value that is largely attributable to increased 
profits received five or more years out.  Andrew Schwartz provides an extensive discussion of 
additional reasons why we should apply a lower discount rate to future corporate profits than we 
would apply to future payments received by an individual.  Schwartz, supra note 26, at 786-791. 
18 
  
concepts.  Risk refers to variation in future outcomes where the nature of 
84
the  possible  outcomes  and  their  statistical  probabilities  are  both  fully 
known. A coin toss is merely risky: although we do not know if the result 
will be heads or tails, it must be one or the other, and  we know with 
certainty the probability of each is 50 percent. Uncertainty, in contrast, 
describes  situations  where  either  the  possible  future  outcomes,  the 
probabilities of those outcomes, or both, remain to some extent unknown. 
Whether Apple will thrive without former CEO Steve Jobs, and whether 
Google  will  profit  from  developing  self-driving  vehicles,  are  questions 
involving not only risk but uncertainty.  
85
Investors, analysts, and finance professors  can employ a number of 
comfortably familiar mathematical techniques to value economic ventures 
that are merely risky. But they have not yet figured out how to deal with 
uncertainty.  Uncertainty allows subjective disagreement. Rational people 
86
cannot disagree on the probable results of a coin toss, but they can disagree 
about whether Apple will thrive or fail without Steve Jobs.  Uncertainty and 
87
disagreement  make  the  task  of  valuing  an  ongoing  business  venture 
notoriously difficult and subjective. This is evidenced by the variety of 
different and competing valuation techniques–book value, discounted cash 
flow, earnings multiples, etc.–described in finance texts.  Each technique, 
88
moreover,  requires  the  person  doing  the  valuing  to  make  numerous 
assumptions. Are earnings better described by  EBIT or EBITDA? Will 
profits increase, decrease, or remain steady? What discount rate should be 
applied? Uncertainty allows even experts to disagree in their answers.  And 
the further they try to look into the future, the murkier the future becomes. 
The  reality  of  uncertainty  undermines  the  claim  that  demanding 
corporate directors and executives to maximize long-term shareholder value 
somehow adds clarity or rigor to the messy business of gauging whether 
managers are doing a good job. Once we attempt to attach any number other 
than today’s market  price to  a company’s shares, the number becomes 
subject  to  disagreement and manipulation.  The CEO claims her chosen 
                                                           
84 The distinction is often attributed to economist Frank Knight.  See FRANK F. KNIGHT, RISK, 
UNCERTAINTY, AND PROFIT (1921). 
85 See generally Edward R. Miller, Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion, 32 J. Fin. 1151 
(1977). 
86 See generally NASSIM N. TALEB, THE BLACK SWAN: THE IMPACT OF THE HIGHLY IMPROBABLE (2d 
ed., 2010).  
87 See generally Miller, supra note 85; Lynn A. Stout, Are Stock Markets Costly Casinos: 
Disagreement, Market Failure, and Securities Regulation 81 VA. L. REV. 613 (1995). 
88 SIMON Z. BENNINGA & ODED SARIG, CORPORATE FINANCE: A VALUATION APPROACH (1997).  
19 
  
business strategy will maximize shareholder value “in the long run;” the 
activist hedge fund manager argues his proposed restructuring will better 
“unlock shareholder value.” There is no way to prove who is correct. Both 
claims are unfalsifiable until the future arrives. 
This means that, far from supplying an objective metric for holding 
corporate  managers  accountable,  “long-term  shareholder  value”  may 
provide no observable metric at all. The concept simply cannot perform the 
function that supposedly justifies it as a theory of corporate purpose. It 
cannot provide a way to objectively assess managerial performance. Which 
raises the question: what is left of the case for shareholder value theory? 
A diehard defender of shareholder value as the corporate maximand 
might  reply  that,  whatever  its  weaknesses,  long-term  shareholder  value 
remains the best possible corporate objective because it is better to use an 
imperfect  tool  than  no  tool  at  all.     This  argument  presupposes  that 
89
shareholder  value  theory  is,  in  fact,  the  only  tool  available  to  monitor 
corporate performance and hold managers accountable. In the next section 
we challenge this presupposition. We argue that  an alternative tool  for 
assessing  corporate  performance—one  that  honors  the  complexities  of 
corporations and board decisionmaking, and allows for better managerial 
accountability  and  monitoring—is  indeed  available.  That  alternative  is 
systems thinking. 
 
PART II. THE SYSTEMS ALTERNATIVE 
 
A.  WHAT IS SYSTEMS THEORY? 
Systems theory is a design and performance assessment methodology 
routinely used in many fields, including engineering, biology, computer 
science,  and  (significantly)  management  science.   Some  readers  may 
90
                                                           
89 It is worth noting that, as a matter of logic, this is incorrect.  It is better to use no tool to remedy a 
headache, than to apply the chainsaw that might be the only tool at hand. 
90 See, e.g., F.  CAPRA & P. L. LUISI, THE SYSTEMS VIEW OF LIFE: A UNIFYING VISION (2014); DRAPER 
L. KAUFFMANN, JR., SYSTEMS ONE: AN INTRODUCTION TO SYSTEMS THINKING 1 (1981); J. 
GHARAJEDAGHI, SYSTEMS THINKING: MANAGING TO CHAOS AND COMPLEXITY (1999); D. K. 
HITCHENS, ADVANCED SYSTEMS THINKING (2003); DONELLA H.  MEADOWS, THINKING IN SYSTEMS: A 
PRIMER (Diana Wright ed., 2008). See also Lynn M. LoPucki, Systems Approach to Law, 80 
CORNELL L. REV. 479 (1997) (applying systems analysis to legal systems). 
20 
  
nevertheless find the term esoteric, in part because experts in each of these 
areas  often  apply  systems  thinking  without  explicating  its  general 
principles,  and  also  tend  to  employ  their  own  unique  vocabulary.   For 
91
example,  systems  theory  goes  by  the  name  of  cybernetics  in  controls 
engineering;  systems  analysis  in  computer  programming;  medicine  in 
human biology; and operations analysis in management research. Moreover, 
few  texts  describe  basic  principles  outside  of  some  highly  specialized 
context (e.g., safety engineering or evolutionary biology).  Nevertheless, 
92
whatever the field, certain basic principles are employed to design, assess, 
and improve the performance of any system. 
What, then, is a “system”? A system has been defined as any set of 
distinct but interconnected elements or parts that operate as a unified whole 
to serve a function or purpose.  Consider, for example, the humble coffee 
93
machine. Its different parts—filter, water reservoir, heating element, coffee 
pot—are distinct, but operate together for the purpose of brewing coffee. 
The human body also is a system. Its elements include lungs, circulatory 
system, musculature, skeletal frame, etc. Each is distinct, but the elements 
interact  with  each other to  function as a unified organism.  In  contrast, 
pebbles randomly scattered along the street do not constitute a system. They 
are not interconnected, nor do they form a cohesive whole that serves a 
particular function or purpose. 94   
Systems accordingly have certain core characteristics: (1) they consist 
of distinct elements;  (2) these elements are coordinated and interconnected; 
95
and (3) the elements operate as a unified whole to serve a given function or 
purpose. In addition, a fourth core characteristic of systems implicit in the 
literature,  and  of  critical  importance  for  our  discussion,  is  (4)  systems 
perform their  function  or purpose  over time.  The coffee machine, it is 
                                                           
91 KAUFFMANN, supra note 90, at 1 (systems theory “has revolutionized many fields of science and 
has had an enormous impact on all our lives, even though most people have never heard of it.”) 
92 An exception can be found in an accessible guide written by biochemist Donella Meadows, 
MEADOWS, supra note 90. Meadows was a MacArthur Foundation genius award recipient and lead 
author of the bestseller Limits to Growth. DONELLA MEADOWS ET AL., THE LIMITS TO GROWTH 
(1972). Another useful introductory text is KAUFFMANN, supra note 90. 
93 MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 11.  See also KAUFFMANN, supra note 90, at 1 (“A system is a 
collection of parts which interact with each other to function as a whole”). 
94 Following Meadow’s convention, we will generally use the word “function” to refer to nonhuman, 
evolved systems and the word “purpose” to refer to designed systems. As Meadows notes, and as is 
arguably the case with corporations, “many systems have both human and nonhuman elements.” 
MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 15. 
95 Elements can be tangible or intangible. MEADOWS, supra note 90 at 13.  For example, a senior 
executive’s knowledge and experience may be an important element of a corporate system. 
21 
  
hoped, will brew coffee not only today, but tomorrow.  
96
Systems take many forms. Some systems, such as the coffee machine, 
are designed. Other systems, like organisms, evolve. Still other systems are 
hybrids that are both designed and evolved. Examples of hybrid systems 
include “artificial life” computer programs  and (as we explore in greater 
97
detail below) many business corporations.  
98
For, while systems theory currently is not a staple of contemporary 
corporate law and governance discussions, we believe it is especially well-
suited to the tasks of designing, assessing, and improving the performance 
of business  firms,  especially those structured  as corporations.  Just as a 
coffee machine can be viewed as a system, so too can a company. Business 
corporations  consist  of  separate  yet  interconnected  elements,  including 
human capital (employees, executives, directors), financial capital (funds 
raised from operations and from equity and debt investors), and physical 
capital (plant and equipment, inventory). Each element is distinct and serves 
a distinct purpose. For example, directors and officers supply managerial 
expertise; employees supply labor; the physical plant produces goods for 
sale; and financial capital purchases the labor and raw materials needed to 
produce more goods. These elements do not exist in isolation vis-à-vis each 
other. They are interconnected, influencing each other in ways that allow 
them to operate as a unified whole, separate and apart from their individual 
selves. This unified whole performs several useful functions: generating 
goods  and  services,  investment  returns,  and  tax  revenues.  Finally,  it 
performs these functions over time. Indeed, an incorporated entity in theory 
can operate in perpetuity.  
99
Accordingly, thinking of a company as a system can help us better 
understand the nature of corporations, their purpose, and the best way to 
measure and improve their performance. We explore how below. We start 
by identifying some basic principles of systems theory and examining what 
                                                           
96 Meadows offers the following approach for differentiating between systems and things that are (in 
Meadows’ words) “a bunch of stuff”: First, determine whether one can identify the parts. If yes, then 
determine whether the parts affect each other.  Third, determine whether “the parts together produce 
an effect that is different from the effect of each part on its own.” We would add a fourth step; 
consider whether the effect produced persists “over time…in a variety of circumstances.” Id. at 12,15. 
97 CHRISTOPHER G.  LANGTON, ARTIFICIAL LIFE: AN OVERVIEW (1995). 
98 See infra Part II.B (discussing hybrid nature of corporations). 
99 See, e.g., DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 8, § 102(b)(5) (giving perpetual existence to a corporation); N.Y. 
BUS. CORP. § 402(a)(9) (McKinney 2013) (the certificate of incorporation shall include “[t]he 
duration of the corporation if other than perpetual”). 
22 
  
those principles teach about the nature of firms. We then consider what 
systems theory tells us about the question of corporate purpose. Finally, we 
discuss what can be learned from systems theory about ways to measure 
and  improve  corporate  performance  and  to  hold  corporate  managers 
accountable.  
 
B.  SYSTEMS THEORY AND THE NATURE OF THE CORPORATION 
Perhaps the first and most fundamental principle in systems theory is 
that systems are more than the sum of their parts. The individual pieces of a 
coffee machine, left lying about, do nothing. It is only when these pieces are 
connected and fitted together properly, and interact with and affect each 
other, that the machine can brew coffee. 
This principle applies straightforwardly to business corporations. The 
individual  elements  that  comprise  the  corporation—physical  assets, 
intellectual  capital,  financial  resources,  labor—perform  quite  differently 
when disconnected and disaggregated from each other, than when they are 
coordinated with each other through the corporate entity. A pile of money, 
sitting alone, does nothing. It is only when investors’ money is combined 
and  coordinated  with  intellectual  capital,  physical  capital,  and  human 
capital, that the money can generate additional wealth for investors (along 
with goods, services, employment opportunities, and innovations).  The 
100
firm, like the coffee machine and other systems, operates as an integrated 
whole  to  perform  functions  that  its  individual  parts  cannot  perform  in 
isolation.  
101
A second fundamental principle of systems thinking is that systems are 
fractal, in the sense that it is useful to think of systems as comprised of 
subsystems, which in turn are comprised of other subsystems, and so on, ad 
infinitum.   Conversely  a  system  typically  can  also  be  described  as  a 
102
subsystem of another larger system. Thus a human being is comprised of 
organs,  which  are  comprised  of  cells,  which  are  comprised  of  protein 
                                                           
100 This is why corporate production often presents what economists call a “team production” 
scenario. Blair & Stout, supra note 21. 
101 See MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 12 (“there is an integrity or wholeness about a system and an 
active set of mechanisms to maintain that integrity. Systems can change, adapt, respond to events, 
seek goals, mend injuries, and attend to their own survival in lifelike ways, although they may 
contain or consist of nonliving things. Systems can be self-organizing, and often are self-repairing 
over at least some range of disruptions. They are resilient, and many of them are evolutionary.”) 
102 KAUFFMANN, supra note 90, at 2.  
23 
  
molecules, etc. At the same time, an individual can be viewed as part of a 
family, which is part of a community, which is part of a nation, and so forth.  
To  keep  the  amount  of  information  needed  to  make  decisions  within 
manageable  bounds,   systems  thinkers  typically  order  systems  into 
103
hierarchies. Any system can be broken down into component subsystems, 
or  viewed  as  a  subsystem  of  a  larger  system.  A  corollary  is  that  it is 
essential when applying the systems approach to identify which level of 
hierarchy is most suitable for analyzing the problem at hand.    
104
Again, this lesson applies to corporations. A corporation can be viewed 
as comprised of a number of different subsystems, such as its managerial 
team;  its  production  process  and  facilities;  its  marketing  team;  and  its 
financial operations. Each subsystem is comprised of elements that interact 
with  each  other  to  perform  some  subpurpose  (raising  financing, 
manufacturing products, generating sales). Conversely, a corporation can be 
viewed as part of a larger system (e.g., a corporate conglomerate, or a 
nation’s economy). For present purposes—that is, for analyzing the nature, 
purpose,  and  best  way  of  monitoring  the  performance  of  business 
corporations—we treat the corporate entity as the system of interest and the 
appropriate level of analysis.  
105
A third general principle of systems theory that flows from the first and 
second principles is that the overall health and continued functioning of a 
system depends on the continued health and functioning of each of its 
essential subsystems. Each subsystem must work for the whole system to 
work properly, and changes in the elements or relationships of a subsystem 
can affect the system as a whole. If a coffee machine’s heating element 
breaks, for example, the coffee machine can no longer brew coffee. 
                                                           
103 As Meadows explains it, although the boundaries between systems are not real, it is acceptable to 
simplify analysis this way because “relationships within [systems] are denser and stronger than 
relationships between [systems]” and “[w]hen hierarchies break down, they usually split along their 
subsystem boundaries.  Much can be learned by taking apart systems…and studying them 
separately.” MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 83. 
104 Id., at 84 (“if you have a liver disease, for example, a doctor usually can treat it without paying 
much attention to your heart or your tonsils (to stay on the same hierarchical level) … or the DNA in 
the nuclei of the liver cells (to move down several levels)”). 
105 An unwillingness to confine analysis to a manageable level may have contributed to the decline of 
interest in “structural functionalism” in sociology.  Structural functionalism, associated with theorists 
like Talcott Parsons and Robert K. Merton, attempted to apply systems thinking to understanding 
entire societies. LopuckI, supra note 90 at 483-85. It thus fell into what Meadows has described as the 
“trap” of “making [systems] boundaries too large… result[ing] in enormously complicated analyses, 
which produce piles of information that may only serve to obscure the answers to the questions at 
hand.” MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 98. 
24 
  
Corporations similarly depend on all their subsystems to function.  If 
equity or debt investors refuse to supply funds; if employees stop manning 
the production facilities; if executives mismanage; the entire corporation 
may soon cease to function. As we discuss in greater detail in Part II.D, this 
insight from systems thinking has important implications for how we should 
go about the business of measuring corporate performance.  
106
Finally, a fourth important lesson from systems theory is that, to fulfill 
its  purpose  or  function,  a  system  must  survive.  Recall  that  a  basic 
characteristic of systems is that they perform purposes or functions over 
time. The time period necessary to fulfill the system’s purpose or function 
may be quite short (consider the fruit fly or the hand grenade). But it may 
also be quite long. This is especially likely to be true in the case of business 
firms organized as perpetual corporate entities. For example, the Hudson 
Bay  Company  has  been  operating  continuously  since  1670;   General 
107
Electric (a corporate adolescent by comparison) was founded in 1892.  
108
When systems must operate over long periods of time to perform their 
functions or purposes, system survivability—or, to use a more common 
label, sustainability—becomes a desideratum. 
Systems thinkers accordingly devote considerable attention to questions 
of sustainability. This focus is apparent in the systems literature, which 
identifies multiple strategies to improve the odds a system will survive long 
enough to achieve its intended purpose. Because sustainability may be a 
particularly desirable attribute for perpetual entities like corporations, we 
conclude this section by exploring some common sustainability strategies in 
greater detail. 
One straightforward sustainability mechanism found in many systems is 
redundancy—that  is,  devoting  more  resources  to  some  purpose  than 
necessary under current conditions.  Redundancy is often seen, for example, 
in engineering, where it is common practice to employ backup systems, or 
make structures stronger than they need to be. Redundancy is inefficient in 
a narrow sense, as redundant resources seem “wasted” as long as conditions 
remain stable. In an uncertain world, however, conditions may change, and 
redundant resources prove essential for the system’s survival. This explains 
                                                           
106 See infra Part II.D. 
107 Our History, HUDSON BAY COMPANY, https://www2.hbc.com/hbc/history/ (last visited Jan. 18, 
2016).  
108 Our Company History, GENERAL ELECTRIC, https://www.ge.com/about-us/history/1878-1904 (last 
visited Jan. 18, 2016).  
25 
  
why redundancy is often seen in organisms. (If efficiency were all evolution 
cared about, people would not become overweight, or have two kidneys.)  
109
A  second  sustainability  mechanism  found  in  many  systems  is 
homeostasis—that is, information and control feedback loops that allow the 
system to adjust to disturbances in its external environment, and stay within 
the  parameters  necessary  for  continued  functioning.   For  example,  the 
110
dihedral (“V”-shaped) wings of aircraft provide homeostasis. When a wing 
dips in flight, it tends to rebound. Organisms similarly use feedback loops 
to achieve homeostasis; hunger is a feedback mechanism that prompts an 
organism to eat when running short on calories. Systems theorists have 
something of an obsession with feedback loops, which can be stabilizing or 
destabilizing  (“runaway”  feedback  loops),  and  may  have  limits  or 
breakdown points.  (Dihedral wings alone are unlikely to save an aircraft 
111
turned upside down.) 
Finally, a third sustainability mechanism found in some systems is the 
capacity for self-organization—the ability for the system itself to change 
(“to learn, diversify, complexify, evolve”)  in response to shifts in the 
112
external  environment  that  might  otherwise  overwhelm  the  system’s 
feedback loops, and threaten the system’s survival. For example, birds are 
warm-blooded, but many species do not rely only on homeostasis to avoid 
freezing; they have also evolved the ability to fly south for winter.  
Business firms can, and often do, exhibit redundancy, homeostasis, and 
self-organization. For example, it is common for corporations to employ 
redundancy by maintaining an “equity cushion” (holding more assets than 
necessary  to  meet  liabilities).  Financial  controls  that  document  rising 
                                                           
109 Put differently, redundancy appears inefficient in a static analysis that presumes conditions cannot 
change.  A dynamic analysis that acknowledges uncertainty and the possibility of change makes 
redundancy look more efficient. Moreover, although it might be argued that in perfectly competitive 
markets companies might find it difficult to invest in redundancy just as they might find it difficult to 
invest in innovation, see WILLIAM J. BAUMOL & ALAN S. BLINDER, ECONOMICS: PRINCIPLES AND 
POLICY 607 (4th ed. 1988) (discussing argument that perfect competition can make innovation 
difficult), economists recognize that many business firms operate in markets that are not perfectly 
competitive, id. at 611 (“Most productive activity in the United States, as in any advanced industrial 
society, can be found between the two theoretical poles [of] perfect competition and pure 
monopoly”). 
110 See KAUFFMANN, supra note 90, at 4-12. 
111 MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 40 (“Every balancing feedback loop has its breakdown point, where 
other loops pulled the stock away from its goal more strongly than it can pull back”); see also 
KAUFFMANN, supra note 90, at 13 (“there are limits to the amount and kind of change which any 
active system can deal with”). 
112 MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 79. 
26 
  
inventories or declining sales figures are homeostatic information feedback 
loops that alert companies when they must reduce production to remain 
profitable. Finally, firms can self-organize by merging, moving to other 
jurisdictions, or amending bylaws and charters to evolve new governance 
structures (e.g., adopting a classified board or a dual class share structure) in 
response to changes in the regulatory or market environment.  In effect, 
113
their legal form “evolves.” 
Companies  that  embrace  these  sorts  of  sustainability  mechanisms 
exhibit  resilience:  the  ability  to  recover  and  continue  functioning  after 
encountering a destabilizing and potentially destructive force.  Citibank, 
114
BP, and JPMorgan were each able to recover after unforeseen destabilizing 
events—the subprime mortgage crisis, Gulf oil spill, and “London whale” 
fiasco, respectively.  Enron and Lehman Brothers proved too fragile for the 
115
shocks  they  encountered.  We  discuss  the  implications  of  resiliency  for 
corporate performance in greater detail in Part II.D. 
In sum,  at  least  four basic principles from  systems theory apply to 
corporate entities if we think of them as systems: (1) the whole of the 
corporate system is more than the sum of its parts; (2) the corporate system 
can be viewed as composed of subsystems and also as part of a larger 
system, making it essential to choose the appropriate level of analysis in 
decisionmaking;  (3)  the  health  of  the  corporate  system  depends  on  the 
                                                           
113 See infra text accompanying note 193-195 (discussing how the corporate sector is self-organizing 
in response to the rise of shareholder value theory by adopting internal governance rules that insulate 
corporate entities from shareholder demands, e.g. share classes); Lynn A. Stout, On the Rise of 
Shareholder Primacy, Signs of its Fall, and the Return of Managerialism (In the Closet) 36 SEATTLE 
U. L. REV. 1169 (2013) (discussing how public companies are reorganizing in response to appearance 
and empowerment of activist investors).. Self-organization allows systems to change, evolve, and 
sometimes to create whole new structures, responding in diverse and complex ways to meet the 
changing needs of their environments and constituents. Innovation, entrepreneurship, and 
intrapreneurship are all examples of firm self-organization. See Tamara C. Belinfanti, Contemplating 
the Gap-Filling Role of Social Intrapreneurship, 94 OREGON L. REV. 67 (2015). 
114 MEADOWS, supra note 90 at 78 (“Systems need to be managed not only for productivity or 
stability, they also need to be managed for resilience—the ability to recover from perturbation, the 
ability to restore or repair themselves”). 
115 Jonathan Berr, $7B Penalty Doesn’t End Citigroup’s Legal Woes (July 14, 2014, 1:49 PM), 
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/citigroups-7-billion-penalty-doesnt-end-banks-legal-woes/; Miyoko 
Sakshita, Four Years After Gulf Oil Spill, BP is Recovering Faster Than Environment, 
HUFFINGTONPOST (Mar. 26, 2014, 4:50 PM), http://www.huffingtonpost.com/miyoko-sakashita/gulf-
oil-spill_b_5036370.html; Mary Bottari, JP Morgan Gets an Award for London Whale Fiasco, Will 
Schneiderman Harpoon the Corruption?, THE CENTER FOR MEDIA AND DEMOCRACY (Mar. 26, 2013, 
7:34 AM), http://www.prwatch.org/news/2013/03/12033/jp-morgan-gets-award-london-whale-fiasco-
will-schneiderman-harpoon-corruption (JPMorgan Chase employee accepted a “best crisis 
management” award by an investor relations magazine). 
27 
  
health of each of its critical subsystems; and (4) to perform over time, the 
corporate system must be sustainable. 
 
C.  SYSTEMS THEORY AND THE QUESTION OF CORPORATE 
PURPOSE 
As we have described, systems theory offers a variety of insights to 
benefit our understanding of the nature of corporate entities. But some of 
the most valuable lessons systems thinking offers corporate law scholarship 
lies in what it teaches about how we might think about corporate purpose. 
As discussed in Part I, for most of the past three decades, experts in the 
Anglo-American world have embraced the notion that business corporations 
have but one goal: to maximize shareholder value.  Systems thinking, in 
116
contrast, offers a very different perspective—one that offers support for 
some of the competing models of the corporation surveyed in Part I.A. For 
systems theory teaches, first and foremost, that systems not only can but 
typically do serve more than one purpose. 
Consider again the coffee machine. One purpose of a coffee machine is, 
obviously, to brew coffee. But anyone designing a coffee machine is likely 
to have other goals in mind as well. In addition to being able to brew coffee, 
the coffee machine also should be energy efficient; have a beautiful design; 
not be too expensive; and not occupy too much counter space. Finally but 
fundamentally, the machine should be durable. (As Meadows puts it, “[a]n 
important  function  of  almost  every  system  is  to  ensure  its  own 
perpetuation.”)   
117
Multiple purposes are the rule, not the exception, in systems.  Indeed, it 
is hard to think of any designed system whose designer would not have had 
more than one goal in mind. This naturally raises the question: if even a 
simple coffee machine has multiple purposes, is it not reasonable to believe 
that a system as complex as a corporation also might serve more than one 
purpose?  
Corporations provide investment returns to shareholders.  They also 
make interest payments to debtholders; pay salaries to employees; provide 
revenues to suppliers; pay taxes to governments; provide goods and services 
                                                           
116 See supra Part I.A. 
117 MEADOWS, supra note 90 at 15. 
28 
  
to consumers; and make technological breakthroughs that benefit future 
generations. These are all legitimate and beneficial outcomes of corporate 
activity.   There  is  no  logical  reason  (apart  from  the  accountability 
118
argument discussed in Part I.C) to choose only one beneficial outcome as 
important, and demote all others.  Systems theory accordingly challenges 
119
shareholder value theory’s fundamental assumption of a singular, uniform 
corporate goal, and instead supports the view that corporate purpose need 
not be homogenous.  
120
At the same time, it inevitably raises the question: how, then, should we 
determine a corporate entity’s purpose? One obvious way to think about the 
purposes of a designed system is in terms of the intentions of the person or 
persons  who  designed  it.  The  coffee  machine,  for  example  might  be 
designed to brew coffee quickly and efficiently while looking attractive and 
occupying minimal counter space. The intentions of the coffee machine’s 
designer delineate its purposes. 
Who “designs” corporations? Perhaps most fundamentally, corporate 
entities  are  designed  and  created  by  the  states  whose  laws  make 
incorporation  possible.   In  this  sense  systems  thinking  reinforces  the 
121
concession/state franchise model of the corporation.  Beyond the state, 
122
however, one might also say the corporation is designed by the entrepreneur 
who drafts and files the corporate charter (often with the aid of lawyers who 
help select the charter’s terms).  In addition, one could say the corporation 
123
is  designed by the individuals who serve  as its board of directors  and 
executive team. Finally, creating a business corporation usually requires 
investment capital, which comes from equity and debt investors. To the 
                                                           
118 Moreover, to ensure the company will continue to provide these benefits, durability or 
sustainability may itself be a desirable goal for some corporate entities.  We explore this possibility in 
greater detail infra text accompanying note 138–40. 
119 Systems theory accordingly lends credibility to alternative models of corporate purpose, like 
stakeholder models or team production models that allow for the possibility that corporations might 
serve multiple constituencies.  See, e.g., Blair & Stout, supra note 21 (team production model); 
Edward R. Freeman, Stockholders and Stakeholders: A New Perspective on Corporate Governance, 
25 CAL. MGMT. REV. 88 (1993)(stakeholder model). 
120 See EASTERBROOK &  FISCHEL, supra note 59. See generally Michael Klausner, The Contractarian 
Theory of Corporate Law: A Generation Later, 31 J. Corp. L.  779 (2006). 
121 See Ciepley, supra note 41 (describing corporate entities as “franchise governments” designed by 
the state); Henry Hansmann & Reinier Kraakman, The Essential Role of Organizational Law, 110 
YALE. L.J.387 (2000) (describing how corporate entities need state law to exist and cannot be formed 
by private contracting). 
122 See supra text accompanying note 41. 
123 See John C. Coates IV, Explaining Variation in Takeover Defenses: Blame the Lawyers, 89 CAL. 
L. REV. 1301 (2001) (describing the role played by lawyers in setting the terms of corporate charters). 
29 
  
extent  the  corporation  is  organized  to  appeal  to  potential  creditors  and 
shareholders, both debt and equity investors might be said to participate in 
its design. It should be apparent at this point that the shareholder class is 
only one, and not necessarily the most important, of the many different  
groups that “design” a corporation and participate in it on a voluntary basis; 
each of which has its own objectives in mind.  The systems approach 
124
consequently echoes many elements of the nexus of contracts model of the 
firm.  
125
But  inquiring  into  designers’  intentions  may  not  be  the  end  of  the 
inquiry into a designed system’s purpose. A third lesson of systems thinking 
is that even a designed system may surprise us by exhibiting behaviors and 
performing functions that were not intended or anticipated by its designers; 
automobiles are designed for transportation, but also prove unfortunately 
effective  at  causing  injury.  Moreover,  if  a  designed  system  has  self-
organizing  features,  its  functions  may  change  as  it  evolves.  Even  in 
designed systems, “[s]ystem purposes need not be human purposes and are 
not necessarily those intended by any single actor within the system.”  
126
When we observe a system, we may find the functions it actually performs 
to be quite different from what its designers intended.  
127
This insight is consonant with the entity approach to thinking about 
                                                           
124 A shareholder value theorist might argue shareholders play the major role because companies need 
to raise funds by selling equity.  But as forms of team production, companies also need to attract 
funds from creditors, human capital from executives, employees, etc.  Blair & Stout, supra note 21. 
125 See supra text accompanying notes 39-40.  Because corporations have many designers, their 
intended purpose may vary depending on the intentions of the particular designer in question.  As a 
normative matter, when the objectives of different designers clash, which designer’s goals should 
prevail? Like most corporate governance scholarship, this Article adopts the public policy approach 
of focusing on overall social welfare. See Hansmann & Kraakman, supra note 18, at 444-49 
(suggesting that “all thoughtful people” believe corporations ought to be run in the interests of society 
as a whole). From this perspective it makes little sense to define corporate purpose only in terms of 
the intentions of the entrepreneurs who start companies, or the executives who run them, or the equity 
and debt investors who finance them.  Our concern is with social welfare writ large. This perspective 
suggests that the corporate designers whose goals matter most may be the political states whose laws 
create and regulate corporate entities. Elsewhere, one of the authors has argued that a social welfare 
analysis of corporate purpose should also take into account the welfare of future generations. Stout, 
supra note 81 at 84-85 
126 MEADOWS, supra note 90 at 15. 
127 This is not always a bad thing.  Systems can surprise us in good ways.  For example, Cynthia 
Estlund has argued that large corporations, by bringing together employees from a wide range of 
backgrounds, break down racial, ethnic, and religious barriers and promote greater social integration.  
CYNTHIA ESTLUND, WORKING TOGETHER: HOW WORKPLACE BONDS STRENGTHEN A DIVERSE 
DEMOCRACY (2003). 
30 
  
corporations.   It  also  has  interesting  implications  for  identifying  the 
128
functions of corporations, which are hybrid systems with both designed and 
self-evolved  characteristics.   It  recommends  that  we  look  at  what 
129
corporations do, not only at what academics, judges, or executives say they 
do  or  ought  to  do.  The  rhetoric  of  shareholder  value  peppers  the 
contemporary scholarly literature, and can also be found in policy reports 
and  the  dicta  of  some  judicial  opinions.   Yet  business  corporations 
130
continue to pursue strategies that seem clearly inconsistent with maximizing 
accounting profits or share price: rejecting premium takeover bids, adopting 
poison pills and dual class share structures, resisting activist shareholders’ 
demands.   Some defenders of shareholder value try to resolve the tension 
131
between shareholder value theory and corporate behavior by speculating 
that such strategies must maximize shareholder wealth in the (conveniently 
unobservable) “long run.”  Others acknowledge the gap between theory 
132
and practice by asserting that managers are running amok, and corporate 
law must be reformed to constrain them.  Systems theory does not directly 
133
answer the question of whether the gap between shareholder value theory 
and actual corporate behavior is a good thing or bad thing. It does, however, 
caution us to pay close attention to the difference.   
Finally, systems theory teaches that what we observe about a system’s 
apparent purpose will depend on our level of analysis—what level in the 
system hierarchy are we looking at? Systems are made up of subsystems, 
and subsystems have subpurposes that can be at odds with the system’s 
overall purpose. The purpose of the human circulatory system is to move 
blood; the purpose of the human skin is to contain the other organs of the 
body.  If the skin is breached and the circulatory system continues to move 
blood,  you  might  bleed  to  death.  It  is  important  not  to  focus  only  on 
                                                           
128 See supra text accompanying notes 34-36. Recall Justice Brandeis’ description of the corporation 
as a “Frankenstein monster,” id. 
129 See STOUT, supra note 47, at 23-24.  
130 See supra text accompanying notes 47-48. 
131 See infra,  text accompanying notes 191-199. 
132 Millon, supra note 70, at 1013. See, e.g., Steven Greenhouse, How Costco Became the Anti-Wal-
Mart, N. Y. TIMES, July 17, 2005 (Costco’s CEO states “On Wall Street, they’re in the business of 
making money between now and next Thursday . . . we can’t take that view. We want to build a 
company that will still be here 50 and 60 years from now.”); James B. Stewart, Amazon Says Long 
Term and Means It, NEW YORK TIMES (Sep. 16, 2011) (Amazon CEO issued a manifesto stating “It’s 
all about the long term,” explaining why Amazon is spending profits on long-term growth and 
customer support). 
133 See Bebchuk, The Case for Increasing Shareholder Power and Bebchuk, The Case for 
Shareholder Access to the Ballot, supra note 72; Lucien Arye Bebchuk, The Myth that Insulating 
Boards Serves Long-Term Value, 113 COLUMBIA L. REV. 1637 (2013). 
31 
  
promoting  the  purpose  of  a  single  subsystem,  if  we  care  about  the 
functioning of the system as a whole.  When a single subsystem’s goals 
134
dominate, overall system function can suffer. 
Thus a  fourth and, we believe, critical lesson that systems thinking 
offers  on  corporate  purpose  is  that  the  overall  purpose  or  goal  of  the 
corporate system should not be subordinated to the goals of one of its 
subsystems. This observation cautions against placing exclusive emphasis 
on the goals of shareholders, as shareholder value theory recommends.  
135
Issuing  equity  shares  allows  corporations  to  obtain  financial  capital  at 
certain points in time (although debt and retained profits often are more 
important sources of funding).  Shareholders may perform other useful 
136
functions  as  well,  including  serving  as  a  check  on  agency  costs.  It  is 
important to remember, however, that the share ownership system is only 
part of the larger corporate system. There are other corporate subsystems 
that matter, including the subsystems that produce the goods and services 
the corporation sells, the subsystems that market these goods and services to 
customers, the subsystems that manage the corporation’s employees, and so 
forth.  The  goals  of  the  shareownership  system  and  the  goals  of  the 
company’s current shareholders—many of whom expect to hold their shares 
for  only  a  short  period  of  time—are  not  necessarily  the  goals  of  the 
corporate entity as a whole.  And for the systems thinker, “[k]eeping sub-
purposes and overall system purposes in harmony is an essential function of 
successful systems.”  
137
In exploring systems theory’s implications, we do not claim to offer a 
definitive answer to the difficult question of corporate purpose.  Indeed, one 
of the primary insights of systems thinking is that the purpose and functions 
of a system can be the “least obvious part of the system,”  especially to 
138
outsider observers who pay attention to only a few events or to “rhetoric or 
stated goals.”  Different corporations can have different sets of purposes, 
139
and perceptions of purpose can vary depending on the perspective of the 
                                                           
134 MEADOWS, supra note 90 at 84-85. 
135 See supra Part II.B. 
136 JEFFREY D. BAUMAN & RUSSELL B. STEVENSON, JR., CORPORATIONS LAW AND POLICY 30–31 (8th 
ed., 2007). 
137 MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 16. 
138 Id. at 16–17. 
139 Id.  See infra text accompanying notes 161-163 (describing advantages insiders enjoy in assessing 
corporate performance). 
32 
  
participant in the system and on the level of analysis.  In other words, 
140
systems theory treats system purpose as complex, fluid, and to some degree 
dependent  on  the  observer’s  perspective.  In  this  regard  it  resembles 
relativity  theory,  which  treats  physical  reality  as  complex,  fluid,  and 
dependent on the observer’s perspective. The analogy may be instructive. 
For just as in physics it is sometimes necessary to take relativity theory into 
account to avoid costly mistakes,  it can be necessary to use systems theory 
141
to avoid costly mistakes about corporate purpose. 
Systems  theory  accordingly  carries  several  obvious  and  important 
implications  for  contemporary  corporate  governance  scholarship.  First, 
shareholder value theory demands corporations pursue a single, uniform 
objective. Systems thinking embraces the possibility of multiple objectives. 
Second, shareholder value theory presumes the desires of the corporation’s 
current shareholders should determine what corporations are designed to 
do.  Systems theory acknowledges that corporate purpose can be viewed 
142
from different perspectives, including the desires of the state whose laws 
made incorporation possible in  the first  place. Third, shareholder value 
theory conflicts with much observed corporate behavior. Systems thinking 
explains why companies often eschew opportunities to “maximize” current 
profits or share price. Finally, shareholder value theory focuses obsessively 
on promoting the goals of the shareholding subsystem, while ignoring the 
goals of the corporate system as a whole. As we explore in greater detail in 
Part  III,  systems  theory  explains  why  this  approach—which  in  recent 
decades  has  encouraged  numerous  federal  regulatory  interventions  into 
traditional state corporate law—has proven not only ineffective, but very 
possibly destructive.   
143
                                                           
140 See EASTERBROOK & FISCHEL, supra note 59, at 35-36 (“An approach that emphasizes the 
contractual nature of a corporation removes from the field of interesting questions one that has 
plagued many writers: what is the goal of the corporation?  Is it profit, and for whom?  Social welfare 
more broadly defined?  Is there anything wrong with corporate charity?  Should corporations try to 
maximize profit over the long run or the short run?  Our response to such questions is: who cares?...  
The role of corporate law here, as elsewhere, is to adopt a background term that prevails unless varied 
by contract”). 
141 For example, the global positioning system (GPS) must take account of the theory of relativity 
because atomic clocks on satellites in orbit experience time more slowly relative to clocks on the 
surface of the earth.  Neil Ashby, Relativity and the Global Positioning System, PHYSICS TODAY, May 
2002, 41. https://www.uam.es/personal_pdi/ciencias/jcuevas/Teaching/GPS_relativity.pdf  
142 It also assumes that equity investors’ sole interest is in making as much money as possible, without 
regard for ethics or for impact on stakeholders and third parties.  This is a questionable assumption in 
many cases. Andrew A. Schwartz, Corporate Legacy, 5 HARV. BUS. L. REV. 237 (2015); STOUT, 
supra note 47, at Ch. 8. 
143 See infra Part II.C. 
33 
  
D.    SYSTEMS  THEORY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  MEASURING 
CORPORATE PERFORMANCE 
In Part I, we discussed the competing models of the corporate form and 
the  rise  of  shareholder  value  theory  as  the  dominant  Anglo-American 
narrative. We then showed how intellectual justifications for shareholder 
value theory have shifted over the decades. Today, the theory is grounded 
primarily on the idea that shareholder value provides a single, quantifiable 
metric that can be used to hold directors and executives accountable. As we 
also showed in Part I, however, when shareholder value is gauged only by 
short-term financial metrics, it can produce pathological results, and when it 
is interpreted to mean long-term shareholder value, it no longer offers that 
desired accountability. What, then, can?  
Systems thinking may offer a more promising solution to the problem of 
measuring corporate performance. This idea may seem counterintuitive, for 
systems theory acknowledges that corporate purpose need not be monolithic 
and that different companies may have different purposes. Yet as we will 
show, this fundamentally contractarian approach does not equate to a move 
toward chaos.  Rather, it is a move toward reality, and an embrace of the 
utility of the corporate form. Uncertainty makes it impossible to measure a 
company’s future performance perfectly. However, systems thinking allows 
us to gauge current performance and sustainability reasonably well, without 
risking  the  damage  that  can  follow  from  emphasizing  share  price  or 
accounting profits to the exclusion of all other corporate concerns. 
Let us return to the concept of multiple purposes. Modern shareholder 
value  theory  teaches  that  companies  should  “maximize”  one  particular 
purpose (shareholder returns) to the exclusion of others. Yet business firms 
provide  a  wide  range  of  social  benefits:  useful  goods  and  services, 
employment  opportunities,  tax  revenues,  and  technological  innovations, 
along  with  investment  returns  not  only  to  shareholders  but  also  to 
bondholders and other creditors. There are many possible different mixes of 
benefits  any  particular  company  might  produce,  and  no  obvious  policy 
reason (beyond broader social welfare concerns)  to prefer one mix over 
144
another. Moreover, systems theory underscores how a business corporation 
can have many “designers” whose contributions can be essential to the 
enterprise’s  success,  including  the  company’s  founders;  its  directors, 
                                                           
144 For example, in times of high unemployment we might want companies to focus on providing 
jobs; in times of slow growth, to emphasize investment and research.  During World War Two, 
corporate resources were redirected to providing military goods and services. 
34 
  
executives, employees, shareholders and lenders; and the state whose law 
makes  incorporation  possible.   Each  has  unique  goals  and  interests. 
145
Systems thinking accordingly supports a contractarian approach that treats 
corporate purpose as flexible, multifaceted, and driven by the purposes of 
those who create and participate in the enterprise. 
It also strongly cautions outside observers, like courts and government 
agencies, to exercise restraint in drawing conclusions about whether or not a 
particular company is performing well. One cannot simply assume what 
goal  or  business  strategy  is  “best”  for  any  particular  company.  The 
company’s purpose depends to some extent on the observer: shareholders 
might think the company should pay more dividends; creditors might think 
the company should build more equity to reduce risk; executives might 
think the company should invest more in developing new products; the state 
might think the business should pay more taxes. When different groups hold 
different  views  of  company  purpose,  there  is  room  for  subjective 
disagreement about how well the company is being managed.  Systems 
thinking accepts this disagreement, counseling against a rigid, “top-down” 
strategy  that  attempts  to  impose  a  single  objective  on  all  business 
corporations.    Like  the  nexus  of  contract  approach,  it  rejects  central 
planning in favor of diversity and self-organization. 
As  we  discuss  in  Part  III.B,  below,  this  approach  is  remarkably 
consistent with traditional state corporate law, which allows corporations to 
be formed for any lawful purpose and which protects director discretion to 
set  corporate  goals  through  the  business  judgment  rule.   As  we  also 
146
explore, it is inconsistent with many recent federal interventions.  Yet it 
147
raises a question: if outside regulators like courts and agencies are not well-
positioned to gauge whether companies are performing well, then who or 
what can hold managers accountable? 
In  part,  the  answer  lies  in  recognizing  that  like  many  systems, 
companies have homeostatic feedback loops that provide managers with 
information and incentive to keep the firm and its essential subsystems 
operating  within  the  parameters  necessary  to  ensure  continued 
functioning.  To survive, a business firm must be able to please customers 
148
                                                           
145 See supra text accompanying notes 121-124 (discussing who designs companies). 
146 See infra text accompanying notes 182. 
147 See infra Part III.C. 
148 Firm survival is likely to be an objective for many of those who manage firms, including directors 
(who presumably want to keep their positions), Blair & Stout, supra note 21, at 315. 
35 
  
well enough to keep sales stable or growing; satisfy employees enough to 
keep turnover within reasonable bounds; satisfy debt and equity investors 
enough to raise financing at a reasonable cost when needed; satisfy talented 
executives  enough  to  retain  them;  and  satisfy  taxing  authorities  and 
regulators enough to avoid costly sanctions. And, of course, it must make 
sufficient profits to do all these things and stay in business. 
For  it  seems  reasonable  to  believe  perpetuation—the  ability  to 
successfully perform desired functions on an ongoing basis—is likely to be 
an  important,  if  not  necessarily  exclusive,  objective  for  business  firms 
incorporated as perpetual entities.  A corollary is that those who create, 
149
manage, and participate in companies view resilience (a firm’s ability to 
survive and continue functioning in the face of change) as an important, if 
often implicit, firm goal.  Sometimes it is an explicit goal. Even diehard 
150
defenders of shareholder value theory concede banks should be not only 
profitable, but stable and sound.  
151
So, where does this leave us? How would a systems thinker address the 
problem of measuring firm performance? 
First, it is important to recognize that companies typically generate a 
wealth of potentially useful feedback information: sales trends, employee 
                                                                                                                                                   
and executives and employees (who may have invested significantly in firm-specific human capital, 
id. at 276 n.61; EASTERBROOK & FISCHEL, supra note 59, at 37). 
149 At some point, risk of failure may be acceptable if it helps the system achieve other desirable 
goals. For example, an engineer might want to design a reliable car, but recognize that if the car has 
too many backup systems it might become unaffordable.  Moreover, because the future is uncertain, 
it may be impossible to anticipate all the shocks the system could encounter.  (Even the most reliable 
car might fail if struck by an asteroid.) Thus, while survival is a likely corporate objective, it is 
probably not the only objective.  
150 Thus systems theory teaches that a manager concerned about firm survival should look to see 
whether the company has sustainability strategies in place (e.g., redundancy, homeostasis, self-
organization, see supra text accompanying notes 109-117) and assess whether they are sufficient to 
ensure firm survival in the face of likely future events. This might involve identifying sustainability 
mechanisms; establishing their limits or constraints (the points at which they might be overwhelmed 
and cease to protect the system’s functioning); and attempting to identify the sorts of future shocks 
the system might encounter. 
151 See, e.g,, Lucian A. Bebchuk and Holger Spamann, Regulating Bankers’ Pay, 98 GEO. L. J. 247 
(2009)(arguing that corporate governance “reforms” that empower shareholders cannot prevent 
excessive bank risk-taking). Systems thinking is implicit in the work of financial authorities like the 
Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), which seeks to ensure that financial institutions 
remain stable and sound.  It is standard practice for these authorities to refer to the banking sector as 
“the financial system” and to use “stress testing” (scenario analysis, see infra note 155) to assess the 
sustainability of large financial companies.  MARIO QUAGLIARELLO, STRESS TESTING THE BANKING 
SYSTEM: METHODOLOGIES AND APPLICATIONS (2009). 
36 
  
turnover, investment expenditures, borrowing costs, inventory changes, and 
customer satisfaction surveys, along with accounting profits and (for public 
companies) stock price. As we explore below, system theory offers a suite 
of methodologies and techniques for using such data to assess and improve 
a company’s progress towards multiple goals. The process goes by different 
labels depending on the field in which it is applied (e.g., system analysis in 
computer  science,  operations  analysis  in  engineering,  finance,  and 
management).  Whatever  the  field,  systems  thinkers  tend  to  assess 
performance in ways that are similar, and that can be easily adapted to the 
problem of assessing a company’s overall performance. 
Second,  when  perpetuation  is  an  important  system  goal,  systems 
theorists  pay  close  attention  to  what  they  call  “constraints:”  the  limits 
beyond which the system’s sustainability mechanisms can no longer protect 
the system.  Typically this involves identifying the parameters that the 
152
system  and  its  essential  subsystems  must  stay  within  to  function.  For 
example,  a  coffee  machine’s  heating  element  must  receive  a  certain 
minimum  amount  of  electrical  current  but  not  excessive  voltage;  its 
reservoir system must be supplied with a certain amount of water, but not 
too much; it must be subject to the normal force of gravity, but not ten g’s 
of gravitational force. This approach is quite different  from  selecting a 
single  variable  and  attempting  to  “maximize”  it.   Yet  it  can  be 
153
straightforwardly applied to companies. Just like other systems, firms must 
operate within constraints to survive: to remain functioning, the typical 
company must retain a certain number of employees, must invest a certain 
amount  in  marketing  and  developing  new  products,  and  must  provide 
returns to debt and equity investors sufficient to keep them happy without 
disgorging so much cash that it cannot pay its employees or develop new 
products.  Sustainability  requires  that  the  company  stay  within  these 
constraints, even if the external environment changes.  
154
                                                           
152 See supra text accompanying notes 109-117 (discussing sustainability mechanisms). 
153 Among other things, it requires systems thinkers to recognize and address the critical elements of 
time and uncertainty. They have developed a number of techniques to do this. Time graphs, for 
example, extrapolate system behavior over time given certain assumptions about initial conditions. 
MEADOWS, supra note 90 at 20. Another common methodology often used by engineers, military 
analysts, and financial regulators is scenario analysis, which models the likely effects of alternative 
future events on the system with the goal of identifying circumstances that might cause the system to 
fail. JEROME BRACKEN & GARTH P. MCCORMICK, RESEARCH ANALYSIS CORPORATION, SELECTED 
APPLICATIONS OF NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING 16-19 (1968). 
154 As this discussion suggests, systems thinking is congruent with the managerial principle of 
“satisficing” developed by Nobel-prize winning economist Herbert Simon. See Herbert A. Simon, 
Rationality as Process and as Product of Thought, 68 AM. ECON. REV. 1 (1978). 
37 
  
Third, systems thinkers have devised a wide range of analytical and 
mathematical  techniques  to  try  to  identify  ways  to  improve  system 
performance while keeping the system within its constraints.   This process 
155
is sometimes called “optimization,” a phrase that accepts the possibility of 
multiple objectives in a way that “maximization” cannot.  For example, 
156
nonlinear programming is a staple of systems analysis that acknowledges 
the  importance  of  protecting  resilience  by  keeping  the  system  within 
relevant constraints. The use of multiobjective functions is also common.  
157
Such techniques can be combined with scenario analysis, queuing theory, 
stochastic  analysis,  network  analysis,  time  graphs,  and  other  arcana  of 
operational research to identify ways to measure and improve a company’s 
ability to achieve its intended objectives while preserving sustainability.  
158
And in fact, corporate managers routinely apply these techniques when 
making  decisions  about  financing,  manufacturing,  and  supply  chain 
management.  
159
Understanding  how  systems  theorists  measure  and  improve  the 
performance  of  complex  systems  with  multiple  objectives  (machines, 
production processes, software programs) accordingly offers at least two 
insights into how to go about measuring overall corporate performance. 
First  and  perhaps  most  obviously,  systems  thinking  counsels  against 
focusing on any single metric. Raising next quarter’s profits by cutting 
valuable employees or eliminating customer support can lead to long-term 
disaster. Profits are not so much an objective as a constraint the firm must 
meet to stay in business. In this sense, systems theory incorporates elements 
of  shareholder  value  theory  by  recognizing  profitability  as  an  essential 
                                                           
155 See generally Cornell Engineering Operations Research and Information Engineering,“What is 
Operations Research?,” https://orie.cornell.edu/about/whatis.cfm;  SYSTEM THEORY: MODELING, 
ANALYSIS, AND CONTROL (Theodore E. Djaferis & Irvin C. Schick, eds., 2000). 
156 See, e.g., V. Bhaskar et al., Applications of Multiobjective Optimization in Chemical Engineering, 
16 REVIEWS IN CHEMICAL ENGINEERING 1 (2011). 
157  Id. A typical example of a multiobjective function might be a weighted average of desired goals.  
For example, corporate managers might be asked to optimize a weighted average of profits, revenue 
growth, consumer satisfaction, and R&D spending.  It is important to bear in mind that optimization 
typically takes place within constraints—that is, within the limits identified as necessary to keep the 
system functioning.  Trying to increase the weighted average through strategies that threaten the 
system’s long-term survival is to be avoided.  Moreover, the weights assigned to the different 
objectives are, to at least some extent, subjective. 
158 See Princeton University Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Academics Overview, 
http://orfe.princeton.edu/academics (describing operational research methods). 
159 See, e.g., Operations Research: The Science of Better, www.scienceofbetter.org (describing 
management uses). Similarly, financial regulators use “stress testing” to assess the stability and 
sustainability of large financial companies.  See also QUAGLIARELLO, supra note 151 (discussing 
bank regulators’ use of operations research techniques in bank stress testing). 
38 
  
constraint  to  be  considered  in  corporate  decisionmaking.  In  contrast  to 
shareholder value theory, however, the systems approach does not focus on 
profits alone, and does not direct managers to try to maximize them. Indeed, 
as  we  demonstrated  in  Part  I.C  it  makes  no  sense  to  talk  about 
“maximizing” such a number when the corporation is intended to operate 
into  an  indefinite  future,  and  the  sum  of  its  profits  over  time  is 
unobservable.   Metrics  like  profits,  employee  turnover,  customer 
160
satisfaction surveys, supplier costs, research budgets, and so forth are not 
ends in themselves. Rather, they are sources of information about whether 
the company is healthy and resilient, and likely to continue to generate 
multiple benefits into the future. It is to this goal, first and foremost, we 
may wish to hold managers “accountable.” 
A second important lesson from systems thinking is that, given multiple 
purposes  and  the  complexity  inherent  in  systems  analysis,  courts  and 
regulators will rarely be well-positioned to judge whether a company is 
performing well or poorly. It is those involved in the business, such as 
customers, employees, investors, and executives, who are in the far better 
position  to  make  such  an  assessment,  and  whose  behavior  is  likely  to 
provide the most useful feedback.  This observation provides additional 
161
support  for  a  contractarian  approach  to  corporate  governance  and  state 
corporate law’s business judgement doctrine.  It also suggests that it will 
162
be difficult for academics, lawmakers, or corporate governance advisors to 
identify  reforms  that  can  reliably  improve  the  performance  of  all 
companies.  Attempts to impose generic silver-bullet solutions are more 
likely to result in what Roberta Romano has pithily described as “quack 
corporate governance” that does more harm than good.  
163
In Part III.C we explore how recent federal regulatory interventions into 
state corporate law may be inflicting just such harm: reducing the numbers 
of public companies, decreasing corporate life expectancy, and eroding the 
returns from holding public equity.  These interventions, many of which 
164
were designed to encourage managers of public companies to focus more on 
                                                           
160 See supra Part I.C (discussing unobservability of “long term shareholder value”). 
161 The temptation for outside observers to claim significant and perhaps superior ability to judge 
corporate performance may explain why some lawmakers and corporate governance advisors have 
embraced shareholder value thinking despite its obvious limitations. STOUT, supra note 47, at 19. 
162 See supra text accompanying notes 39-41 (contractarianism) and infra text accompanying notes 
181-188 (discussing business judgment rule). 
163 Roberta Romano, The Sarbanes Oxley Act and the Making of Quack Corporate Governance, 114 
Yale L. J. 1521 (2005). 
164 See supra text accompanying notes 216-218. 
39 
  
increasing  shareholder  returns,  fall  into  what  systems  guru  Donella 
Meadows  has  called  the  “systems  trap”  of  misidentifying  the  system’s 
desired purpose or goal.  Supposed reforms driven by shareholder value 
165
thinking privilege the goals of the corporation’s shareholding subsystem 
over the goals of other important subsystems and the company as a whole. 
In  doing  so,  they  may  threaten  the  public  corporation’s  health  and 
sustainability. 
Systems  theory  counsels  that  to  remain  resilient,  companies  must 
maintain harmony between overarching system goals and subsystem goals. 
There  is  danger  in  focusing  too  much  on  improving  one  subsystem’s 
performance at the expense of another’s. Maximizing a coffee machine’s 
output leads to system failure if it causes the machine to overheat and break 
down, while maximizing the machine’s energy efficiency by turning off the 
heating element leads to system failure in the form of cold, weak coffee. 
Similarly, maximizing a company’s current profits by cutting research and 
development expenditures can eventually cause the firm to fail for lack of 
new products, just as maximizing R&D expenditures at the expense of 
profitability can lead to a different kind of failure. Systems theory treats the 
health  and  functioning  of  a  system’s  essential  subsystems’  elements  as 
incommensurables.  Constraints  must  be  respected  if  the  system  is  to 
survive. 
At the same time, it should be acknowledged that systems techniques 
rarely  allow  us  to  gauge  whether  a  company  is  being  run  perfectly. 
Embracing multiple objectives can give managers “wriggle room” to claim 
they are performing well overall, even when some performance measure 
like quarterly profits is in decline. Their wriggle room is limited, however.  
Whatever mix of functions we believe a company should perform, it can 
only perform those functions while it survives. When relevant metrics stray 
too far outside the parameters necessary for corporate sustainability—when 
profits  become  losses—it  becomes  apparent  that  something  is  amiss. 
Accordingly,  while  a  systems  approach  does  not  necessarily  allow 
observers to determine whether a company is performing at its best, it does 
often allow them to gauge whether managers are doing a better job or a 
                                                           
165 MEADOWS, supra note 90 at 138-41 (“if the goal is defined badly, if it doesn’t measure what it’s 
supposed to measure, if it doesn’t reflect the real welfare of the system, then the system can’t 
possibly produce a desirable result.  Systems, like the three wishes in the traditional fairy tale, have a 
terrible tendency to produce exactly and only what you ask them to produce.  Be careful …  If the 
desired system state is national security, and that is defined as the amount of money spent on the 
military, the system will produce military spending …”). 
40 
  
worse one.  It thus offers a better methodology for promoting managerial 
accountability  than  the  subjective,  unobservable  criterion  of  “long-term 
shareholder value.” The strategy is hardly perfect.  But when it comes to 
assessing performance, the illusory perfection of shareholder value may be 
the enemy of the good of thriving, socially-beneficial corporations. 
 
PART III. SYSTEMS THINKING IN CORPORATE PRACTICE AND 
CORPORATE LAW 
 
A.  SYSTEMS THINKING IN CORPORATE MANAGEMENT 
We  have  argued  in  this  Article  that  systems  theory  provides  an 
intriguing alternative approach to thinking about the nature and purpose of 
corporate entities, an approach that  integrates  elements  of many  of the 
competing models of the corporation that have been proposed. Systems 
thinking  also  offers  methods  for  measuring  corporate  performance—
methods with arguably more rigor, and greater potential for truly holding 
managers  accountable,  than  the  much-lauded  but  essentially  subjective 
mirage of “long-term shareholder value.” Because systems theory views 
corporations from a fundamentally different perspective than shareholder 
value  theory  (or  any  of  the  other  theories  of  the  corporation),  space 
constraints prevent us from exploring more than a few of its implications 
here. Further work is  more than worthwhile, however. For the systems 
approach  fits  comfortably  with,  and  indeed  explains,  key  aspects  of 
corporate  practice  and  corporate  law  that  are  in  obvious  tension  with 
conventional shareholder value thinking. 
This tension can easily be heard, for example, in the way founders, 
directors and executives of successful corporations talk about their business 
objectives. Given the intellectual dominance of the standard model, it is 
hardly  surprising  to  find  managers  of  public  companies  sometimes 
referencing shareholder value (especially “long-term shareholder value”) as 
a corporate goal. Yet when companies publish statements describing their 
purpose or mission, they typically describe it far more broadly, often in 
terms of providing quality goods or services, or serving multiple corporate 
41 
  
stakeholders.  (The Johnson & Johnson credo begins “We believe our first 
166
responsibility is to the doctors, nurses, and patients, to mothers and fathers 
and  all  others  who  use  our  products  and  services…”)   A  survey  of 
167
corporate directors similarly found that a majority viewed themselves as 
having  obligations  not  only  to  shareholders  but  also  to  employees, 
customers, and the larger society.  This embrace of multiple objectives is 
168
far more consistent with the systems approach, than with shareholder value 
thinking. 
Moreover, even executives who publicly espouse shareholder value as 
their ultimate objective—and notably, many do not —still emphasize that 
169
the best way to achieve that objective is not to focus directly on trying to 
“maximize” profits or share price, but instead to pay close attention to the 
company’s sales trends, employee morale,  customer satisfaction, supply 
chain, and reinvestment initiatives.  In line with systems thinking, they 
intuitively recognize that the best strategy for enhancing future performance 
in the face of uncertainty is to ensure that each of the company’s essential 
subsystems remains healthy and resilient.  This philosophy was captured in 
a 2009 Financial Times interview with iconic CEO Jack Welch, a leading 
champion of the shareholder value theory of corporate purpose. According 
to Welch, “on the face of it, shareholder value was the dumbest idea in the 
world.  Shareholder  value  is  a  result,  not  a  strategy...Your  main 
constituencies are your employees, your customers, and your products.”  A 
170
2012 article in the Harvard Business Review similarly noted: 
                                                           
166 See Graham Kenny, Your Company’s Purpose is Not Its Vision, Mission, or Values, HARV. BUS. 
REV., Sept. 3, 2014, https://hbr.org/2014/09/your-companys-purpose-is-not-its-vision-mission-or-
values (describing various corporate purpose statements). 
167 JOHNSON & JOHNSON credo, www.jnj.com/sites/default/files/pdf/jnj_ourcredo. Management guru 
Peter Drucker famously held that the purpose of business is to create and keep a customer. PETER 
DRUCKER, THE PRACTICE OF MANAGEMENT 37 (1954). 
168 JAY LORSCH & ELIZABETH MACIVER, PAWNS OR POTENTATES: THE REALITY OF AMERICAN 
CORPORATE Boards 39-43 (1989). 
169 See, e.g., BUSINESS IS ABOUT MORE THAN MAKING MONEY, DIRECTORS & BOARDS ANNUAL 
REPORT 6, 8 (2015) (quoting Jim Senegal, founder and former chief executive of Costco, that 
“business was about more than making money.  Business had a responsibility.  Business had a social 
contract to the communities where they did business”); Geoff Colvin, Indra Nooyi’s  Pepsi 
Challenge, FORTUNE (May 29, 2012)(PepsiCo CEO Indra Nooyi publicly embraced shifting away 
from products that promote the obesity because it is “the right thing” to do);  Kerry A. Dolan, 
Starbucks’ Howard Schultz Wants to Redefine the Role of Business and Society, FORBES, Oct. 17, 
2012 (quoting Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz that “it is no longer enough to serve customers, 
employees, and shareholders.  As corporate citizens of the world, it is our responsibility —our duty—
to serve the communities where we do business”). 
170 Francensco Guerrera, Welch Slams the Obsession With Shareholder Value as a “Dumb Idea,” FIN. 
TIMES 1, March 13, 2009. 
42 
  
There’s a growing body of evidence…that the companies 
that  are  most  successful  at  maximizing  shareholder  value 
over  time  are  those  that  aim  toward  goals  other  than 
maximizing  shareholder  value.  Employees  and  customers 
often  know  more  about  and  have  more  of  a  long-term 
commitment to a company than shareholders do.  
171
In accord with this philosophy, we see systems thinking reflected not 
only in what successful managers say, but also what they do. For example, 
it is commonplace for companies to employ operations analysts to internally 
assess  corporate  performance  using  system  theory  tools  like  network 
analysis, queuing theory, scenario analysis, multiobjective functions, and 
nonlinear  computer  programs  for  optimizing  within  constraints.   These 
172
techniques  are  also  taught  to  students  studying  management  science,  a 
systems-oriented discipline commonly taught at many undergraduate and 
graduate business schools.  
173
B.  SYSTEMS THINKING IN CORPORATE LAW 
The consonance between the principles of systems thinking, and the 
ways successful corporate managers talk about and do their jobs, provides 
compelling  evidence  of  the  relevance  of  systems  thinking  to  business 
corporations.  Still  more  evidence  can  be  seen  in  the  striking  way  the 
systems approach fits with traditional state corporate law. 
Corporate law typically is found in three places; corporate codes; case 
law; and the “internal” law of corporate articles and bylaws.  None of the 
three  meshes  well  with  shareholder  value  thinking.  Starting  with  state 
corporate  codes,  these  notably  do  not  require  corporations  to  pursue 
shareholder value.  To the contrary, it is standard practice for states to allow 
corporations to be formed to do anything that is legal.  The Delaware 
174
General Corporate Law provides, for example, that “[a] corporation may be 
incorporated or organized under this chapter to conduct or promote any 
                                                           
171 Justin Fox & Jay W. Lorsch, What Good Are Shareholders?, HARV. BUS. REV., July–Aug. 2012. 
172 See, e.g., COLLEGEGRAD, Operations Research Analysts: Career, Salary and Education 
Information, https://collegegrad.com/careers/operations-research-analysts (describing growing 
corporate demand for operations research analysts). 
173 See, e.g., Harvard Business School, Doctoral Programs: Management, 
www.hbs.edu/doctoral/areas-of-study/management/pages/default.aspx; MIT Sloan School of 
Management, Master of Science in Management Studies, http://mitsloan.mit.edu/msms . 
174 STOUT, supra note 47, at 28. 
43 
  
lawful  business  or  purpose[s].”   This  enabling  language  implicitly 
175
contradicts  the  notion  that  corporations  must  adopt  shareholder  wealth 
maximization (or anything else) as their singular goal. Instead, it seems to 
reflect a contractarian perspective that presumes that, absent external costs 
to third parties, social welfare is best served by granting those who form 
enterprises the freedom to structure their affairs as they wish and to pursue 
the goals they desire.   
176
Indeed,  the  majority  of  states  go  even  further  than  Delaware,  and 
explicitly reject shareholder value theory in their codes by providing that 
directors  may  serve  the  interests  not  only  of  shareholders  but  other 
constituencies like employees, customers, suppliers, and the community as 
a whole.  Moreover, state codes also allow corporations to customize their 
177
articles and by-laws by adopting governance rules that modify or restrict 
shareholders’ default rights, for example by staggering director elections or 
issuing  shares  with  limited  voting  rights.   This  statutory  embrace  of 
178
complexity, diversity, self-organization, and multiple and varied purposes, 
is far more consistent with the systems approach than the idea of a single 
“standard” model. 
Turning to case law, some opinions at first glance seem to provide 
support for shareholder value theory. Closer inspection reveals, however, 
the support is more apparent than real. As shareholder value thinking has 
gained  intellectual  dominance,  we  occasionally  see  judicial  opinions 
offhandedly  suggest  that  managers  ought  to  be  maximizing  “long-term 
shareholder value.”  Yet we also see opinions suggesting the opposite: 
179
recall Justice Alito’s 2014 opinion for the majority in Burwell v. Hobby 
Lobby Stores, Inc., declaring that “modern corporate law does not require 
for-profit corporations to pursue profit at the expense of everything else, 
                                                           
175 DEL. CODE. ANN. tit. 8, § 101(b) (2015).  
176 The language might reflect a state purpose of promoting social welfare by reducing the 
transactions costs associated with mutually voluntary exchanges between and among stockholders, 
creditors, managers, employees, and so forth, on the theory that, as a general rule, social welfare is 
improved by lawful exchange. EASTERBROOK & FISCHEL, supra note 59, at 6-7. See Robert B. 
Thompson, Anti-Primacy: Sharing Power in American Corporations, 71 BUS. LAWYER 381, 384 
(2016) (positing that “[c]orporate law’s purpose is to provide a structure for private ordering within 
which the broad group of participants can contract for exchange and have available a government 
structure to fill gaps”). 
177 Guhan Subramanian, The Influence of Antitakeover Statutes on Incorporation Choice: Evidence on 
the “Race” Debate and Antitakeover Overreaching, 150 U. PA. L. REV. 1795, 1827 (2004) (by 2004, 
31 states had “other constituency” statutes). 
178 See, e.g., DEL. CODE. ANN. tit. 8, §§ 102 (b), 228 (2015).  
179 See, e.g., supra text accompanying notes 48, 78. 
44 
  
and many do not do so.”  It is critical to note, however, that both types of 
180
statements appear only in dicta (as lawyers put it, “mere” dicta). If we 
refuse to be distracted by dicta and focus on holdings, we see that courts 
give corporate managers remarkable freedom to choose company objectives 
under  the  fundamental  corporate  law  doctrine  known  as  the  business 
judgment rule.  
181
The business  judgment rule holds that, as long as directors are not 
tainted by conflicts of interest and make reasonable efforts to be informed, 
judges will not second-guess a board’s decision about what is best for the 
company—even when the board embraces strategies that foreseeably reduce 
profits or share price. For example, in the 2011 case of Air Products and 
Chemicals, Inc. v. Air Gas, Inc., Delaware Chancellor William B. Chandler 
invoked the business judgment rule to uphold a board decision to reject a 
merger offer at a premium price, noting that the board was “not under any 
per se duty to maximize shareholder value in the short term, even in the 
context of a takeover.”   
182
Air Products v. Air Gas illustrates how, when push comes to shove, 
courts routinely refuse to impose on boards any duty to maximize profits or 
share price. The very few cases cited in support of such a supposed duty—
typically Dodge v. Ford Motor Co.  and Revlon, Inc. v. MacAndrews & 
183
Forbes Holdings, Inc. —are inapposite. The first deals not with the duties 
184
of independent directors, but the duties of a majority shareholder towards 
minority shareholders.  The second concerns a public company board’s 
185
voluntary  decision  to  “go  private”  through  a  merger  in  which  public 
shareholders  would  be  forced  out  in  favor  of  a  new,  controlling 
shareholder.   (In  this  unusual  situation,  public  shareholders  need 
186
heightened protection because directors have  incentive to sacrifice their 
interests by approving a sale at an unfairly low price in order to serve the 
                                                           
180 573 U.S. 2751, 2771 (2014). 
181 Elhauge, supra note 21; STOUT, supra note 47, at 29-31. See Lyman Johnson & Robert Ricca, The 
Dwindling of Revlon, 71 WASH. LEE. L. REV.  167, 170 (2014)(“[there is] broad language in Delaware 
decisions suggesting [a] duty to maximize shareholder value in the no-deal context, but as of yet there 
is no clear-cut holding on this basic issue”). 
182 No. 5249CC (Del. Ch., Feb. 15, 2011) at 92, citing Paramount Communications, Inc. v. Time, Inc., 
571 A.2d 173 (Del. 1990). 
183  170 N.W. 668 (Mich. 1919).  See generally Lynn A. Stout, Why We Should Stop Teaching Dodge 
v. Ford, 3 VA. L. & BUS. REV.  163 (2008).   
184 506 A.2d 173 (Del. 1986). 
185 Id.  The same is true of a modern case sometimes cited in support of shareholder value theory, 
eBay Domestic Holdings v. Newmark, 16 A.3d 1 (2010). 
186 Johnson & Ricca, supra note 181. 
45 
  
new,  controlling  shareholder.)   Neither  case  applies  to  independent 
187
directors  of  public  companies  planning  to  stay  public,  for  whom  the 
business judgment rule prevails.  
188
Finally,  let  us  consider  the  internal  law  of  corporate  charters  and 
bylaws. Here, the conflict between shareholder value theory and corporate 
law reality becomes still more evident. As noted, state corporate codes are 
enabling on the subject of purpose. Anything  lawful is  permitted. This 
means corporations have the option to choose to limit themselves to a single 
purpose: a charter could easily specify that a corporation’s purpose was 
maximizing shareholder value. Yet the overwhelming majority of charters 
describe the corporation’s purpose in the same flexible terms as corporate 
codes, as “anything lawful.”  
189
This is telling. If a shareholder value maximand were such a superior 
business strategy, and so important to attract equity investors, we should 
expect to see companies trumpet shareholder value as their purpose in their 
charters, both at formation and when going public. They do not.  
190
Indeed, corporations are taking advantage of the enabling nature of state 
codes to evolve in the opposite direction. As we explore in greater detail 
below, the rise of “activist” hedge funds and the seeping of shareholder 
value thinking into federal securities and tax rules have put pressure on 
public companies to embrace profits and share price as their only goal.  
191
Many are responding by going public with staggered boards and classified 
share structures that deliberately insulate managers from such demands.  
192
(Snap Inc., which sells the app Snapchat, recently filed documents revealing 
                                                           
187 STOUT, supra note 47, at 30. Notably, public company boards have no obligation to put the 
corporation into “Revlon mode.” See Thompson, supra note 176, at 7 (noting that directors of target 
companies can “turn off or on” Revlon duties, and that “shareholder primacy at the option of directors 
hardly seems to qualify for the name”). 
188 Outside the public company context, both the business judgment rule and the question of corporate 
purpose are much less likely to be contested; there is seldom a reason for a controlling shareholder to 
challenge the decisions of the board that shareholder controls. 
189 STOUT, supra note 47, at 28. 
190 Although it is impossible to prove a negative, the authors have never seen such a charter nor any 
source citing to such a charter. 
191 See supra text accompanying notes 199-208. 
192 See Richard J. Sandler & Joseph A. Hall, Corporate Governance Practices in IPOs, CORPORATE 
GOVERNANCE ADVISER, July/August 2014 (summarizing studies showing that, that despite growing 
pressure on public companies to avoid these practices, 70% of the large public IPOs examined 
involved corporations that had staggered boards; more than 90% retained plurality voting for 
uncontested director elections; and the percentage of companies going public with dual or multi-class 
share structures rose from 8% in 2007-08, to 28% in 2011-13). 
46 
  
a plan to go public by offering common shares with no voting rights at 
all.)  More are refusing to go public in the first place: the number of 
193
publicly-listed companies in the U.S. has declined nearly 50% over the past 
decade, from about 8,000 to about 4,000, with most of the decrease due to 
new companies choosing not to list.  Systems thinking, which emphasizes 
194
the  importance  of  observing  and  acknowledging  the  system’s  behavior, 
suggests these trends are significant.  As we explore further below, they 
may indicate that the external pressures currently driving public companies 
to focus increasingly on observable metrics like current profits and share 
price are often dysfunctional, and the corporate sector is using the flexibility 
provided by traditional state corporate law to self-organize in response. 
C.   ON THE RISKS OF IGNORING SYSTEMS 
We  have  shown  that  systems  theory  offers  a  coherent  alternative 
approach for understanding corporate purpose and performance. We have 
also shown that systems thinking fits more comfortably with traditional 
corporate  law,  common  business  practices,  and  many  elements  of 
competing corporate models, than shareholder value theory does. These 
observations raise an important question. Could policy interventions driven 
by the dominant vision of shareholder value thinking—interventions that 
often ignore, or even contradict, the lessons of systems theory—do more 
harm than good? 
The question is not merely academic. As a number of recent law review 
articles have observed, over the past three decades the Anglo-American 
corporate landscape has shifted significantly.  Public companies today face 
195
increasing pressure to become more “shareholder-centric,” and to focus on 
raising share price or reported earnings per share in the near future through 
strategies like leveraging; repurchasing shares; selling off assets; or cutting 
                                                           
193 Steven Davidoff, Snap’s Plan is Most Unfriendly to Outsiders, N.Y. TIMES, Feb. 3, 2017, at B1 
(“Snap Inc. is aiming to adopt the most shareholder-unfriendly governance in an initial public 
offering, ever”). 
194 GERALD F. DAVIS, THE VANISHING AMERICAN CORPORATION:  NAVIGATING THE HAZARDS OF A 
NEW ECONOMY 15-17 and Figure 1.4 (2016)(number of domestic companies listed on U.S. exchanges 
declined from more than 8000 in 1996 to just over 4000 in 2012); Bob Bryan,  There are Nowhere 
Near as Many Public Companies in the U.S. as There Should Be, BUS. INSIDER, July 5, 2015, 
www.businessinsider.com/us-has-too-few-publicly-listed-companies-2015-6 (citing study concluding 
that U.S. listings were declining while listings elsewhere were increasing, and that more than half of 
the “listing gap” was attributable to new companies declining to list). 
195 See, e.g., DAVIS, supra note 194 at 53-79; Rock, supra note 47; Lynn A. Stout, The Toxic Side 
Effects of Shareholder Primacy, 161 U. PA. L. REV. 2003 (2013); see also Thompson, supra note 176, 
at 384 (noting “increased space for power to be exercised by shareholders”). 
47 
  
accounting  expenses  for  payroll,  customer  support,  and  research  and 
development.   Importantly, this pressure has not come from  traditional 
196
state corporate law, which still grants corporations the flexibility to pursue 
any lawful purpose and to adopt different governance structures, and still 
protects director discretion under the business judgment rule.  Nor has the 
197
pressure come from inside corporations themselves—that is, from boards of 
directors, or the demands of the employees, customers, creditors, or the 
initial  equity  investors  who  contract  directly  with  corporate  entities  by 
seeking employment with them, buying their products, lending money to 
them, or buying their shares in the primary market.  
198
Instead, the trend has been driven largely by external forces. These 
include innumerable federal regulatory initiatives, especially changes in tax 
rules, securities law, and Department of Labor regulations.  To give only a 
199
few  examples,  with  the  passage  of  the  Employee  Retirement  Income 
Security Act (ERISA) in 1974,  federal rules encouraged the growth of 
200
institutional investors (tax-favored pension and mutual funds) which now 
collectively control nearly half of all shares traded on U.S. exchanges.  
201
Other federal interventions around the same time dramatically reduced the 
transactions  costs  associated  with  trading  stock,  with  the  unintended 
consequence that many institutions now typically hold shares for 24 months 
or  less.   These  new,  relatively  short-term  institutional  investors  gained 
202
power when the SEC amended its proxy rules in 1992 to encourage them to 
                                                           
196 See supra note 28 (publications by experts and research foundations expressing concerns over such 
short-term strategies). 
197 See supra text accompanying notes 175-182. 
198 Equity investors who purchase shares in the primary market contract directly with corporate 
entities and can be an important source of capital for them.  In contrast, investors who purchase 
shares in the secondary market do not provide capital or any other direct benefit to companies.  
Statement of Company Law, supra note 20. 
199 Rock, supra note 47 at 1922; Stout, supra note 195 at 2008-10; Thompson, supra note 176 at 384 
(shift has not come from “changes in Delaware law but from market changes in makeup of the 
shareholder population and a nudge from federal regulations”). 
200 29 U.S.C.A. § 1001 (1974). 
201 From 1990 through 2010, the value of public equities held by U.S. retirement and mutual funds 
increased from about $1.1 trillion to more than $9.8 trillion, while household sector holdings 
increased only from about $2 trillion to $8.5 trillion. STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES, 
Table 1201, “Equities, Corporate Bonds, and Treasury Securities—Holdings and Net Purchases by 
Type of Investor,” 
http://www2.census.gov/library/publications/2011/compendia/statab/131ed/tables/12s120 1. 
202 The elimination of fixed brokerage commissions in 1975 dramatically reduced trading costs and 
holding periods, which now average months instead of years.  See Stout, supra note 79 at 618 
(elimination of fixed brokerage commissions and transaction taxes); STOUT, supra note 47, at 66 
(average holding period on NYSE has fallen from eight years in 1960, to an implied average of four 
months in 2010). 
48 
  
play a more active role in corporate governance, including mounting proxy 
contests to challenge directors.  1993 saw another critical change when 
203
Congress amended the tax code to require public companies to tie executive 
pay to “objective performance metrics,” driving companies to compensate 
executives in ways that encouraged a laser-like focus on measures like share 
price appreciation or total shareholder return (TSR).  Then the SEC in 
204
2003 furthered the shift to a shareholder-centric model by adopting rules 
requiring  exchange-listed  companies  to  have  a  majority  of  independent 
directors  on  their  boards  (independent  directors  are  more  responsive  to 
shareholder demands than “inside” directors who are also employees)  and 
205
requiring mutual funds to publicly disclose how they vote shares held in 
their portfolios.  This last rule change spurred the growth of the remarkably 
206
powerful—and  remarkably  unaccountable—“proxy  advisory”  service 
known  as  Institutional  Shareholder  Services  (ISS),   which  has  added 
207
substantially to the pressure public companies feel to pursue shareholder 
value as their dominant objective. 208 
There  is  theoretical  reason  to  question  whether  policy  interventions 
springing from such sources are always, or even often, wise or efficient.  
State corporate law is mostly common law or derived from common law 
principles; as a number of scholars have noted, the common law tends to 
evolve  to  favor  efficient  rules.   In  contrast,  federal  legislation  and 
209
administrative  rulemaking  are  notoriously  vulnerable  to  interest  group 
lobbying and rent-seeking.  Moreover, state corporate law is contractarian. 
210
It permits individuals forming corporations to choose from among a variety 
of possible governance patterns (single versus multiple classes of shares, 
unitary  versus  classified  board  structures,  and  so  forth).  It  also  grants 
shareholders, bondholders, executives, and employees alike the freedom to 
decline to do business with corporations that adopt inefficient or exploitive 
governance rules, thus encouraging incorporators to adopt rules that serve 
                                                           
203 Stout, supra note 195 at 2009. 
204Id. 
205 Id. 
206 Id. 
207 Lynn A. Stout, Why Should ISS be the New Master of the Corporate Governance Universe?  
DOWJONES CORPORATE GOVERNANCE, Guest Column 14-15, Jan. 4, 2006. 
208 Tamara Belinfanti, The Proxy Advisory and Corporate Governance Industry: The Case for 
Increased Oversight and Control, 14 STAN. J. L. BUS. & FIN. 384 (2009).  Meanwhile, the ideology of 
shareholder value has been taught to a generation of graduates from the nation’s leading business 
schools, law schools, and economics departments. West, supra note 47. 
209 DAVID A. BARNES & LYNN A. STOUT, CASES AND MATERIALS ON LAW AND ECONOMICS 285 -308 
(1992) 
210 Id. at 476-487. 
49 
  
all corporate participants.  In contrast, federal regulation tends toward a 
211
rigid, “one-size-fits-all” approach that threatens the resilience of companies 
by  limiting  their  ability  to  self-organize  in  response  to  changes  in  the 
market environment,  and that insulates incorporators from the competitive 
212
pressures that otherwise might  encourage them to  select  efficient  rules.  
Finally, a major consequence of federal regulatory interventions has been to 
empower private institutions whose interests, there is reason to suspect, are 
not aligned with the survival and functioning of the corporation as a system. 
For example, activist hedge funds can profit from buying shares in the 
secondary market, pushing for changes in corporate charters and by-laws  
213
or in federal regulation  (thus “changing the rules in the middle of the 
214
game,”  possibly  at  the  expense  of  other  players  like  employees  or 
bondholders), and selling soon after. The powerful proxy advisory service 
ISS is notoriously even less accountable.  
215
All this is theory, of course. But several empirical observations give 
further reason to question whether the federally-driven push to make public 
corporations more shareholder-focused has overshot the mark, privileging 
the goals of the shareholding subsystem to the exclusion and at the expense 
of  the  corporate  system  as  a  whole.  In  particular,  the  standard  model 
predicts  that  the  shift  should  have  produced  more  and  stronger  public 
corporations that provide higher returns to equity investors. This prediction 
has not been realized.  To the contrary, as noted earlier, over the past decade 
                                                           
211 EASTERBROOK & FISCHEL, supra note 59 at 4-7.  
212 See also MEADOWS, supra note 90, at 76-79, 80 (system resilience and capacity to self-organize 
are often sacrificed for purposes of short term productivity or efficiency; self-organization “requires 
freedom and experimentation, and a certain amount of disorder”). 
213 For example, in recent years activist shareholder pressure has led hundreds of large public 
companies to “declassify” their board structures, making it easier for activists to remove incumbent 
directors. Daniel M. Gallagher & Joseph A. Grundfest, Did Harvard Violate Federal Securities Law?  
The Campaign against Classified Boards of Directors 3 (2014), 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?  abstract_id= 2536586.  These activist campaigns have been 
led by shareholders who purchased in the secondary market.  In contrast to the hostility to classified 
boards seen among secondary market investors, equity investors in the primary market have 
continued to show a notable willingness to purchase shares of companies with classified board 
structures. Id. at 2-3 (more than 70% of companies going public from 2007 to 2013 had classified 
boards). 
214 In 2010, the SEC unsuccessfully sought to adopt a “proxy access” rule that would allow activist 
shareholders to use corporate resources to mount proxy contests in director elections.  SIDLEY 
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT, PROXY ACCESS MOMENTUM IN 2016, 3 (2016).  Although the 
SEC’s rule was vacated by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, an SEC 
amendment to Exchange Act Rule 14a-8(i)(8) allowing shareholders to bring proposals seeking proxy 
access became effective, and has since been used by institutional investors to obtain proxy access in 
approximately 40% of the companies in the S&P 500. Id. at 1, 3. 
215 Belinfanti, supra note 208, at 407-08. 
50 
  
the number of public companies listed on U.S. exchanges has been cut in 
half.  Corporate life expectancy has declined even further: where in the 
216
1960s the average Fortune 500 company could expect to remain on that list 
for 60 years or more, today the figure is 15 years.  Optimists might dismiss 
217
such numbers as evidence of “creative destruction.” But if the destruction 
were creative, we should see increased returns from holding stock in these 
fewer, more short-lived companies.  This has not happened. Although some 
activist investors have earned above-market returns, the shift toward more 
shareholder-centric  corporations  has  not  benefited  long-term,  diversified 
investors. Indeed, average returns from holding public equity may have 
declined.  There is reason to question whether the embrace of shareholder 
218
value theory has created greater shareholder value.   
Given such trends, it is unsurprising to hear a growing chorus of voices 
question  the  wisdom  of  requiring  companies  to  privilege  immediate 
shareholder returns over other possible corporate goals and objectives.  Yet 
219
many governance experts and business leaders continue to presume that 
maximizing “long-term” shareholder value is the only proper objective of 
the corporation, primarily because they see no attractive alternative for 
holding managers accountable.  System theory provides that alternative. In 
220
the  process,  it  supports  and  explains  important  elements  of  corporate 
practice, corporate law, and competing models of the corporation.  
                                                           
216 See supra text accompanying note 181 (number of U.S. public companies has declined from about 
8,000 to about 4,000); see generally DAVIS, supra note 194. Meanwhile, the number of private 
companies has been increasing, Stout, supra note 195 at 2020-21. These trends suggest that at the 
level of the corporate sector as a whole, the system seems to be self-organizing by shifting from 
public companies to private ones. It can be argued that this is a second-best solution that deprives 
average investors of the opportunity to participate in the wealth generation made possible by the 
corporate form, unless they invest through layers of expensive intermediaries like mutual funds, 
hedge funds, and private equity funds. 
217 Stout, supra note 195, at 2021. See also RICHARD N. FOSTER & SARAH KAPLAN, CREATIVE 
DESTRUCTION (2001) www.mckinsey.com/functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-
insights/creative-destruction 
(companies on the original S&P Index were on list for 65 years; by 1998, average tenure on list was 
10 years). 
218 ROGER MARTIN, FIXING THE GAME: BUBBLES, CRASHES, AND WHAT CAPITALISM CAN LEARN FROM 
THE NFL 63 (2011); James Montier, GMO White Paper: The World’s Dumbest Idea, Dec. 2014, 
https://www.gmo.com/docs/default-source/research-and-commentary/strategies/asset-allocation/the-
world’s-dumbest-idea.pdf 
219 See sources cited supra note 28. 
220 See supra text accompanying notes 65-79. 
51 
  
CONCLUSION 
Despite the dominant role corporations play in our economy, culture, 
and politics, the nature and purpose of corporations remains hotly contested.  
This conflict was brought to the fore in the recent Supreme Court opinions 
in Citizens United and Hobby Lobby. Although the dominant narrative for 
the past quarter-century has been that corporations belong to shareholders 
and should pursue shareholder value, support for this approach, which has 
been justified as assuring managerial accountability, is eroding.  It persists 
today primarily in the form of the argument that corporations should seek 
“long-term”  shareholder  value.  Yet,  as  this  Article  has  shown,  when 
shareholder value is interpreted to mean “long-term” shareholder value, it 
no longer offers that desired managerial accountability. 
What can?  Systems theory offers an answer. It provides an approach to 
understanding the nature and purpose of corporate entities that is not only 
consistent with elements of many otherwise-conflicting visions of the firm, 
but also with important features of corporate law and practice. It offers 
proven methods for measuring corporate performance that recognize the 
possibility of multiple goals and the importance of sustainability. And it 
cautions that, by ignoring the lessons of systems theory, shareholder value 
thinking  may  have  encouraged  regulatory  and  policy  interventions  into 
corporate governance that are not only ineffective, but destructive. 
In exploring the lessons of systems thinking, and particularly why it 
might not always (or even often) be desirable to demand that managers 
“maximize shareholder value,” we do not mean to suggest that shareholder 
returns and managerial accountability are unimportant corporate objectives. 
The  shareholding  system  is  an  important  subsystem  of  any  public 
corporation; to thrive, public companies must offer returns that attract and 
keep  equity  investors.  Moreover,  shareholder  governance  rights,  and 
compensation practices that pay attention to accounting profits and other 
financial  metrics,  can  help  police  against  managerial  shirking  and  self-
dealing.  Finally, there may be particular businesses or industries in which a 
singular focus on short-term financial results is more appropriate.  
221
But  systems  theory  warns  against  always  defining  and  measuring  a 
corporate  enterprise  solely  in  terms  of  shareholder-centric  goals  and 
                                                           
221 For example, a greater focus on shareholder returns may be more appropriate in investment 
companies, where shareholders are also the customers. 
52 
  
metrics, as this allows the goals of the shareholding subsystem to eclipse the 
goals of the corporate system as a whole. For the most part, states have 
managed to resist the pressure to change their laws to support shareholder 
value theory. However, it has stealthily crept into federal law, especially tax 
code rules that tie executive pay to objective performance metrics, and SEC 
rules that empower short-term investors and measure corporate performance 
by shareholder near-term returns. Activist investors have used the rhetoric 
of shareholder value as a cudgel to browbeat boards into selling assets, 
repurchasing shares, and cutting payroll and research and development to 
achieve short term share price increases. Finally, shareholder value theory 
has been taught as gospel to a generation of policymakers and business 
leaders.  Over  the  past  quarter-century,  these  developments  have 
significantly  influenced  business  behavior,  especially  in  publicly-listed 
companies. They have been accompanied by declining corporate numbers, 
decreasing corporate life expectancy, and reduced shareholder returns. 
Corporations are perpetual entities designed to operate into an uncertain 
future. They are comprised of elements and subsystems, each of which has 
an  individual  purpose  that  may  at  times  come  into  conflict  with  the 
overarching purpose of the corporation. Systems thinking accepts, rather 
than dismisses, these realities. It honors the corporation as its own separate 
legal entity, while recognizing the state’s part in its creation. It respects the 
important roles played by shareholders and other stakeholders, while also 
explaining the board’s function in mediating among these interests to keep 
the system in check. It acknowledges that the corporate system exists as part 
of  a  larger  system,  which  we  can  broadly  call  community  or  society.  
Finally, it reveals how the quest to find a single quantifiable metric to 
ensure managerial accountability is a quixotic venture that offers at most an 
illusion of objectivity and certainty. Systems theory provides an alternative 
that offers both  greater managerial  accountability and fewer destructive 
consequences. 
 
53 
 