 
 
Academic Freedom and Critical Speech in Hong 
Kong: China’s Response to Occupy Central and the 
Future of “One Country, Two Systems” 
∗
Carole J. Petersen† and Alvin Y.H. Cheung†† 
 
I.!!!!!!Introduction .............................................................................. 2!
II.!!!!The “One Country, Two Systems” Model: Formal 
Autonomy but with an Executive-Led System ...................... 8!
III.   Legal Protections for Academic Freedom and Critical 
Speech in Hong Kong’s Constitutional Framework ............ 13!
IV.   University Governance: The Impact of Increased 
Centralization and Control ................................................... 20!
V.   !Conflicts between The Academic Community and the 
Hong Kong and Central Governments ................................ 28!
VI.    Beijing’s Retribution: Increased Interference in Hong 
Kong Universities ................................................................ 40!
VII.   The Disapearing Booksellers ............................................... 53!
VIII.  Conclusion ........................................................................... 58!
 
 
*Copyright © 2016 Carole J. Petersen and Alvin Y.H. Cheung.  The authors thank the 
academics who agreed to be interviewed for this article and research assistants Jasmine 
Dave, Jason Jutz, and Jai Keep-Barnes for their assistance with research and editing.  
This is an updated version of a paper presented at a roundtable organized by the Council 
on Foreign Relations on December 15, 2015, and the authors thank the chair of the 
roundtable, Professor Jerome A. Cohen, and other participants for their comments.  The 
William S. Richardson School of Law at the University of Hawai’i at Manoa supported 
Professor Petersen’s travel to Hong Kong to conduct interviews for this article. 
† Carole J. Petersen is a Professor at the William S. Richardson School of Law and 
Director of the Matsunaga Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution, University of 
Hawai’i at Manoa.  She taught law at the University of Hong Kong from 1991–2006 and 
at the City University of Hong Kong from 1989-1991. 
†† Alvin Y.H. Cheung is a JSD student at New York University School of Law, an 
affiliated researcher at the U.S.-Asia Law Institute at New York University School of 
Law, and a non-practicing member of the Hong Kong Bar. 2  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
I.  Introduction 
Since  July  1997,  when  Hong  Kong  was  reunited  with  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China,  academics  in  the  Special 
Administrative Region of Hong Kong have fiercely protected their 
right to engage in critical speech and practice academic freedom.  
They  have  been  aided  by  Hong  Kong’s  regional  constitution 
(known  as  the  “Basic  Law”),  which  incorporates  international 
human rights treaties into domestic law and contains unusually 
detailed protections for freedom of expression, academic freedom, 
and  educational  autonomy.1    These  constitutional  provisions 
originated in the Sino-British Joint Declaration, a bilateral treaty 
that was duly registered with the United Nations.2  Nonetheless, 
this article documents a dramatic decline in academic freedom in 
Hong Kong since the last comprehensive study of the topic was 
published in 2006.3  This is partly because the Chinese Communist 
Party has made a concerted effort to punish Hong Kong academics 
and student organizations for their role in the Umbrella Movement 
and other pro-democracy movements.4  Equally important, there 
have been significant changes to the governance structure in Hong 
Kong’s  universities  over  the  past  decade,5  creating  overly-
centralized  universities  that  are  far  too  vulnerable  to  outside 
interference.    These  developments  have  already  damaged  the 
 
  1 See XIANGGANG JIBEN FA [Hong Kong Basic Law] (promulgated by Order 
No.26, Pres. of China, Apr. 4, 1990, effective July 1, 1997), arts. 27, 34, 39, 136–7 
(1997) (H.K.) [hereinafter Basic Law] (although the Basic Law is a national law enacted 
by the National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China, it has the status of 
superior law in Hong Kong and is considered Hong Kong’s constitutional instrument); 
Albert H.Y. Chen, The Interpretation of the Basic Law – Common Law and Mainland 
Chinese  Perspectives,  30  H.K.L.J.  380–81  (2000);  see  discussion  infra  Part  III 
(analyzing the legal protections for free speech, academic freedom, and educational 
autonomy and the role of the independent judiciary in preserving Hong Kong freedoms; 
and the role of academics and students in critiquing the controversial “national security” 
bill). 
  2 Joint Declaration of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland and the Government of the People’s Republic of China on the Question of 
Hong Kong, China-U.K., Dec. 19, 1984, 1399 U.N.T.S. 33 [hereinafter Joint Declaration]. 
  3 Compare Part V-VIII, infra, with JAN CURRIE, CAROLE J. PETERSEN, & KA-HO 
MOK, ACADEMIC FREEDOM IN HONG KONG (Lexington Books, 2006) (documenting 
challenges but concluding that Hong Kong academics generally still enjoyed academic 
freedom) [hereinafter ACADEMIC FREEDOM]. 
  4 See infra Part VI. 
  5 See infra Part IV. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  3 
quality and international reputation of Hong Kong’s universities,6 
which  will  ultimately  hurt  not  only  Hong  Kong  but  also  the 
People’s Republic of China. 
A British colony from 1842-1997, Hong Kong was returned to 
China in 1997 under the “one county, two systems” model, which 
was devised by Deng Xiaoping and originally intended to provide 
a  model  for  reunification  with  Taiwan.7    Public  opinion  polls 
demonstrated  that  the  majority  of  Hong  Kong  residents  would 
have preferred to remain British or to become an independent city-
state.8    Although  colonial  Hong  Kong  was  inherently 
undemocratic,  the  British  had  provided  a  common  law  legal 
system  and  certain  traditions  that  facilitated  civil  liberties, 
including an independent judiciary.9  In contrast, the rule of law 
was (and still is) seriously lacking in mainland China.10 
In an effort to reassure the population, the Chinese and British 
governments made many promises in the Joint Declaration.  The 
treaty provides that Hong Kong will maintain its common law 
legal system and independent judiciary and enjoy a “high degree 
of  autonomy”  as  a  Special  Administrative  Region  of  China 
(“SAR”).11    It  also  promises  that  Hong  Kong  residents  will 
continue to enjoy freedom of expression and that the territory will 
maintain  its  pre-existing  educational  system,  protect  academic 
 
  6 See infra Part VI. 
  7 See, e.g., Ma Ying-jeou: ‘One Country One System’, AL JAZEERA (Sept. 29, 
2014),  http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/talktojazeera/2014/09/ma-ying-jeou-an-
inexplicable-fear-201492613134516309.html [https://perma.cc/5Y72-97JX] (showing that 
while Taiwan is functioning as an independent nation, with its own military, it is highly 
unlikely that Taiwan would ever agree to unify with China under the “one country, two 
systems” model). 
  8 See JOSEPH Y.S. CHENG, HONG KONG IN SEARCH OF A FUTURE ch. 3 (Oxford 
Univ.  Press  1984)  (summarizing,  among  other  surveys,  a  1982  telephone  survey 
reporting that 70% of respondents preferred to keep the status quo, 15% wanted Hong 
Kong to become a British “trust territory,” and only 4% preferred that Hong Kong be 
returned to China). 
  9 See Carole J. Petersen, From British Colony to Special Administrative Region of 
China:  Embracing  Human  Rights  in  Hong  Kong,  in  HUMAN  RIGHTS  IN  ASIA:  A 
COMPARATIVE LEGAL STUDY OF TWELVE ASIAN JURISDICTIONS, FRANCE, AND THE UNITED 
STATES (Randall Peerenboom, Carole J. Petersen & Albert H.Y. Chen eds., Routledge 2006) 
[hereinafter HUMAN RIGHTS IN ASIA] (on Hong Kong). 
  10 See id.; Randall Peerenboom, Human Rights in China, in HUMAN RIGHTS IN ASIA, 
supra note 9 (on Mainland China). 
  11 Joint Declaration, supra note 2, ¶¶ 3(2)–(3), Annex I, § III. 4  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
freedom, and make its own educational policies.12  In addition, 
China agreed that the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (the “ICCPR”), which was applied to Hong Kong by the 
British  government,  would  continue  to  apply  to  Hong  Kong, 
although China has yet to ratify the treaty.13  Similar provisions 
were  repeated  in  the  Basic  Law  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special 
Administrative  Region  (“Basic  Law”),  Hong  Kong’s  regional 
constitution.14  The question is whether these protections work in 
practice, even when the central government and its allies may have 
a strong incentive to curtail critical speech in Hong Kong. 
In 2006, the first comprehensive study of academic freedom in 
Hong  Kong  concluded  that  academics  had  faced  significant 
challenges since 1997, but that, on the whole, academic freedom 
was still very much alive.15  However, the study also reported that 
Hong  Kong’s  universities  were  undergoing  significant 
“management reforms,” which were likely to leave the universities 
more centralized, less democratic, and thus more vulnerable to 
outside interference.16  This article demonstrates how, in the past 
decade, these changes have, indeed, made it far easier for the 
government  and  other  external  agents  to  influence  decision-
making  processes  in  the  universities.    Meanwhile,  relations 
between Hong Kong and Beijing have become increasingly tense 
 
  12 Id. ¶ 3(5); id. Annex I, §§ X, XIII. 
  13 Id. Annex I, § XIII; see also United Nations Treaty Collection, Ch. IV (4), 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (documenting that China has since 
signed the ICCPR, in 1998, but still has not ratified it and noting, at Endnote 6 to China, 
that the Covenant continued to apply to Hong Kong after China resumed exercising 
sovereignty over the territory), 
https://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-
4&chapter=4&clang=_en [https://perma.cc/92TD-Q8QT] (last visited June 6, 2016). 
China also agreed that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights would continue to apply to Hong Kong, but that treaty has had less impact than 
the  ICCPR.    See  Carole  J.  Petersen,  Embracing  Universal  Standards?  The  Role  of 
International Human Rights Treaties in Hong Kong’s Constitutional Jurisprudence, in 
INTERPRETING HONG KONG’S BASIC LAW: THE STRUGGLE FOR COHERENCE (Fu Hualing, 
Lison  Harris  &  Simon  N.  M.  Young  eds.,  Palgrave  Macmillan  2007)  [hereinafter 
INTERPRETING HONG KONG’S BASIC LAW]. 
  14 Basic Law, supra note 1, arts. 27, 34, 39, 136–7. 
  15 ACADEMIC FREEDOM, supra note 3, at 145–55. 
  16 Id.  at  153;  see  also  Carole  J.  Petersen  and  Jan  Currie,  Higher  Education 
Restructuring and Academic Freedom in Hong Kong, 6(5) POL’Y FUTURES IN EDUC. 589–98 
(2008) (documenting further changes in the governance and management structures after 
2006) [hereinafter Petersen & Currie, Higher Education]. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  5 
and pro-China forces have a greater incentive to interfere with 
academic freedom and critical speech.17   This is partly because 
Hong  Kong  residents  have  resisted  proposals  to  introduce 
nationalism into the territory’s public schools but also because 
democracy activists—many of whom are associated with Hong 
Kong  universities—have  become  more  confrontational,  as 
demonstrated  by  Occupy  Central  and  the  student-led  Umbrella 
Movement in 2014.18  Pro-Beijing forces have retaliated, directly 
targeting certain academics and publishers in Hong Kong.19  In 
light of these developments, it is clearly time to reassess academic 
freedom and educational autonomy in the territory. 
Part II of the article begins by briefly summarizing the “one 
country, two systems” model, which provides extensive formal 
autonomy for the Hong Kong SAR but also places the reins of 
power primarily in the unelected executive branch.  Part III then 
analyzes the legal protections for free speech, academic freedom, 
and  educational  autonomy  and  the  role  of  the  independent 
judiciary in preserving Hong Kong’s freedoms.  It also analyzes 
the role of academics and students in critiquing the controversial 
“national  security”  bill,  which  was  introduced  in  the  local 
legislature in 2003 to implement Article 23 of the Basic Law but 
withdrawn after more than 500,000 people took to the streets.20 
Part IV of the article then shifts to the issue of university 
governance and its relationship to academic freedom.  It begins by 
briefly summarizing the “Robert Chung affair,” a covert attempt to 
restrict academic research in the early years following China’s 
resumption of sovereignty.21  This section demonstrates how the 
 
  17 See infra Part V. 
  18 Id. See also Elizabeth Barber & Charlie Campbell, Pro-Democracy Students 
Storm Government Square in Hong Kong, TIME (Sept. 27, 2014). 
  19 See infra Part VI. 
  20 Article 23 obligates the local Hong Kong legislature to enact legislation “on its 
own” prohibiting, inter alia, sedition, subversion, secession, and theft of state secrets. 
For a general introduction to Article 23 and the failed attempt to enact legislation 
implementing it, see Carole J. Petersen, Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise and 
Fall of the National Security Bill in 2003, in NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL 
FREEDOMS: HONG KONG’S ARTICLE 23 UNDER SCRUTINY ch. 1 (Fu Hualing, Carole J. 
Petersen & Simon N.M. Young eds., H.K. Univ. Press 2005) [hereinafter NATIONAL 
SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS]. 
  21 See infra Part IV.  See also Carole J. Petersen, Preserving Academic Freedom in 
Hong  Kong:  Lessons  from  the  “Robert  Chung  Affair,”  30  H.K.L.J.  165–76  (2000) 
[hereinafter Petersen, Lessons]. 6  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
Chief Executive’s ties to the University of Hong Kong’s Council 
weakened the Council’s response to the interference.  Subsequent 
changes  to  university  governance  have  made  Hong  Kong’s 
universities even more vulnerable to interference. 
Part  V  then  analyzes  the  escalating  conflicts  between  the 
universities and pro-Beijing forces.  While many academics have 
actively  studied  and  critiqued  Hong  Kong’s  legal  and  political 
systems, some have moved beyond research and written advocacy 
and  become  activists  in  the  human  rights  and  democracy 
movements.22    Student  organizations  have  also  become 
increasingly confrontational, reflecting their frustration with the 
slow pace of democratic reform.23  Meanwhile, mainland Chinese 
tourists have begun to take advantage of Hong Kong’s free press 
and  have  obtained  copies  of  publications  that  embarrass  the 
Chinese  Communist  Party.24    All  of  these  developments  have 
increased the desire of the local and central governments to try to 
curtail critical speech in the territory.25 
As demonstrated in Part VI, Beijing and its allies have, indeed, 
embarked upon an overt campaign to punish and intimidate its 
critics in Hong Kong.  In 2015, the Council at the University of 
Hong  Kong  (“HKU”)  (which  is  now  dominated  by  external 
members who are loyal to the government) refused to confirm the 
appointment of the former Dean of the Faculty of Law to a high-
level  administrative  position.26    Other  academics  have  also 
reported  that  they  believe  they  have  been  targeted  for  less 
favorable treatment, either because of their research and public 
commentary  or  because  of  their  political  activities  as  private 
citizens.27 
Part VII then analyzes the most egregious threat to freedom of 
 
  22 See infra Part V.  See also Stephan Ortmann, The Umbrella Movement and Hong 
Kong’s Protracted Democratization Process, 46 ASIAN AFF. 32 (2015). 
  23 See, e.g., Siegfried Sin, The Source of Hong Kong Youth’s Frustration, S. CHINA 
MORNING  POST  (Dec.  12,  2014),  http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-
opinion/article/1661412/source-hong-kong-youths-frustration  [https://perma.cc/6ZRU-
752J ]. 
  24 Chris Horton, In Hong Kong: A Sanctuary for Banned Books, ATLANTIC (Apr. 
10, 2012), http://www.theatlantic.com/china/archive/2013/04/in-hong-kong-a-sanctuary-
for-banned-books/274831/ [https://perma.cc/LNF6-7WTM]. 
  25 Id. 
  26 See infra Part VI. 
  27 Id. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  7 
expression  in  Hong  Kong  to  date—the  disappearance  of  book 
publisher Lee Bo and his colleagues.  All evidence indicates that 
Lee  was  abducted  from  Hong  Kong  by  security  agents  of  the 
central government, who have no legal authority to act within 
Hong Kong’s borders but appear to have done so with impunity.28  
Hong Kong residents were deeply shaken by the disappearances 
and the televised “confessions” of the booksellers while in the 
custody of mainland Chinese security forces.29  The message is 
clear:  a  Hong  Kong  resident  who  publishes  material  that 
embarrasses the Chinese Communist Party is no longer safe from 
arrest.30 
Part VIII concludes by considering the possible responses to 
these dramatic developments.  On one hand, interviews indicate 
that at least some academics plan to curtail certain projects during 
this sensitive time.31  Hong Kong book shops have also stopped 
selling  certain  books  that  are  banned  in  the  mainland,  clear 
evidence of intimidation.32  On the other hand, a more assertive 
“localist” movement has also developed in Hong Kong, one that 
openly blames mainland China for a host of social and political 
problems.33  While peaceful advocacy is still the norm, a small 
minority of local residents have begun to express their frustrations 
more  aggressively,  as  demonstrated  in  the  “Fishball  Riots”  of 
 
  28 (cid:48)(cid:51) [Ching Cheong], (cid:18)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:36)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:37)(cid:23)(cid:33)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:14)(cid:15) [Lee Bo Incident 
Exposes  CCP’s  Habit  of  Illegal  Handling  of  Cases],  INITIUM  (Jan.  6,  2016), 
https://theinitium.com/article/20160106-opinion-chingcheong-cwbbookstore/ 
[https://perma.cc/HQ92-DM9C]. 
  29 Hong Kong Bookseller Defies China by Leading Protest, AL-JAZEERA (June 18, 
2016),  http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/06/hong-kong-bookseller-defies-china-
leading-protest-160618145552341.html [https://perma.cc/WPD2-QFQ4]. 
  30 Michael Forsythe & Andrew Jacobs, In China, Books That Make Money, and 
Enemies,  N.Y.  TIMES  (Feb.  4,  2016), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/07/business/international/in-china-books-that-make-
money-and-enemies.html [https://perma.cc/NP89-L9Y8]. 
  31 See infra Part VIII. 
  32 Christy Leung and Oliver Chou, Hong Kong Book Stores Pull Titles Banned in 
Mainland China from Shelves as Mystery Over Missing Bookseller Deepens, S. CHINA 
MORNING POST (H.K.) (Jan. 6, 2016), http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-
community/article/1898232/least-one-hong-kong-store-pulls-books-banned 
[https://perma.cc/C3EP-DFHM]. 
  33 Owen Fung, Face of the Pro-Independence Hong Kong National Party: Students 
and 20-Somethings who Shun Outside Donors, S. CHINA MORNING POST (Mar. 31, 2016), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/1932336/face-pro-independence-
hong-kong-national-party-students-and [https://perma.cc/78P9-4V9Z]. 8  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
February 2016.34  Unfortunately, such actions are likely to generate 
even more oppression from Beijing.  We therefore conclude the 
article by recommending concrete changes to governance in Hong 
Kong’s  universities  which  are  urgently  necessary  to  strengthen 
educational autonomy and rebuild academic freedom.  We also 
explore what the international community and foreign academic 
institutions  can  do  to  assist  Hong  Kong  during  these  difficult 
times. 
II. The “One Country, Two Systems” Model: Formal 
Autonomy but with an Executive-Led System 
“The autonomies which have been given to Hong Kong under 
the Basic Law are unique in the world. Our autonomies surpass 
those  which  are  available  to  provinces  and  states  under  many 
federal systems.”35  In 2002, this is how Hong Kong’s Secretary 
for  Constitutional  Affairs  described  the  “one  country,  two 
systems” model.36  On one level, Secretary Lam was correct: Hong 
Kong exercises many powers that are not typically held by a state 
in a federation. For example, it issues its own travel documents, 
including a Hong Kong identity card and a Hong Kong passport, 
and applies its own immigration controls.37 The SAR also issues 
 
  34 See, e.g., Ned Levin, Hong Kong’s Failed Democracy Protests Fed Riots Over 
Street Vendors, WALL ST. J. (Feb. 10, 2016), http://www.wsj.com/articles/how-hong-
kongs-democracy-protests-fed-riots-over-street-vendors-1455108266 
[https://perma.cc/Q282-RWG5] (explaining that the riot started as an angry response to 
local police officers’ efforts to shut down popular food stalls during Chinese New Year; 
however, it was openly supported by “localists,” a group of frustrated Hong Kong 
citizens who are advocating, for the first time since 1997, aggressive protests against 
China’s interference); Hong Kong’s Mongkok Clashes: More Than Fishballs, BRIT. 
BROADCAST.  CORP.  (Feb.  9,  2016),  http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-
35529785 [https://perma.cc/LCF5-3ERD]. 
  35 See Stephen Lam, H.K. Sec’y for Constitutional Affairs, at the Seminar on Legal 
Landscape  of  China  After  Accession  to  WTO  (Sept.  7,  2002), 
http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/200209/07/0907233.htm  [https://perma.cc/Z837-
FQRG] (last visited Dec. 19, 2015). 
  36 For the historical background of the “One Country, Two Systems” concept 
(which was originally designed by China to facilitate reunification with Taiwan), see 
Ming K. Chan, The Politics of Hong Kong’s Imperfect Transition: Dimensions of the 
China Factor, in THE CHALLENGE OF HONG KONG’S REINTEGRATION WITH CHINA (Ming 
K. Chan ed., H.K. Univ. Press 1997); YASH GHAI, HONG KONG’S NEW CONSTITUTIONAL 
ORDER: THE RESUMPTION OF CHINESE SOVEREIGNTY AND THE BASIC LAW 1, 35–80 (H.K. 
Univ. Press, 2nd ed. 1999) [hereinafter GHAI]. 
  37 Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 154. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  9 
its  own  currency  (the  Hong  Kong  dollar),  formulates  its  own 
monetary policy, and has an entirely separate taxation system.38  
Although  vague  on  many  important  issues,  the  Basic  Law  is 
crystal  clear  when  it  comes  to  Hong  Kong’s  financial 
independence, stating that local tax revenues “shall not be handed 
over to the Central People’s Government” and that Beijing “shall 
not levy taxes” in the SAR.39  Hong Kong is also empowered to 
“conclude  and  implement  agreements  with  foreign  states  and 
regions and relevant international organizations” in a variety of 
fields, including economics, trade, finance, monetary, shipping, 
and communications.40 
In addition to these specific powers, Hong Kong is vested with 
general executive powers41 and general legislative powers.42  The 
only significant limitations are in the areas of defense and foreign 
affairs43 and in certain other areas where the Basic Law expressly 
allocates  an  executive  or  legislative  power  to  the  central 
government (such as the power to appoint the Chief Executive and 
the power to amend the Basic Law).44  Hong Kong’s Legislative 
 
  38 Id. arts. 110–11.  It should be noted, however, that the Basic Law places certain 
restrictions on the nature of Hong Kong’s monetary policy.  For example, the “issue of 
Hong Kong currency must be backed by a 100 percent reserve fund,” (art. 111) and the 
local government shall “safeguard the free flow of capital within, into and out” of Hong 
Kong and shall not apply foreign exchange control policies (art. 112).  These restrictions 
are not, however, generally viewed as examples of intervention by Beijing but rather as 
reflecting the commitment to maintain Hong Kong’s free market and capitalist system. 
  39 Id. arts. 106–7 (explaining that the Basic Law obligates the local government to 
pursue fiscally conservative policies; for example, it “shall follow the principle of 
keeping expenditure within the limits of revenues” and “avoid deficits”); see also id. art. 
108 (explaining also that when enacting tax legislation it shall take “the low tax policy 
previously pursued in Hong Kong as reference”). 
  40 Id. art. 151. For further information on Hong Kong’s powers regarding external 
affairs, see id. arts. 150–57; GHAI, supra note 36, at 461–69. 
  41 Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 16 (stating that Hong Kong “shall be vested with 
executive power” and “shall, on its own, conduct the administrative affairs of the Region 
in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Law”).  For more detailed provisions 
on the powers of the Chief Executive, see id. arts. 43, 48–53. For provisions relating to 
the powers of the Executive Council (the closest thing to a cabinet in Hong Kong) and 
the Hong Kong government generally, see id. arts. 54–65. 
  42 Id. art. 17 (stating that Hong Kong “shall be vested with legislative power”).  For 
additional provisions relating to legislative powers and the legislative process, see id. 
arts. 8, 17–18, 66–79. 
  43 See id. arts. 13-14. 
  44 Id. arts. 45, 159. 10  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
Council enacts laws in virtually every other field that is relevant to 
local governance and no one stops to examine whether a newly 
proposed bill fits within some enumerated power granted to the 
local  legislature.45    Local  laws  are  reported  to  the  Standing 
Committee of the NPC, which has the power to invalidate the law 
“if it is not in conformity with the provisions of [the Basic Law] 
regarding  affairs  within  the  responsibility  of  the  Central 
Authorities  or  regarding  the  relationship  between  the  Central 
Authorities and the Region.”46  This situation has, however, never 
arisen.    If  it  were  to  occur,  the  Standing  Committee  may  not 
amend the law but rather must simply return and thereby invalidate 
it.47 
In contrast to the broad and general powers allocated to the 
Hong Kong SAR, the Basic Law defines, rather narrowly, the 
areas in which the central authorities shall exercise executive or 
legislative power.48  Article 8 provides that the sources of law in 
Hong Kong shall be: the Basic Law; Hong Kong’s pre-existing 
laws (including ordinances, common law and the rules of equity); 
and new ordinances enacted by the local legislature.49  National 
laws other than the Basic Law are not, therefore, a source of law 
for  Hong  Kong.    If  the  central  government  wishes  to  make  a 
national law apply in Hong Kong it must go through a special 
procedure set forth in Article 18 of the Basic Law, which involves 
seeking advice from the Committee for the Basic Law (a joint 
committee with members from both Hong Kong and Mainland 
China) and then adding the national law to Annex III of the Basic 
 
  45 Basic Law, supra note 1, arts. 17, 73. 
  46 Id. art. 17, ¶ 3. 
  47 Id. 
  48 Id. art. 18. 
  49 Id. art. 8.  See also Quanguo Renmin Daibiao Dahui Changwu Weiyuanhui 
Guanyu Genju Zhonghua Renmin Gengheguo Xianggang Tebie Xingzhengqu Jibenfa di 
Yibai Liushi Tiao Chuli Xianggang Yuan You Falu de Jueding ((cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:5)(cid:32)(cid:6)(cid:44)(cid:19)(cid:27)(cid:22)(cid:11)
(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:27)(cid:45)(cid:26)(cid:30)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:41)(cid:5)(cid:32)(cid:9)(cid:15)(cid:17)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:36)(cid:10)(cid:43)(cid:25)(cid:12)(cid:18)(cid:29)(cid:34)(cid:2)(cid:40)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:8)(cid:13)(cid:31)(cid:42)(cid:37)(cid:46)
(cid:35)(cid:14)(cid:28)(cid:34)(cid:23)(cid:39)(cid:33)(cid:21)) [Decision of the Standing Committee of the National People’s 
Congress  on  the  Treatment  of  the  Laws  Previously  in  Force  in  Hong  Kong  in 
Accordance with Article 160 of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region of the People’s Republic of China] Standing Comm. Nat’l People’s Cong. (Feb. 
23, 1997) [hereinafter 1997 Decision] (showing that laws already in force in the British 
territory of Hong Kong on June 30, 1997 were adopted as part of the law of the Hong 
Kong SAR, provided that they had not been determined by the Standing Committee of 
the National People’s Congress to be in conflict with the Basic Law). 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  11 
Law.50  Moreover, Annex III must be confined to laws relating to 
defence, foreign affairs, and other matters “outside the autonomy” 
of the Region.51  Although that final phrase is vague and could be 
abused, in practice very few national laws have been added to 
Annex III.52 
It  should  be  noted  that  Article  18  also  gives  the  central 
government the power to apply other national laws to Hong Kong 
in times of war or turmoil which “endangers national unity or 
security  and  is  beyond  the  control  of  the  government”  of  the 
SAR.53  Until recently, Hong Kong has enjoyed a reputation for 
being a very stable and peaceful community and thus there seemed 
to be little chance of Beijing intervening on this ground. However, 
as  discussed  in  Part  VIII  of  this  article,  if  civil  unrest  due  to 
delayed  democracy  becomes  violent  or  beyond  the  local 
government’s control, there is a possibility that Beijing would use 
Article 18 as an excuse to apply more restrictive national laws in 
Hong Kong. 
Despite the narrow scope of the central government’s formal 
legislative  powers,  it  is  widely  acknowledged  that  Beijing  can 
influence law and policies in Hong Kong through its power to 
appoint the Chief Executive.54  Most local legislation is drafted and 
proposed by the executive branch.  Hong Kong legislators can 
 
  50 See Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 18 (declaring that national laws “shall not be 
applied” in Hong Kong except for those contained in Annex III to the Basic Law and 
setting forth the procedure for adding a national law to Annex III). 
  51 Id. 
  52 Basic Law, supra note 1, Annex III.  The Hong Kong government publishes a list 
of  national  laws  on  Annex  III.    See  Basic  Law  Full  Text,  THE  BASIC  LAW 
http://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/en/basiclawtext/annex_3.html  [https://perma.cc/Y4FW-
Y4F8].  See also HKSAR v. Ng Kung Siu, [1999] 2 H.K.C.F.A.R. 442.  Annex III 
includes the Nationality Law of the PRC, the Declaration of the Government of the PRC 
on the Territorial Sea, the Regulations of the PRC Concerning Diplomatic Privileges and 
Immunities, plus three laws relating to the national calendar and the national flag, 
anthem and emblem.  The application of the law on the national flag, which prohibits 
flag desecration, was challenged but ultimately upheld.  Id. ¶ 39 (showing however, in 
the same case, Hong Kong’s Court of Final Appeal took the opportunity to confirm that 
the ICCPR is incorporated into the Basic Law).   For discussion of the significance of 
this holding, see Petersen, Embracing Universal Standards? The Role of International 
Human Rights Treaties in Hong Kong’s Constitutional Jurisprudence, in INTERPRETING 
HONG KONG’S BASIC LAW, supra note 13, at 35-36. 
  53 Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 18. 
  54 Id. art. 45 (providing that the Chief Executive is to be “selected” by local 
elections or consultations and then appointed by the Central People’s Government). 12  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
block government bills (and they often do so); but they cannot 
introduce  new  laws  of  any  significance  without  the  Chief 
Executive’s consent.55  Moreover, only thirty-five of the seventy 
legislators are currently elected from geographic constituencies.56  
Of the remaining thirty-five, thirty are selected from professional 
and  industry-based  “functional  constituencies,”  which  are 
designed  to  ensure  a  significant  number  of  pro-government 
legislators;57 the remaining five legislators are chosen by voters not 
registered  to  any  of  the  functional  constituencies  that  existed 
before 2012.58 
Thus, the high degree of autonomy promised in the Basic Law 
is  chiefly  exercised  by  the  Chief  Executive,  who  is  primarily 
accountable  to  the  Chinese  government.59    As  the  relationship 
between the central authorities and the Chief Executive is largely 
hidden from public scrutiny,60 it is impossible to assess the extent 
to which Beijing uses this channel.  However, most commentators 
would  probably  agree  that  the  hand  of  Beijing  is  increasingly 
evident.  This is not surprising—the delay in introducing elections 
has  steadily  decreased  public  support  for  the  appointed  Chief 
Executive, making whoever is appointed to that office increasingly 
reliant upon Beijing. 
 
  55 Id. art. 74 (prohibiting an individual legislator from introducing any bill that 
relates to public expenditure or political structure or the operation of government.  It also 
requires  an  individual  legislator  to  obtain  the  Chief  Executive’s  consent  before 
introducing any bill that relates to government policies). 
  56 See Legislative Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the 
People’s Republic of China, History of the Legislature: Overview and Composition – the 
Legislative  Council  Today,  http://www.legco.gov.hk/general/english/intro/hist_lc-
overview-and-composition.htm. 
  57 See  Michael  E.  DeGolyer,  The  Challenges  of  Researching  Functional 
Constituencies, in HONG KONG’S CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES ch. 9 (Johannes Chan & 
Lison Harris eds., H.K.L.J. Ltd. 2005); SIMON YOUNG & ANTHONY O.K. LAW, A 
CRITICAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  HONG  KONG’S  FUNCTIONAL  CONSTITUENCIES  (Civic 
Exchange Ltd. July, 2004) (explaining that while some functional constituencies, such as 
the legal functional constituency, allow individuals to vote, others use corporate voting). 
  58 The system of functional constituencies is particularly significant because Annex 
I to the Basic Law requires that a bill or amendment proposed by an individual legislator 
must receive a majority of votes from both categories of legislators. 
  59 Basic Law, supra note 1, Annex I, ¶7, Annex II, ¶ 3. 
  60 See id. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  13 
 
III. Legal Protections for Academic Freedom and Critical 
Speech in Hong Kong’s Constitutional Framework 
The Hong Kong courts have the power to interpret the laws of 
Hong  Kong  and  to  judicially  review  local  executive  acts  and 
legislation.  The local judiciary also interprets the Basic Law in the 
context of litigation, and there is no appeal beyond Hong Kong’s 
Court of Final Appeal.61  On the other hand, the National People’s 
Congress  Standing  Committee  (“NPCSC”)  can  also  issue 
“legislative interpretations” of the Basic Law, which the Hong 
Kong judiciary is required to follow.62  Moreover, Hong Kong’s 
Court of Final Appeal is required to seek an interpretation from the 
NPCSC  when  it  determines  that  there  is  a  need  to  interpret 
provisions of the Basic Law relating to the central government’s 
powers or the relationship between the two governments.63 As of 
October 2016, the NPCSC had exercised its power to interpret the 
Basic Law only four times and only once at the request of Hong 
Kong’s Court of Final Appeal.64 
Prior to 1991, the local judiciary’s power of judicial review 
had little impact in Hong Kong because there was no domestic bill 
of  rights  and  the  colonial  constitution  (the  Letters  Patent  and 
Royal Instructions) contained very few limitations on the colonial 
government or legislature.65  This changed as a direct result of the 
June 4, 1989 massacre in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square.  With more 
than one million Hong Kong residents (approximately 20% of the 
population at the time) protesting against the Chinese government, 
 
  61 Id. art. 82 (stating that the power of final adjudication is vested in the Hong Kong 
Court of Final Appeal). 
  62 Id.  art.  158;  see  Yash  Ghai,  The  Political  Economy  of  Interpretation,  in 
INTERPRETING HONG KONG’S BASIC LAW, supra note 13, at 127–138 (showing the history of 
Article 158 and the damage that Beijing’s power of interpretation has done to the 
framework of the Basic Law and “one country two systems”). 
  63 Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 158. 
  64 The Hong Kong government publishes English translations of the NPCSC’s 
interpretations  of  the  Basic  Law  and  related  “decisions,”  describing  them  as 
“instruments”  and  treating  them  as  equivalent  to  the  text  of  the  Basic  Law: 
http://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/en/basiclawtext/index.html  [https://perma.cc/F4LV-SY2R]. 
The four interpretations of the Basic Law are listed as Instruments 17, 18, 20, and 22. 
Only the interpretation referred to as “Instrument 22” was made at the behest of the 
Court of Final Appeal. 
  65 See GHAI, supra note 36, at 14–19, 25-26. 14  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
Hong Kong’s colonial government had an urgent need to rebuild 
public  confidence.66    It  thus  proposed  that  the  International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (the “ICCPR”) be largely 
incorporated  into  Hong  Kong’s  domestic  law,  through  the 
enactment of the Bill of Rights Ordinance and a simultaneous 
amendment to the colonial constitution.67  Although the Chinese 
government threatened to repeal the Bill of Rights in 1997 (using 
its powers under Article 160 of the Basic Law), in the end it only 
removed a few preliminary provisions which had no impact in 
practice.68  The incorporation of the ICCPR into Hong Kong’s 
domestic legal system thus continued, after the handover, through 
both the Bill of Rights Ordinance and Article 39 of the Basic 
Law.69  Indeed, the Hong Kong judiciary has regularly enforced 
the ICCPR in litigation challenging local laws and government 
policies and the ICCPR has thus become a sort of “gold standard” 
in Hong Kong’s constitutional framework.70 
The Joint Declaration and the Basic Law also contain many 
additional provisions protecting civil liberties, academic freedom, 
and educational autonomy.  For example, Article 27 of the Basic 
Law provides, inter alia, that Hong Kong residents shall have 
freedom of speech, of the press, and of publication.71  Article 34 
protects the freedom to engage in academic research, literary and 
artistic creation, and other cultural activities.72  The Basic Law also 
contains  two  provisions  that  expressly  address  educational 
autonomy  and  academic  freedom.    Article  137  states  that 
“[e]ducational institutions of all kinds may retain their autonomy 
 
  66 NORMAN MINERS, THE GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS OF HONG KONG 27 (5th ed. 
1991). 
  67 Hong Kong Bill of Rights Ordinance, (1991) Cap. 383 (H.K.) (showing that the 
Bill of Rights was largely copied from the ICCPR as applied to Hong Kong). 
  68 See 1997 Decision, supra note 49.  For analysis of why this did not affect the 
application of the Bill of Rights, see Peter Wesley-Smith, Maintenance of the Bill of 
Rights, 27 H.K.L.J. 15 (1997). 
  69 Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 39. 
  70 Petersen, Embracing Universal Standards? The Role of International Human Rights 
Treaties in Hong Kong’s Constitutional Jurisprudence, in INTERPRETING HONG KONG’S 
BASIC LAW, supra note 13 (analysing the Hong Kong courts’ approach to the ICCPR and 
other international human rights treaties that apply to Hong Kong).  See also cases discussed 
in Albert H.Y. Chen, The Rule of Law Under “One Country Two Systems: The Case of Hong 
Kong 1997-2010, 6 NAT’L TAIWAN U.L. REV. 269, 285–291 (2011). 
  71 Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 27. 
  72 Id. art. 34. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  15 
and  enjoy  academic  freedom.”73    It  also  expressly  authorizes 
educational  institutions  to  recruit  international  staff  and  to  use 
foreign teaching materials.74  It further provides that schools run by 
religious  organizations  may  “continue  to  provide  religious 
education, including courses on religion” and that students “enjoy 
freedom  of  choice  of  educational  institutions  and  freedom  to 
pursue their education” outside of Hong Kong.75  Similarly, Article 
136  provides  that  Hong  Kong  shall,  “on  its  own,  formulate 
policies  on  the  development  and  improvement  of  education, 
including  policies  regarding  the  educational  system  and  its 
administration, the language of instruction, the allocation of funds, 
the examination system, the system of academic awards, and the 
recognition of educational qualifications.”76  Taken together, these 
provisions provide Hong Kong with an exceptionally high and 
detailed  level  of  legal  protection  for  critical  speech,  academic 
freedom, and educational autonomy. 
Given  Hong  Kong’s  constitutional  framework  and  the 
willingness of Hong Kong’s judiciary to enforce civil liberties, it is 
unlikely that the local government would ever propose a law or 
adopt  a  policy  that  overtly  restricts  freedom  of  expression  or 
academic  freedom.    The  closest  that  Hong  Kong  has  come  to 
enacting  restrictive  legislation  was  the  failed  attempt  to  enact 
national security legislation in 2002–2003.77  Article 23 has always 
been one of the most controversial and sensitive provisions in the 
Basic Law.  It states: 
The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall enact laws 
on its own to prohibit any act of treason, secession, sedition, 
subversion against the Central People’s Government, or theft of 
state secrets, to prohibit foreign political organizations or bodies 
from conducting political activities in the Region, and to prohibit 
political organizations or bodies of the Region from establishing 
 
  73 Id. art. 137. 
  74 See id. 
  75 Id. 
  76 Id. art. 136. 
  77 For  further  discussion,  see  generally  Petersen,  Hong  Kong’s  Spring  of 
Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the National Security Bill in 2003, in NATIONAL 
SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS, supra note 20.  Other chapters in the same 
volume  analyse  the  specific  legislative  proposals,  relating  to  treason,  sedition, 
subversion, secession, protection of state secrets, and proscription of organisations. 16  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
ties with foreign political organizations or bodies.78 
The reason that Article 23 still has not been implemented in 
Hong  Kong  through  local  legislation  is  that  the  historic  anti-
government demonstration of July 1, 2003 forced Tung Chee-hwa 
(the Hong Kong SAR’s first Chief Executive, who was appointed 
by  the  central  government)  to  withdraw  the  National  Security 
(Legislative Provisions) Bill 2003.79  The saga is a classic example 
of how an unelected government can become too dismissive of 
public opinion.  The government’s initial proposals, which were 
distributed in 2002, were not entirely unreasonable.80  In fact, some 
of the proposals would have liberalized draconian laws that had 
been  left  over  from  the  colonial  period  and  are  probably  now 
unenforceable, as they conflict with the ICCPR.81  Unfortunately, 
the government also included proposals that went beyond the strict 
requirements of Article 23 and created apprehension among Hong 
Kong academics and the general population.  For example, the bill 
proposed to add new categories of “protected information” and 
also to broaden the scope of offenses relating to “unauthorized and 
damaging disclosure” of protected information.82  The bill also 
included  a  proposal  that  could  have  allowed  the  central 
government to play a role in the proscription of local organizations 
(those with links to organizations proscribed in Mainland China) 
on grounds of “national security.”83  The public’s concerns were 
exacerbated when Hong Kong government officials revealed that 
 
  78 Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 23. 
  79 See Legislative Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the 
People’s Republic of China, Bills Committee on the National Security (Legislative 
Provisions)  Bill,  http://www.legco.gov.hk/yr02-03/english/bc/bc55/general/bc55.htm 
(publishing the bill as introduced in 2003 and the Legislative Council Brief and noting 
that the bill lapsed without being enacted). 
  80 See PROPOSALS TO IMPLEMENT ARTICLE 23 OF THE BASIC LAW: A CONSULTATION 
DOCUMENT (H.K. Gov’t, Sept. 2002). 
  81 See  Fu  Hualing,  Past  and  Future  Offences  of  Sedition  in  Hong  Kong,  in 
NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS, supra note 20 (explaining that, for 
example, the government’s proposals regarding sedition would have liberalised Hong 
Kong’s law of sedition, which is no longer enforceable due to conflicts with the ICCPR). 
  82 See Johannes Chan, National Security and the Unauthorized and Damaging 
Disclosure  of  Protected  Information,  in  NATIONAL  SECURITY  AND  FUNDAMENTAL 
FREEDOMS, supra note 20. 
  83 See generally Lison Harris, Lilly Ma, and C.B. Fung, A Connecting Door: The 
Proscription  of  Local  Organizations,  in  NATIONAL  SECURITY  AND  FUNDAMENTAL 
FREEDOMS, supra note 20. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  17 
they  had  consulted  with  central  government  authorities  on  the 
content of the proposed legislation.84 
Hong Kong academics played a significant role in critiquing—
and ultimately defeating—the proposals to implement Article 23.85  
A survey of 442 teachers conducted during the initial consultation 
period revealed that 75% opposed the government’s proposals, 
citing concerns for academic freedom and their ability to conduct 
research.86 
Academics also organized numerous forums on the proposals, 
submitted  comments  to  the  government  and  the  Legislative 
Council, launched signature campaigns, and gave interviews to the 
press to raise public awareness.87  The University of Hong Kong 
Faculty of Law was particularly active: Professor Johannes Chan 
was one of the founding members of the “Article 23 Concern 
Group,”88 while the Faculty’s Centre for Comparative and Public 
Law (“CCPL”) adopted Article 23 as a major research project and 
organized an international conference to critique the legislative 
proposals.89  University students were also active opponents of 
Article 23, sometimes openly jeering the Secretary for Security 
when she tried to defend the proposals during campus forums.90 
Perhaps most important, at the end of the official period of public 
consultation, a group of academics who specialized in the fields of 
 
  84 See Petersen, Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the 
National Security Bill in 2003, in NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS, 
supra note 20, at 22–23. 
  85 S.H. May, Academics Plan United Front on Article 23, S. CHINA MORNING POST 
(H.K.), Oct. 30, 2002, at 2. 
  86 Linda Young, New Security Law Seen as Threat to Teaching, Research; Broad-
based Academic Opposition Endorses Signature Campaign Against Grey Areas of 
Provisions in Article 23, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.), Nov. 16, 2002, at 3. 
  87 For details, see ACADEMIC FREEDOM, supra note 3, at 96–99. 
  88 The Article 23 Concern Group was mainly composed of lawyers but included 
professors of law.  It produced pamphlets, in both Chinese and English, that explained 
the legislation in a way that non-lawyers could understand, which helped to raise public 
awareness of the dangers to civil liberties posed by the legislation. 
  89 See Centre for Comparative and Public Law, Research: Article 23 of the Basic Law, 
http://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/research/projects/article23.html  [https://perma.cc/W3RJ-
ARML] (detailing the 2002 conference and other submissions to the government on the 
Article 23 proposals). 
  90 Ambrose Leung & Ng Kang-chung, Regina Ip Slugs it Out with Rowdy Forum, 
S. CHINA MORNING POST (Oct. 16, 2002), http://www.scmp.com/article/394549/regina-
ip-slugs-it-out-critics-rowdy-forum [https://perma.cc/LT36-BDYE]. 18  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
statistics and public opinion sampling formed a Research Team to 
assess  the  large  number  of  public  submissions  on  the 
government’s  proposals.91    The  Research  Team  published  a 
lengthy report disclosing its methodology and demonstrating how 
the  government  had  understated  the  level  of  opposition  to  the 
proposed legislation.92 
Despite the rising public outcry, the Hong Kong government 
adopted an inflexible attitude, rejecting suggestions that it publish 
a “White Paper” (a draft of the bill) before formally introducing 
the legislation in the Legislative Council.93  It also demanded an 
accelerated schedule for scrutinizing the bill and made it clear that 
it wanted the bill passed by the summer of 2003.94  Although 
legislators  in  opposition  parties  drafted  many  amendments,  the 
government declined to negotiate with them, apparently because 
government  officials  assumed  that  they  could  rely  upon 
representatives  of  the  functional  constituencies  and  other  pro-
government legislators to defeat any proposed amendments in the 
Legislative Council.95 
The  government’s  strategy  was  particularly  unwise  because 
Hong  Kong  was  simultaneously  suffering  from  Severe  Acute 
Respiratory  Syndrome  (“SARS”)  in  2003,  which  was  taking  a 
heavy  toll  on  the  local  economy  and  public  confidence.96  An 
elected  government  probably  would  have  adopted  a  more 
conciliatory attitude, agreed to slow down the legislative process, 
and accepted some additional amendments proposed by the elected 
legislators.    Instead,  the  government  announced  its  own,  very 
 
  91 See Research Team on the Compendium of Submissions on Article 23 of the 
Basic Law, Doing Justice to Public Opinion in Public Consultations: What to Do and 
What NOT to Do: A Case Study of the Government’s Consultation Exercise on Its 
Proposals  to  Implement  Article  23  of  the  Basic  Law  (2002), 
https://www.hkupop.hku.hk/english/resources/bl23/bl23gp/report/ 
[https://perma.cc/JC6H-CXDT]. 
  92 Id. 
  93 Petersen, Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the National 
Security Bill in 2003, in NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS, supra note 
20, at 31. 
  94 Id. at 33. 
  95 Id.  at  28–37  (detailing  the  government’s  mistakes  during  the  consultation 
process). 
  96 Lee Shiu Hung, The SARS Epidemic in Hong Kong: What Lessons Have We 
Learned?, J. ROYAL SOC’Y MEDICINE (Aug. 2003). 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  19 
limited amendments and pressed for a quick vote on the Bill.97  
This created a crisis atmosphere and ultimately caused more than 
500,000 people to join an anti-Article 23 protest march on July 1, 
2003, the sixth anniversary of Hong Kong’s return to China.98  The 
government and its supporters were shocked by the size of the 
march.99  The Liberal Party, a pro-business party that controlled 
eight  functional  constituency  seats  and  normally  supported  the 
government,  responded  by  asking  the  government  to  delay 
consideration of the Bill.100  When the government refused, the 
leader  of  the  Liberal  Party  resigned  from  Tung  Chee-hwa’s 
Executive Council and withdrew his party’s support.101  The Hong 
Kong government eventually had to withdraw the Bill altogether 
and two ministers resigned as a result of the crisis.102   Tung 
himself resigned in early 2005, more than two years before the end 
of  his  second  term  as  Chief  Executive—officially  for  health 
reasons, but in reality, because he had lost credibility with both 
Beijing and the Hong Kong public.103 
On  one  level,  the  Hong  Kong  government’s  inability  to 
implement Article 23 of the Basic Law was a victory for civil 
liberties  and  academic  freedom.    On  the  other  hand,  the  saga 
prompted Beijing to reexamine its entire Hong Kong policy.104  
Since  2003,  the  central  government  has  become  even  more 
reluctant  to  permit  democratic  reforms  and  increasingly 
interventionist  in  matters  that  are  formally  within  the  city’s 
autonomy  under  the  Basic  Law.105    As  demonstrated  in  later 
 
  97 Petersen, Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the National 
Security Bill in 2003, in NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS, supra note 
20, at 46–49. 
  98 Huge  Protest  Fills  HK  Streets,  CNN  (July  2,  2003), 
http://edition.cnn.com/2003/WORLD/asiapcf/east/07/01/hk.protest/ 
[https://perma.cc/PR9Z-VDVD] [hereinafter HK Protest 2003]. 
  99 Id. 
  100 Petersen, Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the National 
Security Bill in 2003, in NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS, supra note 
20, at 50. 
  101 Id. at 50. 
  102 Id. at 52. 
  103 ACADEMIC FREEDOM, supra note 3, at 104. 
  104 Petersen, Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the National 
Security Bill in 2003, in NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS, supra note 
20, at 57. 
  105 See infra Part VI. 20  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
sections of this article, Beijing and pro-Beijing forces in Hong 
Kong have also become increasingly hostile towards academics 
who regularly engage in research and advocacy projects that are 
critical of government proposals or the lack of democratic reform 
in Hong Kong.106 
IV. University Governance: The Impact of Increased 
Centralization and Control 
Each of Hong Kong’s publicly funded institutions of higher 
education is established by a local ordinance, beginning with the 
University of Hong Kong in 1911.107  The territory followed the 
traditional British model and bestowed the title of “Chancellor” 
upon the Governor of Hong Kong.  In the colonial period, that 
position  was  largely  ceremonial  and  the  Vice  Chancellor  (or 
President in some institutions) would be recognized as the highest 
ranking  official  and  the  person  with  true  authority  in  the 
institution.108  The Chancellor did hold the power to appoint the 
University Council (which includes external as well as internal 
members).109    However,  in  the  colonial  era,  this  meant  that  a 
university submitted a list of suggested members who would then 
be formally appointed by the Governor, as Chancellor.110  This is 
not to suggest that the colonial government paid no attention to 
university  politics,111  but  the  colonial  government  generally 
 
  106 See infra Parts VI-VIII. 
  107 See, e.g., University of Hong Kong Ordinance, (1911) Cap. 1053, (H.K.) (setting 
goals for the establishment of a university). 
  108 Alex Lo, Chief Executive as Chancellor of Hong Kong’s Universities is an 
Anachronism,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (H.K.)  (July  13,  2015), 
http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/1838191/chief-executive-
chancellor-hong-kong-universities [https://perma.cc/QBT4-KZRJ]. 
  109 Id. 
  110 Cannix Yau, Politics has Always Played a Role in University of Hong Kong’s 
Complex  104-Year  History,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (H.K.)  (Sept.  12,  2015), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/1857420/politics-
has-always-played-role-university-hong  [https://perma.cc/3H49-E7KU]  (quoting 
Professor Peter Cunich, an historian who has published a history of the University of 
Hong Kong). 
  111 Id. (noting that the colonial government did monitor the University of Hong 
Kong for signs of student radicalization and that at least one lecturer was compelled to 
take early retirement due to his pro-communist views, which Professor Cunich described 
as a “blotch” on the record of the University of Hong Kong). 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  21 
exercised a “laissez-faire” approach.112  Over time, the number of 
degree-granting institutions increased and the University Grants 
Committee was established to make recommendations on funding 
and to serve as a “buffer” between the government and publicly 
funded institutions of higher education.113 
In  1997,  the  Governor  was  replaced  by  the  first  Chief 
Executive, Tung Chee-hwa, who inherited the title of “Chancellor” 
for all eight publicly funded degree-granting institutions.114  In 
hindsight,  this  automatic  continuation  of  the  tradition  was  a 
mistake, as there is evidence that the position is being used far 
more  than  during  the  colonial  period  to  influence  the  public 
universities.115  For example, rather than allowing each university 
to suggest a list of council members, the Chief Executive now 
appoints anyone he wants to university councils, with little regard 
for the institution’s preferences or need for expertise.116  Moreover, 
Hong Kong’s Chief Executives are now more likely than colonial 
Governors to use their influence to overtly interfere in university 
business.117 
In order to illustrate the effect of these changes, this section of 
the article will first briefly review the “Robert Chung” incident in 
1999-2000, as it is still the most famous post-1997 attempt by the 
Hong  Kong  government  to  directly  restrict  an  academic’s 
 
  112 Id.  (quoting  Professor  Peter  Cunich  and  Elizabeth  Wong,  who  served  as 
Secretary for Health during the colonial period). 
  113 See Carlson Tong, Chairman, University Grants Committee, Message from the 
Chairman  of  the  UGC,  http://ugc.hk/eng/ugc/about/message/chairman.htm 
[https://perma.cc/64CH-DBTY] (last visited Mar. 15, 2016). 
  114 The eight institutions are: the University of Hong Kong; Chinese University of 
Hong Kong; Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University; City University of Hong Kong; Hong Kong Baptist University; Lingnan 
University; and the Education University of Hong Kong, previously known as the Hong 
Kong Institute of Education. 
  115 See Yau, supra note 110. 
  116 University Grants Committee, Governance in UCG-funded Higher Education 
Institutions in Hong Kong, (submitted to the UGC by Sir Edward Newby in September 
2015  and  published  by  the  UGC  on  Mar.  30,  2016),  at  20, 
http://www.ugc.edu.hk/eng/ugc/publication/report/her/her.htm  [https://perma.cc/JS5J-
ZJ3A] (last visited Apr. 10, 2016) [hereinafter Newby Report]; see Yau, supra note 110 
(noting the similar observations by Professor Cunich when interviewed by the S. China 
Morning Post). 
  117 See id. 22  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
research.118  In 1999, Robert Chung Ting-yiu was a PhD candidate 
at the University of Hong Kong (“HKU”).119  He developed an 
opinion poll research project that tracked the declining popularity 
of Tung Chee-hwa.120  In July 2000 (after he had completed his 
PhD and secured a position at HKU), Chung published a short 
article  alleging  that  he  had  been  pressured  to  discontinue  the 
project in the previous year.121  He claimed that “more than once, I 
was given a clear message from Mr. Tung via a special channel 
that my polling activities were not welcomed.  Mr. Tung did not 
like me polling his popularity or the Government’s credibility.  I 
was told that he did not like to see universities involved in such 
activities and that our polls should stop.”122 
The  article  generated  a  good  deal  of  controversy  and  the 
government initially responded by demanding that Chung identify 
the “special channel” who had allegedly pressured him.123  Chung 
eventually  revealed  that  the  Vice-Chancellor  (HKU’s  highest-
ranking officer) had sent him the message, via Professor Wong Siu 
Lun  (a  Pro-Vice-Chancellor  and  Robert  Chung’s  PhD 
supervisor).124    The  Vice-Chancellor  responded  swiftly  to  the 
allegation:  although  he  admitted  that  Andrew  Lo,  a  “Senior 
Special Assistant” to Tung Chee-hwa, had visited him at HKU to 
discuss  Robert  Chung’s  research  project,  the  Vice  Chancellor 
insisted that he had never asked anyone at HKU to put pressure on 
Robert Chung.125  As this created a dispute of fact, HKU’s Council 
had little choice but to appoint an Independent Investigation Panel, 
consisting of a former judge of the High Court, a senior barrister, 
 
  118 For a summary of the Robert Chung affair, see Petersen, Lessons, supra note 21. 
  119 Id. 
  120 Id. 
  121 Id. 
  122 Robert Chung, Pressure to Stop Opinion Polls not Welcome, S. CHINA MORNING 
POST (H.K.), July 7, 2000, at 1. 
  123 Exco Three Turn Up Heat on Pollster, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.), July 12, 
2000, at 7. 
  124 Pollster “Irresponsible” if he Withholds Source: Renewed Calls for Clarification 
Turns Up Heat on Pollster, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.), July 13, 2000, at 2. 
  125 See Mark Lander, Citing Pressure, A Pollster Says Academic Freedom is Under 
Siege  in  Hong  Kong,  N.Y.  TIMES  (July  16,  2000), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2000/07/16/world/citing-pressure-a-pollster-says-academic-
freedom-is-under-siege-in-hong-kong.html [https://perma.cc/99ZE-PM6N]. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  23 
and the Executive Officer of Hong Kong’s Consumer Council.126  
The Panel held public hearings, which were televised and widely 
reported in the press.127  Given the seriousness of the allegations, 
the Panel also decided that it would adopt the criminal standard of 
proof—beyond  a  reasonable  doubt—when  assessing  the 
allegations made by Robert Chung.128 
After more than two weeks of hearings, the Panel delivered its 
Report to HKU’s Council.129  The Panel determined that Robert 
Chung’s  allegations  were  true:  Professor  Wong  (acting  at  the 
behest of the Vice-Chancellor) had conveyed a message to Robert 
Chung  that  was  “calculated  to  inhibit  his  right  to  academic 
freedom.”130  The Panel concluded that this action was taken as a 
result of the meeting between the Vice-Chancellor and Andrew 
Lo,  a  special  assistant  to  Tung  Chee-hwa.131    The  Panel  also 
concluded that the Vice Chancellor and Andrew Lo had not given 
full  and  accurate  testimony  regarding  their  initial  meeting  to 
discuss  Robert  Chung’s  research.132    Government  lawyers 
representing Mr. Lo reacted strongly to this finding and initially 
requested the Council to delay releasing the Report to the public.133  
Although  this  request  was  later  withdrawn  (and  the  Council 
released  the  Report  in  September  2000),  the  government’s 
 
  126 University of Hong Kong Independent Investigation Panel, Report to the Council 
of the University of Hong Kong by The Independent Investigation Panel (Aug. 26, 2000) 
(copy on file with the authors). 
  127 Id. at 13 (noting that video cameras provided continuous live coverage of the 
hearings for broadcast media outlets).  Well Worth the Wait as Plot Finally Thickens, S. 
CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.) (Aug 8, 2000), http://www.scmp.com/article/323250/well-
worth-wait-plot-finally-thickens  [https://perma.cc/NZ6A-HPDH];  Pollster’s  Integrity 
Challenged,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (H.K.)  (Aug  9,  2000), 
http://www.scmp.com/article/323304/pollsters-integrity-challenged 
[https://perma.cc/2HZ5-D2MQ]; and Pollster Faced Internal Claims that Surveys were 
Non-Academic Activities, Panel Told, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.) (Aug 10, 2000),  
http://www.scmp.com/article/323377/pollster-faced-internal-claims-surveys-were-non-
academic-activities-panel-told [https://perma.cc/CW58-7TR9]. 
  128 University of Hong Kong Independent Investigation Panel, Report to the Council 
of the University of Hong Kong by The Independent Investigation Panel, supra note 126, 
at 67. 
  129 Id. 
  130 Id. at 73. 
  131 Id. 
  132 Id. at 31. 
  133 Tung Aide to Lobby Against “Slurs”, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.), Sept. 6, 
2000. 24  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
displeasure was clear, which made academic staff concerned that 
HKU’s  Council  would  try  to  distance  itself  from  the  Panel’s 
findings.134 
The Council Chairman, Sir T.L. Yang, was in a particularly 
difficult position because he was also a member of Tung Chee-
hwa’s Executive Council (similar to a cabinet) at the time and Mr. 
Tung had already publicly disagreed with the Panel’s findings.135  
A group of HKU academics therefore drafted a petition, which 
was  circulated  by  email,  requesting  the  Council  to  accept  the 
Report.136  Within  three  days,  439  academics,  over  half  of  the 
academic  staff  of  HKU,  had  signed  this  petition.137    Many 
signatories  did  not  have  tenure  but  probably  felt  somewhat 
reassured by the fact that the signatories included six of the nine 
deans,  fourteen  associate  deans,  and  twenty-six  heads  of 
departments or centers within the university.138  At the time, all of 
the deans were elected from among their respective faculties and 
they all sat on HKU’s Council, giving the university a reasonable 
balance between internal and external members.139  Although the 
petition did not call upon HKU’s Council to take any particular 
action beyond adopting the Report, it demonstrated that the Vice-
Chancellor had lost credibility with the majority of his academic 
staff.140 
Shortly before the Council meeting resumed on September 6, 
2000, the Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor Wong both 
 
  134 Id. 
  135 Id. (noting that Sir. T.L. Yang was simultaneously serving as Chairman of the 
University of Hong Kong’s Council and as a member of the Tung Chee-hwa’s Executive 
Council); see also Petersen, Lessons, supra note 21, at 172 (summarizing statements 
made by Tung Chee-hwa in support of his aide). 
  136 Petition Launched Ahead of Council Meeting on Poll Report, S. CHINA MORNING 
POST (H.K.) (Sept. 4, 2000), 
http://www.scmp.com/article/325483/petition-launched-ahead-council-meeting-poll-
report [https://perma.cc/B5RB-J8E2]. 
  137 Letter dated Sept. 6, 2000 to the Members of the Council, University of Hong 
Kong, signed by 439 academics (copy on file with the authors). 
  138 Id. 
  139 Petersen & Currie, Higher Education, supra note 16 (documenting changes in the 
governance and management structure after the Robert Chung incident). 
  140 University of Hong Kong Academics Are Putting Careers on the Line Over the 
Chung Inquiry, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.), Sept. 6, 2000 (describing academics’ 
reasons for signing the petition and declining support for the Vice Chancellor). 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  25 
offered their resignations.141   They almost certainly did so in order 
to save the external members of HKU’s Council from having to 
decide whether to take any formal action on the Panel’s Report.  
After  the  resignations  were  announced,  the  Chairman  quickly 
introduced a series of motions to the effect that the Council would 
simply  “note”  the  Report  rather  than  formally  adopt  it.142  
Interestingly, the Council was careful to note only the Panel’s 
findings  regarding  the  Vice-Chancellor  and  Professor  Wong, 
thereby distancing itself from any findings relating to Tung Chee-
hwa’s assistant.143  This course of action was supported by the 
external members of the Council but objected to by the student 
members and the majority of the deans.144  There is little doubt that 
the  external  members  were  influenced  by  their  reluctance  to 
criticize a member of the Chief Executive’s staff. 
Following the Robert Chung affair, HKU established a Senate 
Task  Force  on  Academic  Freedom,  which  sought  submissions 
from students and staff.145  The Task Force concluded that “there is 
evidence to suggest that a number of members of this university 
have felt that their academic freedoms have been infringed in a 
variety of ways.”146  It recommended that HKU adopt a definition 
of academic freedom and a list of freedoms enjoyed by members 
of  the  university,  including  the  freedom  to  put  forward 
controversial opinions, to question the governance and conduct of 
university  affairs,  to  discuss  university  affairs  in  appropriate 
media, to select one’s areas of research, and to offer expert advice 
in both academic and non-academic contexts.147  The Task Force 
also stressed that members of the university have an obligation to 
support academic freedom and to “avoid simply using rank or 
positions as a means of imposing opinions or values.”148  To their 
credit, HKU’s Council and Senate later adopted the Task Force’s 
 
  141 See Petersen, Lessons, supra note 21, at 170. 
  142 Id. at 170–71. 
  143 Id. 
  144 Id. 
  145 The University of Hong Kong, Senate Task Force on Academic Freedom, ¶ 19 
(2002),  http://www.dental.hku.hk/biomat/TFAF/TFAF%20Senate%20Report.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/87P7-CM8W]. 
  146 Id. ¶ 81. 
  147 Id. ¶ 47. 
  148 Id. ¶ 10. 26  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
definition of academic freedom, as well as the suggested list of 
freedoms and responsibilities.149 
Robert Chung continues to direct opinion poll research at HKU 
and  he  does  not  shy  away  from  reporting  on  sensitive  topics, 
including  the  low  levels  of  support  for  the  appointed  Chief 
Executive and declining public confidence.150  Yet the saga also 
demonstrated  how  easily  government  officials  can  intimidate 
university councils, particularly the external members.151  In the 
wake  of  the  scandal,  one  of  the  authors  of  this  article 
recommended  certain  reforms  to  make  the  universities  more 
autonomous, including: abolishing the Chief Executive’s role as 
chancellor  of  every  university;  adopting  a  firm  rule  that  no 
member of a university council could simultaneously serve as a 
member of the Chief Executive’s Executive Council; and changing 
the  balance  of  membership  on  university  councils  so  that  the 
external members would not hold a majority of the seats.152 
Unfortunately, the system of university governance moved in 
precisely  the  opposite  direction  after  the  Robert  Chung  affair, 
becoming  more  centralized  and  more  vulnerable  to  outside 
interference.153  This is largely due to recommendations in a 2002 
report  commissioned  by  the  University  Grants  Committee  and 
authored by Lord Sutherland, Vice-Chancellor of the University of 
Edinburgh, entitled Higher Education in Hong Kong: Report of 
the University Grants Committee (also known as the “Sutherland 
Report”).154  The Sutherland Report concluded that the system of 
governance  used  in  Hong  Kong’s  traditional  universities—
 
  149 See  Academic  Freedom  Policy,  U.  HONG  KONG, 
http://www.hku.hk/about/policies_reports/acad_freedom.html  [https://perma.cc/J7VA-
BCEY] (last visited Mar. 16, 2016). 
  150 See,  e.g.,  Team  Members,  PUBLIC  OPINION  PROGRAMME,  U.  HONG  KONG, 
https://www.hkupop.hku.hk/english/aboutpop/teams.html  [https://perma.cc/T86M-
5CNV] (last visited Mar. 15, 2016) (listing the leadership team). 
  151 POP  Polls,  PUBLIC  OPINION  PROGRAMME,  U.  HONG  KONG, 
https://www.hkupop.hku.hk/english/popexpress/  [https://perma.cc/SUC4-UV8G]  (last 
visited Mar. 15, 2016) (listing recent polls). 
  152 Petersen, Lessons, supra note 21, at 175. 
  153 Petersen & Currie, Higher Education, supra note 16. 
  154 Stewart  R.  Sutherland,  Higher  Education  in  Hong  Kong  –  Report  of  the 
University  Grants  Committee  (Mar.  2002), 
http://www.ugc.edu.hk/eng/ugc/publication/report/her/her.htm  [https://perma.cc/7WW7-
5224] (last visited Mar. 15, 2016) [hereinafter Sutherland Report].  2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  27 
including elected deans and the practice of distributing governance 
among  several  bodies,  such  as  a  Council,  Senate,  and  Faculty 
Boards—was old-fashioned and inappropriate for building world 
class universities.155  Emphasizing that universities now manage 
substantial public funds, the report endorsed the more centralized 
systems of governance that are used at leading universities in the 
USA,  the  U.K.,  and  Australia.156    The  report  also  expressed  a 
strong preference for appointed deans, which is consistent with 
international  practice  but  not  necessarily  the  best  approach  in 
Hong Kong, given the lack of local democracy and the hostility 
towards free speech from the central government.157 
Despite many academics’ concerns, the recommendations of 
the  Sutherland  Report  were  largely  endorsed  by  a  subsequent 
review at HKU, known as the Fit For Purpose Report, which 
concluded  that  the  “globalization  of  higher  education  and  an 
increasingly competitive environment” require more “robust” and 
“streamlined”  systems  of  governance.158    As  part  of  these 
“reforms,” HKU abolished the tradition of electing deans from 
within the faculties and it now advertises for and appoints full-
time “executive” deans.159  Although members of the faculty elect 
some representatives onto the relevant search committee, the Vice-
Chancellor  makes  the  ultimate  decision  on  appointment  and 
reappointment  of  deans  and  has  no  obligation  to  follow  the 
recommendations of faculty representatives.160  Thus the deans are 
now a part of the Vice-Chancellor’s team and almost certainly less 
accountable to their respective faculties.  The appointed deans, in 
turn, now appoint HKU’s heads of departments.161  In our view, 
had this been the case during the Robert Chung affair, it is unlikely 
that so many deans and heads of departments would have signed 
the petition that led to the Vice-Chancellor’s resignation. 
 
  155 Id. 
  156 Id. 
  157 Id. 
  158 The University of Hong Kong, Fit For Purpose Report, at Executive Summary 
(2003),  http://www.hku.hk/about/governance/purpose_report.html 
[https://perma.cc/K9S5-Q2XW]  [hereinafter  Fit  for  Purpose]  (last  visited  Mar.  15, 
2016). 
  159 Id. 
  160 Id. 
  161 Id. 28  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
HKU also now has a smaller Council, which is even more 
dominated  by  non-university  members  than  it  was  during  the 
Robert Chung affair.162  Similar changes have been made to Hong 
Kong’s other institutions of higher education, greatly increasing 
the  influence  of  the  Chief  Executive.163    The  Newby  Report, 
prepared  by  Sir  Howard  Newby  for  the  UGC  in  2015, 
acknowledged that the Chief Executive’s power to appoint the 
external members of universities’ councils leaves the universities 
with “little or no control” and “places a premium on the nature of 
the relationship” with the Chief Executive’s office.164  This puts 
the universities in a particularly difficult position because there are 
so  many  conflicts  between  the  government  and  the  academic 
community,  a  situation  unlikely  to  change  as  long  as  Beijing 
refuses  to  allow  the  Hong  Kong  people  to  elect  their  Chief 
Executive.  Examples  of  these  conflicts—which  have  become 
increasingly heated in the past five years—are analyzed in the next 
section of the article. 
V.  Conflicts between The Academic Community and the Hong 
Kong and Central Governments 
It is not surprising that academics at Hong Kong’s universities 
would be deeply involved in the study of “One Country, Two 
Systems” and various cross-border controversies that have arisen 
since  1997.165    For  example,  Baptist  University’s  Hong  Kong 
Transition Project has been studying political developments in the 
territory since 1989, including the increasingly contentious topic 
of democracy.166  HKU academics associated with the CCPL also 
 
  162 The  University  of  Hong  Kong,  The  Council:  Membership, 
http://www.hku.hk/about/governance/governance_structure/the-
court/council_membership.html [https://perma.cc/8KAR-SKT9] (last visited Mar. 15, 
2016). 
  163 Petersen & Currie, Higher Education, supra note 16. 
  164 Newby Report, supra note 116, at 2021. 
  165 Thomas P. Rohlen, Hong Kong and the Pearl River Delta: “One Country, Two 
Systems”  in  the  Emerging  Metropolitan  Context,  STANFORD  INSTITUTE  FOR 
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES 7 (July 2000). 
  166 See, e.g., The Hong Kong Transition Project, Hong Kong Constitutional Reform: 
What  Do  the  People  Want?  (Dec.  2005),  http://hktp.hkbu.edu.hk 
[https://perma.cc/GA6Q-FYEC] (last visited Mar. 14, 2016).  Additional research reports 
available on the website of the Hong Kong Transition Project at http://hktp.hkbu.edu.hk/ 
[https://perma.cc/V767-MVVV] (last visited Mar. 14, 2016). 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  29 
have been prolific on issues relating to the implementation of the 
Joint  Declaration,  Hong  Kong’s  Bill  of  Rights,  and  the  Basic 
Law.167 
In  recent  years,  the  most  controversial  subject  has  been 
whether and how Hong Kong will be permitted to develop a more 
democratic system of governance.  There is a good deal of material 
for academics to study and comment upon, partly because the 
current system is so complicated (perhaps deliberately so), making 
it important for researchers to study just how the system works.  
For example, Centre for Comparative and Public Law published a 
series of research reports on the functional constituency seats in 
the  Legislative  Council,  including  the  problem  of  “packing” 
(whereby  a  corporation  can  create  additional  subsidiaries  and 
affiliated companies to increase its votes within a constituency).168  
HKU  academics  also  produced  and  commented  on  various 
proposals  to  nominate  and  elect  a  Chief  Executive  through 
universal suffrage.169 
For  academics  who  study  law  and  politics,  their  research 
 
  167 See, e.g., THE NEW LEGAL ORDER IN HONG KONG (Raymond Wacks, ed., H. K. 
Univ.  Press,  1999);  RODA  MUSHKAT,  ONE  COUNTRY,  TWO  INTERNATIONAL  LEGAL 
PERSONALITIES: THE CASE OF HONG KONG (H.K. Univ. Press 1997); HONG KONG, CHINA 
AND 1997: ESSAYS IN LEGAL THEORY (Raymond Wacks, ed., H.K. Univ. Press 1993); 
INTERPRETING HONG KONG’S BASIC LAW, supra note 13; and NATIONAL SECURITY AND 
FUNDAMENTAL  FREEDOMS,  supra  note  20.      Additional  publications  by  academics 
associated  with  the  CCPL  are  listed  at  http://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/pub/index.html 
[https://perma.cc/JE2W-JGKE]. 
  168 See, e.g., YOUNG & LAW, supra note 57, ¶¶ 135–155.  See also Centre for 
Comparative  and  Public  Law,  Research:  Constitutional  Societies, 
http://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/research/ConstitutionalSocieties.html 
[https://perma.cc/CR8L-VDTC] (last visited Mar. 15, 2016) (showing additional reports 
on the functional constituency system). 
  169 See, e.g., Stuart Lau, Basic Law Expert Albert Chen Tries to Steer Middle Road 
on Reform for Hong Kong Chief Executive Election, S. CHINA MORNING POST (Jan. 26, 
2015,  5:49  AM),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1691393/basic-law-
expert-albert-chen-tries-steer-middle-road-reform-hong-kong  [https://perma.cc/739F-
Q4RV]; see also Stuart Lau, ‘Dual Track’ Nomination System for 2017 Chief Executive 
Election Proposed by Law Scholar, S. CHINA MORNING POST (Apr. 1, 2014, 11:57 AM), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1462336/dual-track-system-2017-chief-
executive-election-proposed-law-scholar  [https://perma.cc/576K-E5MW]  (discussing 
Professor Simon N. M. Young’s proposal); see generally, Academic Roundtable at the 
Centre for Comparative and Public Law at The Univ. of Hong Kong, Universal Suffrage 
and Nomination Procedures: Imperatives from Article 25 ICCPR (Mar. 20, 2014), 
http://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/events/Article25ICCPR.html  [https://perma.cc/N6KJ-2GJ2] 
(containing experts’ viewpoints  on equal and universal suffrage under Article 25). 30  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
interests and their political activities often naturally overlap. For 
example, as a Professor of Political Science at City University, 
Joseph  Cheng  Yu-shek  has  published  extensively  on  political 
movements in Hong Kong.170  He also served as the convener of 
the Alliance for True Democracy and has endeavored to moderate 
between  different  factions  within  Hong  Kong’s  pro-democracy 
movement.171    At  the  other  end  of  the  political  spectrum,  Ms. 
Priscilla Leung holds the rank of Associate Professor of Law at 
City University,172 while also serving as a legislator and political 
commentator  who  regularly  champions  pro-Beijing  views.173  
Indeed, if one scans the biographies of members of the Legislative 
Council, the District Councils, and the political parties, one will 
find many academics listed there.174  As their political positions are 
generally  not  “full-time,”  this  means  that  many  academics  are 
wearing two hats—one as a politician and one as a lecturer or 
professor at a university.175  There are no rules against this in Hong 
Kong—and  in  fact,  many  members  of  the  Legislative  Council 
maintain  other  careers.    However,  that  so  many  university 
employees are in the thick of the debate on democratic reform in 
Hong Kong—not simply as researchers and commentators but as 
active  political  campaigners—naturally  increases  the  tension 
between government officials and the academic community. 
 
  170 Tanna Chong, Professor Joseph Cheng Yu-Shek, a Peace Broker at Breaking 
Point,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (Jan.  13,  2014),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-
kong/article/1404121/professor-joseph-cheng-yu-shek-peace-broker-breaking-point 
[https://perma.cc/EF4R-VLWG]. 
  171 See id. 
  172 See  Staff  Profile  for  Priscilla  Leung,  CITY  UNIVERSITY  SCHOOL  OF  LAW, 
http://www6.cityu.edu.hk/slw/people/people_priscilla.html  [https://perma.cc/R9AK-
2UJA] (last visited Sept. 16, 2016). 
  173 See  BUSINESS  AND  PROFESSIONALS  ALLIANCE  OF  HONG  KONG, 
http://bpahk.org/eng/ [https://perma.cc/Z7VH-RR26] (showing the homepage of Leung’s 
political party). 
  174 See Members’ Biographies, LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF THE HONG KONG SAR, 
http://www.legco.gov.hk/general/english/members/yr16-20/biographies.htm (last visited 
Jan. 25, 2017) (showing for example, that Legislator Helena Wong (of the Democratic 
Party) is also a lecturer at Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Joseph Lee is a Professor 
at the Open University of Hong Kong, and Priscilla Leung is an Associate Professor at 
the City University of Hong Kong) [hereinafter Biographies]; see also Dr. Hon Fernando 
Cheung  Chiu  Hung,  http://en.cheungchiuhung.org.hk/about-us/fernando-cheung-chiu-
hung/  [https://perma.cc/7EQ8-C3LG]  (last  visited  Sept.  16,  2016)  (providing  the 
biography of Legislative Councilor Fernando Cheung). 
  175 Id. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  31 
These conflicts have become especially acute in recent years.  
Beijing  has  delayed  democracy  reforms,  making  the  local 
appointed government all the more unpopular and, therefore, more 
sensitive to critical research projects and advocacy.  Although the 
Basic Law expressly provides for democratic reform, it pinpoints 
the  second  decade  after  reunification  as  the  first  time  that 
significant changes can be made.  Article 45 states that there shall 
be “gradual and orderly progress” in the method of selecting the 
Chief  Executive,  and  that  the  “ultimate  aim”  is  selection  “by 
universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative 
nominating  committee  in  accordance  with  democratic 
procedures.”176  Similarly, Article 68 provides for “gradual and 
orderly progress” toward the ultimate aim of electing “all members 
of the Legislative Council by universal suffrage.”177  This would 
appear  to  expressly  allow  for  the  eventual  abolition  of  the 
functional constituency seats.  Yet the Annexes to the Basic Law 
set forth procedures that must be followed in order to move in this 
direction and establish substantial hurdles.178 
For example, Annex I to the Basic Law provides that: “If there 
is a need to amend the method for selecting the Chief Executive 
for the terms subsequent to the year 2007,” such amendments must 
be endorsed by a two-thirds majority of the Legislative Council, 
approved by the Chief Executive, and reported to the NPCSC for 
approval.179  Annex II requires a similar procedure for changes to 
the  method  of  selecting  the  Legislative  Council,  except  that  it 
states that the changes must be reported to the NPCSC “for the 
record” (rather than “for approval”).180  In practice, this language 
does not make a great deal of difference, because the appointed 
Chief Executive would almost certainly withhold his consent to 
any  changes  that  the  central  government  was  not  prepared  to 
approve. 
Beijing has consistently exploited the procedural requirements 
in the Annexes in order to delay the pace of reform,181 using its 
 
  176 Basic Law, supra note 1, art. 45 (showing that the Central People’s Government 
will appoint the Chief Executive after s/he is selected or elected locally). 
  177 Id. art. 68. 
  178 Id. Annex I–II. 
  179 Id. Annex I. 
  180 Id. Annex II. 
  181 See Alvin Y.H. Cheung, Road to Nowhere: Hong Kong’s Democratization and 32  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
power  to  interpret  the  Basic  Law  (pursuant  to  Article  158)  to 
create new barriers.182  For example, in 2004, in response to the 
July 2003 march against national security legislation and strong 
performance  of  pro-democracy  parties  in  that  year’s  District 
Council elections, the NPCSC issued an interpretation of Annexes 
I and II that arrogated to itself the right to determine whether 
electoral  reform  was  “necessary,”  following  a  report  from  the 
Chief Executive.183  Unsurprisingly, then-Chief Executive Tung 
advised,184 and the NPCSC declared, that such reforms were not 
necessary for the Chief Executive elections in 2007 and legislative 
elections in 2008.185  In 2007, the NPCSC, again responding to 
political pressure on the Hong Kong government, declared that 
 
China’s Obligations Under Public International Law, 40 BROOK. J. INT’L L. 465, 481–
504 (2015) (describing the history of Beijing’s efforts to thwart democratization in Hong 
Kong). 
  182 See supra note 64 (containing English translations of instruments that the Hong 
Kong government publishes, including the NPCSC’s interpretations of the Basic Law 
and its “decisions” blocking democratic reform, describing them as “instruments” and 
treating them as equivalent to the text of the Basic Law). 
  183 See Quanguo Renmin Daibiao Dahui Changwu Weiyuanhui Guanyu Zhonghua 
Renmin Gongheguo Xianggang Tebie Xingzhengqu Jibenfa Fujian Yi Di Qi Tiao He 
Fujian Er Di San Tiao de Jieshi, ((cid:12)(cid:23)(cid:9)(cid:41)(cid:10)(cid:54)(cid:26)(cid:37)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:27)(cid:20)(cid:37)(cid:65)(cid:34)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:52)(cid:9)(cid:41)(cid:13)(cid:19)
(cid:23)(cid:69)(cid:44)(cid:45)(cid:15)(cid:53)(cid:33)(cid:17)(cid:25)(cid:39)(cid:43)(cid:2)(cid:66)(cid:11)(cid:3)(cid:50)(cid:4)(cid:40)(cid:19)(cid:66)(cid:11)(cid:8)(cid:50)(cid:5)(cid:40)(cid:47)(cid:55)(cid:63)),  [Interpretation 
by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress of Article 7 of Annex I 
and Article III of Annex II to the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region of the People’s Republic of China] Standing Comm. Nat’l People’s Cong. (Apr. 
6,  2004),  http://www.npc.gov.cn/wxzl/wxzl/2004-07/23/content_332218.htm 
[https://perma.cc/R9X2-DD98] [hereinafter 2004 Interpretation]. 
  184 See H.K. CHIEF EXEC., REPORT ON WHETHER THERE IS A NEED TO AMEND THE 
METHODS  FOR  SELECTING  THE  CHIEF  EXECUTIVE  OF  THE  HONG  KONG  SPECIAL 
ADMINISTRATIVE REGION IN 2007 AND FOR FORMING THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF THE HONG 
KONG  SPECIAL  ADMINISTRATIVE  REGION  IN  2008,  4  (2004), 
http://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/en/materials/doc/2004_04_15_e.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/Y6DV-9VSC]. 
  185 See Quanguo Renmin Daibiao Dahui Changwu Weiyuanhui Guanyu Xianggang 
Tebie Xingzhengqu 2012 Nian Xingzheng Zhangguan He Lifa Hui Chansheng Banfa Ji 
Youguan Puxuan Wenti de Jueding ((cid:12)(cid:23)(cid:9)(cid:41)(cid:10)(cid:54)(cid:26)(cid:37)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:27)(cid:20)(cid:37)(cid:65)(cid:34)(cid:69)(cid:44)(cid:45)(cid:15)(cid:53)(cid:33)
(cid:17)2012(cid:31)(cid:53)(cid:33)(cid:64)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:49)(cid:43)(cid:37)(cid:0)(cid:46)(cid:60)(cid:43)(cid:18)(cid:38)(cid:65)(cid:35)(cid:61)(cid:21)(cid:68)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:29)),  [Decision  of  the 
Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress on Issues Relating to the 
Methods for Selecting the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region  and  for  Forming  the  Legislative  Council  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special 
Administrative Region in the Year 2012 and on Issues Relating to Universal Suffrage] 
Standing  Comm.  Nat’l  People’s  Cong.  (Dec.  29,  2007),  
http://www.npc.gov.cn/npc/xinwen/syxw/2007-12/29/content_1387576.htm 
[https://perma.cc/62WH-J8BK] [hereinafter 2007 Decision]. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  33 
there would be no election by universal suffrage in 2012.186 
Faced  with  a  line  of  NPCSC  decisions  delaying 
democratization, Hong Kong’s democrats became bitterly divided 
about  how  to  react.    In  November  2009,  the  Hong  Kong 
government released modest proposals on Chief Executive and 
legislative  electoral  reforms  for  2012.187    In  response,  five 
legislators—one  from  each  of  the  territory’s  geographical 
constituencies—resigned  in  order  to  trigger  a  “de  facto 
referendum”  on  reform.188    However,  the  Democratic  Party  of 
Hong Kong—then the largest pro-democracy party—declined to 
participate, instead entering into secret negotiations with Beijing’s 
liaison office in Hong Kong (the “Liaison Office”).189  Although 
the reform proposals were narrowly passed in 2010, they provoked 
a severe backlash against the Democratic Party, splitting the pro-
democracy  camp—and  intensifying  public  demands  for 
democratization.190 
In the midst of this tension, Donald Tsang (the second Chief 
Executive, who served from 2005–2012) threw more fuel on the 
fire by emphasizing, in his 2010–11 policy address, the importance 
of national unity and of strengthening “national education” in local 
schools.191  Although the topic of national education had been 
raised in previous policy addresses, this time the government had a 
concrete plan in mind.  In 2011, the local Education Bureau issued 
a  public  consultation  document  stressing  the  need  to  develop 
“affection for the country” and “national identity.”192  In 2012, it 
 
  186 See id. 
  187 H.K. CONST. AND MAINLAND AFF. BUREAU, CONSULTATION DOCUMENT ON THE 
METHODS FOR SELECTING THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND FOR FORMING THE LEGISLATIVE 
COUNCIL  IN  2012  (Nov.  18,  2009), 
http://www.gov.hk/en/residents/government/publication/consultation/docs/2010/CE_and
_LC_in_2012.pdf [https://perma.cc/V6YM-KWKC]. 
  188 Protest  Vote,  ECONOMIST  (May  20,  2010), 
http://www.economist.com/node/16167654 [https://perma.cc/R8NH-HEFY]. 
  189 Albert H.Y. Chen, An Unexpected Breakthrough in Hong Kong’s Constitutional 
Reform, 40 H.K.L.J. 259, 259-60 (2010). 
  190 See id. at 265. 
  191 See Donald Tsang, The 2010-11 Policy Address: Sharing Prosperity for a Caring 
Hong  Kong,  47  (2010),  http://www.policyaddress.gov.hk/10-11/eng/pdf/policy.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/ZG8C-HA3H]. 
  192 See  Ad  Hoc  Committee  on  Moral  and  National  Education  Curriculum 
Development Council, Consultation on Moral and National Education Curriculum 
(Summary),  11  (2011),  http://www.edb.gov.hk/attachment/en/curriculum-34  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
published a curriculum guide.193  In the same year, a government-
funded body, the National Education Services Centre, distributed a 
teaching handbook that described the Chinese Communist Party as 
“progressive, selfless, and united,” implying that China’s one party 
state was superior to multiparty democracies.194 
The  suggested  curriculum  was  strongly  criticized  by  the 
public, both as a form of brainwashing, and as a violation of Hong 
Kong’s autonomy in the field of education.195  Large protests were 
organized by multiple coalitions, including the National Education 
Parents’ Concern Group, the Civil Alliance Against the National 
Education, and Scholarism—a relatively new student organization.  
The protests attracted thousands of people and gained international 
attention,  launching  the  political  career  of  Scholarism’s  young 
leader, Joshua Wong (who would go on to be a key organizer of 
the pro-democracy protests in 2014).196 
The sheer scale of the anti-patriotic education protests created 
a sense of crisis early in the first term of the third Chief Executive, 
C.Y. Leung, who had only assumed office in July 2012.  Looking 
for a way to defuse the situation, Leung asked one of the few 
liberal members of his Executive Council, Anna Wu, to chair a 
“Committee on the Initiation of Moral and National Education.”197  
After  three  meetings,  the  Committee  recommended  that  the 
government  “shelve”  its  curriculum  guidelines,  and  that  local 
 
development/moral-national-edu/Consultation_on_MNE_Curriculum_(Summary)_2.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/Z5JK-HEGE]. 
  193 See  Ad  Hoc  Committee  on  Moral  and  National  Education  Curriculum 
Development Council, Moral and National Education Curriculum Guide: Primary 1 to 
Secondary  6,  7–8,  15  (2012),  http://www.edb.gov.hk/attachment/en/curriculum-
development/moral-national-
edu/MNE%20Guide%20(ENG)%20Final_remark_09102012.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/U62U-YT2L]. 
  194 See Joyce Lau, Thousands Protest In Hong Kong Against China’s Move to 
Impose Curriculum, N.Y. TIMES, July 30, 2012, at A4. 
  195 Id.  
  196 See Malcolm Moore, Portrait of Hong Kong’s 18-year old Protest Leader, 
TELEGRAPH  (London),  (Dec.  11,  2014),  http:// 
www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/hongkong/11139904/Portrait-of-Hong-
Kongs-17-year-old-protest-leader.html [https://perma.cc/LL3U-HPWU]. 
  197 See Dennis Chong, Anna Wu: Liberal Icon Who Can Handle Political Hot 
Potato,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (Oct.  15,  2012,  12:00  AM), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1061127/liberal-icon-who-can-handle-
political-hot-potato [https://perma.cc/2PHQ-YPFS]. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  35 
schools should exercise complete autonomy over whether, when, 
and how to teach the subjects of moral and national education.198  
Although the Chief Executive quickly agreed, there is a lingering 
fear in Hong Kong that this battle is not over.  Moreover, that the 
local  Hong  Kong  government  could  not  implement  the  new 
curriculum—like its failure to implement Article 23 legislation in 
2003—has  made  Beijing  even  more  suspicious  of  grassroots 
movements  in  Hong  Kong  and  more  opposed  to  meaningful 
democratic reforms. 
Against  this  background  of  growing  political  acrimony, 
securing consensus on a more democratic method of selecting the 
Chief Executive in 2017 would have been difficult at best.  Yet 
neither the pro-democracy leaders nor Beijing made significant 
strides to lower the political temperature.  In a speech on March 
24, 2013, NPC Law Committee Chairman Qiao Xiaoyang declared 
that any candidate for Chief Executive must “love the country and 
love Hong Kong,” adding that no person who “confronted” the 
Central Government could become Chief Executive.199  Similar 
rhetoric about “loving the country and loving Hong Kong” had 
featured  in  previous  debates  over  democratization.    However, 
Qiao’s speech contained an additional threat.  Beijing’s patience, 
he declared, had worn thin; no consultations on further reforms 
could  begin  unless  Hong  Kong’s  democrats  accepted  that  no 
“confrontational”  candidate  could  become  Chief  Executive.200  
Despite  widespread  democratic  uproar,  the  Hong  Kong 
government  took  Qiao’s  speech  as  its  template  for  electoral 
consultations;  the  ensuing  consultation  document  was  widely 
panned as being a purely cosmetic exercise.201 
 
  198 See  generally  Education  Bureau  H.K.,  Moral  and  National  Education, 
http://www.edb.gov.hk/en/curriculum-development/moral-national-edu/ 
[https://perma.cc/VG6Z-NQFY] (last visited Sept. 16, 2016) (containing transcripts of 
speeches delivered when the government accepted the Committee’s recommendation to 
“shelve” the national education initiative). 
  199 See  Xiaoyang  Qiao,  (cid:22)(cid:36)(cid:67)(cid:24)(cid:69)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:43)(cid:37)(cid:62)(cid:14)(cid:59)(cid:20)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:37)(cid:6)(cid:47)(cid:58)(cid:56)  [Qiao 
Xiaoyang’s Remarks at a Seminar With Some Members of the H.K. Legislative Council] 
(Mar.  24,  2013),  http://www.locpg.gov.cn/shouyexinwen/201303/t20130327_7135.asp 
[https://perma.cc/4NPE-KJCS]. 
  200 Id. 
  201 See,  e.g.,  Au  Nok-hin,  (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:10)(cid:9)  [A  Political  Reform 
Consultation Where Beijing’s Officials Dictate Holy Orders], MINGPAO (H.K.), Dec. 6, 
2013. 36  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
In January 2013, a soft-spoken Associate Professor of Law at 
HKU  named  Benny  Tai  began  writing  about  a  new  initiative, 
which he dubbed Occupy Central with Love and Peace (“Occupy 
Central”).202  Tai proposed that Hong Kong residents should not 
wait  indefinitely,  but  rather  should  set  a  deadline  and  take 
meaningful  action  if  Beijing  continued  to  refuse  to  allow  the 
territory to elect its Chief Executive through universal suffrage.203  
On  March  27,  2013,  Tai  formally  launched  the  movement, 
together with Chan Kin-man, a sociology professor from Chinese 
University,  and  Reverend  Chu  Yiu-ming.204    The  movement 
appealed  to  many  Hong  Kong  residents  who  were  growing 
frustrated  with  China’s  continued  opposition  to  democratic 
reforms.  If the final electoral reform proposals did not conform 
with international standards of universal suffrage, Occupy Central 
declared, it would engage in concerted civil disobedience in the 
form of blockading the city’s business district.205  Although firmly 
committed  to  nonviolence,  the  Occupy  Central  organizers  also 
made it clear that they were prepared to violate the law and go to 
jail if necessary.206 
Given that two of the three leaders of Occupy Central were 
academics, it was perhaps inevitable that Beijing would associate 
the  movement  with  Hong  Kong’s  universities.207    The  Occupy 
Central  Secretariat  also  commissioned  HKU’s  Public  Opinion 
Programme,  led  by  Dr.  Robert  Chung,  to  conduct  an  Occupy 
Central  “Deliberation  Series,”  which  applied  the  deliberative 
democracy  model  to  “invite  the  general  public  and  campaign 
supporters to join the discussion” and ensure that any polling of 
public opinion on the various democracy proposals would comply 
with  international  standards.208    Although  the  Public  Opinion 
 
  202 See  generally  OCCUPY  CENTRAL  WITH  LOVE  AND  PEACE  (2016), 
http://oclp.hk/index.php?route=occupy/eng_detail&eng_id=28  [https://perma.cc/Z6UL-
QYNP] (explaining the philosophy behind non-violent protest). 
  203 Id. 
  204 Karita Kan, Occupy Central and Constitutional Reform in Hong Kong, 3 CHINA 
PERSPECTIVES 73, 75 (2013). 
  205 Id. 
  206 Id. 
  207 Id. 
  208 See “OCLP Deliberation Series” Feature Page, PUBLIC OPINION PROGRAMME, 
U.  HONG  KONG,  https://www.hkupop.hku.hk/english/features/OCLP/index.html 
[https://perma.cc/CGQ9-P5J8] (last visited Sept. 16, 2016). 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  37 
Program maintained its political neutrality, and therefore never 
endorsed Occupy Central or any particular model of governance, 
its  very  participation  in  activities  initiated  by  Occupy  Central 
would  have  displeased  pro-Beijing  forces.    HKU’s  Centre  for 
Comparative and Public Law also held many public events on 
constitutional  reforms  during  2013  and  2014,209  including  an 
international “roundtable” on the relationship between Article 25 
of the ICCPR, which guarantees the right to political participation, 
and Article 45 of the Basic Law, which provides for a nominating 
committee to nominate candidates for Chief Executive.210  At the 
conclusion of the roundtable, the participants issued a press release 
expressing the view that a proposal could comply with both Article 
25 of the ICCPR and Article 45 of the Basic Law if the nominating 
committee were truly representative of the public.211  Implicitly, 
these academics were suggesting that compromise was possible.212  
Many other academics proposed models that would maintain a 
nominating committee, but would make it more representative.213 
However, neither Beijing nor the organizers of Occupy Central 
were in the mood for compromise and both sides continued to 
ratchet up tensions during 2014.  Increasingly bellicose rhetoric 
from  Beijing  culminated  in  the  PRC  State  Council’s  “White 
Paper” of June 10, 2014, which declared that Beijing “directly 
 
  209 See Events: Conferences & Seminars, CENTRE COMPARATIVE AND PUB. L., FAC. 
L.  U.  H.K.,  http://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/events/ConferencesSeminars.html#2014 
[https://perma.cc/2A7N-RL77] (follow “2014” hyperlink). 
  210 See Academic Roundtable: “Universal Suffrage and Nomination Procedures: 
Imperatives from Article 25 ICCPR”, CENTRE COMPARATIVE AND PUB. L., FAC. L. U. 
H.K.,  (Mar.  20,  2014),  http://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/events/Article25ICCPR.html 
[https://perma.cc/XL6M-V9JB]. 
  211 See generally Guiding Principles, CENTRE COMPARATIVE AND PUB. L., FAC. L. U. 
H.K.  (Mar.  21,  2014), 
http://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/events/CCPL%20Article%2025%20Roundtable%20Press%
20Release%20on%20Guiding%20Principles%2021%20March%202014.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/Q5PY-TGSM] (providing the text of the press release). 
  212 See generally Participant Commentary, CENTRE COMPARATIVE AND PUB. L., FAC. 
L.  U.  H.K.  (Mar.  20,  2014), 
http://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/events/Comments_ICCPR_27_March.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/XQH5-F87S] (providing the comments of the participants). 
  213 See generally Eric Cheung, Achieving True Democracy Under the Basic Law, 
CENTRE  COMPARATIVE  AND  PUB.  L.,  FAC.  L.  U.  H.K.  (2014), 
https://www.law.hku.hk/ccpl/events/Eric%20Cheung%20(eng)%20Statement.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/2YYC-N3S9] (explaining the proposal signed by eighteen academics 
from seven of Hong Kong’s institutions of higher education). 38  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
exercises jurisdiction over the HKSAR” and demanded that “all 
those who administrate Hong Kong” must be “patriotic.”214  For its 
part, Occupy Central held a referendum between June 20 and June 
29, and nearly 800,000 voters participated, despite “one of the 
largest  and  most  sophisticated  denial-of-service  attacks  in  the 
Internet’s history.”215  An overwhelming majority of participating 
voters  agreed  that  the  legislature  should  reject  any  proposal 
inconsistent with international standards.216  Nonetheless, the Hong 
Kong government’s consultation report stated that “mainstream 
opinion”  backed  the  political  vetting  of  Chief  Executive 
candidates.217 
Although some commentators remained optimistic about the 
possibility of compromise, the NPCSC dashed all such hopes with 
its Decision of August 31, 2014, which entrenched the requirement 
that  any  Chief  Executive  “love  the  country  and  love  Hong 
Kong.”218  In practical terms, it required: (a) between two and three 
 
  214 See The Practice of the “One Country, Two Systems” Policy in the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region, OFFICE COMM’R MINISTRY FOREIGN AFFAIRS CHINA H.K. 
SPECIAL  ADMIN.  REGION  (June  10,  2014), 
http://www.fmcoprc.gov.hk/eng/xwdt/gsxw/t1164057.htm  [https://perma.cc/Y7EA-
CDZ2] [hereinafter White Paper]. 
  215 See  Paul  Mozur  &  Chester  Yung,  Hong  Kong  Democracy  Poll  Hit  by 
Cyberattack, WALL ST. J. (June 20, 2014), http://online.wsj.com/articles/hong-kong-
democracy-poll-is-hit-by-cyberattack-1403258663;  see  also  Hong  Kong  Democracy 
“Referendum” Draws Nearly 800,000, BRIT. BROADCASTING CORP. (June 30, 2014), 
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-28076566 [https://perma.cc/7FMB-UEH6]. 
  216 See Hong Kong’s Democracy Debate, BRIT. BROADCASTING CORP. (June 15, 
2014),  http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-27921954  [https://perma.cc/MH9G-
WX34]. 
  217 See, e.g., Suzanne Pepper, Telling Beijing What Beijing Wants to Hear, CHINA 
ELECTIONS  &  GOVERNANCE  BLOGS  (July  17,  2014), 
http://chinaelectionsblog.net/hkfocus/?p=915  [https://perma.cc/CNN8-2P2T];  see  also 
No Panderers, Please: This Issue’s Black and White, ECONOMIST (July 19, 2014), 
http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21607855-time-britain-rediscover-its-moral-
compass-and-confront-china-over-hong-kong-no-panderers  [https://perma.cc/RMV5-
H5T9].  The “mainstream opinion” in question appears to have consisted in large part of 
pro forma submissions sent as a result of mobilization by pro-Beijing parties.  See (cid:11)(cid:6)
(cid:29)(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:31)(cid:17) (cid:30)(cid:34)(cid:28)(cid:32)(cid:22)(cid:13) [Establishment Parties’ Pro-Forma Submissions Create 
Tens  of  Thousands  in  Public  Opinion],  MINGPAO  (July  16,  2014), 
http://news.mingpao.com/pns/%E5%BB%BA%E5%88%B6%E8%A1%A8%E6%A0%B
C%E5%BC%8F%E6%84%8F%E8%A6%8B%E6%9B%B8%20%20%E8%A3%BD%E
9%80%A0%E8%90%AC%E8%A8%88%E6%B0%91%E6%84%8F/web_tc/article/201
40716/s00001/1405447440737  [https://perma.cc/U89P-ZS4H]. 
  218 See generally Quanguo Renmin Daibiao Dahui Changwu Weiyuanhui Guanyu 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  39 
candidates for Chief Executive, (b) candidates to be chosen by a 
1,200-strong Nominating Committee structured in the same way as 
the  extant  Election  Committee,  (c)  each  candidate  to  receive 
support from at least half of the nominators—a dramatic increase 
from the one-eighth threshold required for nomination in 2012, 
and  (d)  all  candidates  to  “love  the  country  and  love  Hong 
Kong.”219    The  upshot  of  the  2014  Decision  was  that  only 
politicians deemed politically palatable to Beijing could run—an 
outcome Lawrence Lessig described as “Tweedism updated.”220 
In the wake of the 2014 Decision, Occupy Central organizer 
Benny  Tai  declared,  “[t]he  road  of  dialogue  has  come  to  the 
end.”221  The Hong Kong Federation of Students (“HKFS”), an 
organization composed of university student unions, organized a 
weeklong class boycott starting on September 22, 2014; on the 
night of September 26, protesting students scaled a fence to enter 
the forecourt of Hong Kong government headquarters, known as 
Civic Square.222  Police moved in with batons and pepper spray; 
Joshua Wong, along with HKFS leaders Alex Chow and Lester 
Shum,  were  taken  into  custody.223    The  next  day,  police  fired 
 
Xianggang Tebie Xingzhengqu Xingzheng Zhangguan Puxuan Wenti He 2016 Nian Lifa 
Hui Chansheng Banfa De Jueding, ((cid:12)(cid:23)(cid:9)(cid:41)(cid:10)(cid:54)(cid:26)(cid:37)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:27)(cid:20)(cid:37)(cid:65)(cid:34)(cid:69)(cid:44)(cid:45)(cid:15)(cid:53)(cid:33)
(cid:17)(cid:53)(cid:33)(cid:64)(cid:28)(cid:35)(cid:61)(cid:21)(cid:68)(cid:19) 2016 (cid:31)(cid:49)(cid:43)(cid:37)(cid:0)(cid:46)(cid:60)(cid:43)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:29)) [Decision of the Standing 
Committee of the National People’s Congress on Issues Relating to the Selection of 
Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region by Universal and 
Suffrage on the Method for Forming the Legislative Council of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region In the Year 2016] Standing Comm. Nat’l People’s Cong. (Aug. 
31,  2014),  http://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/en/basiclawtext/index.html 
[https://perma.cc/K36N-68N5]  (containing  an  English  translation  of  this  and  other 
Decisions by the NPCSC at Instrument 24). 
  219 Id. 
  220 See Lawrence Lessig, We Should Be Protesting, Too, HUFFINGTON POST (Oct. 1, 
2014,  8:47  PM),  http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lawrence-lessig/we-should-be-
protesting-too_b_5917486.html [https://perma.cc/L2YY-JH43]. 
  221 See  Political  City:  Denied  Free  Elections,  Hong  Kong’s  Democrats  Plan, 
Reluctantly,  for  Protest,  ECONOMIST  (Sept.  6,  2014), 
http://www.economist.com/news/china/21615636-denied-free-elections-hong-kongs-
democrats-plan-reluctantly-protest-political-city [https://perma.cc/Z4AQ-9RDN]. 
  222 See  Elizabeth  Barber  &  Charlie  Campbell,  Pro-Democracy  Students  Storm 
Government  Square  in  Hong  Kong,  TIME  (Sept.  27,  2014,  2:40  AM), 
http://time.com/3434099/protest-arrested-hong-kong-democracy-students-occupy-
central/ [https://perma.cc/WWA8-D4MS]. 
  223 See  Mehul  Strivastava  et  al.,  How  Tear  Gas  Attack  Ignited  Hong  Kong 
Democracy  Protests,  BLOOMBERG  (Oct.  9,  2014), 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-10-09/how-hong-kong-got-caught-off-40  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
eighty-seven canisters of teargas at unarmed protesters gathered 
near Civic Square in support of the students.224  In the early hours 
of September 28, Benny Tai declared that Occupy Central had 
begun.225  While the occupation was remarkably peaceful—and 
ended  with  minimum  violence  in  December—it  attracted 
significant international attention and was an embarrassment to the 
Central government.226 
Beijing did not openly intervene but rather left the matter in 
the hands of the Hong Kong government and the local police.227  
However,  as  demonstrated  in  the  next  section,  it  would  later 
launch  a  concerted  campaign  against  its  perceived  political 
enemies  in  Hong  Kong,  taking  full  advantage  of  its  increased 
influence  over  university  councils  and  the  more  centralized 
structures of governance. 
VI. Beijing’s Retribution: Increased Interference in Hong 
Kong Universities 
An  early—and  particularly  overt—example  of  Beijing’s 
political purge in Hong Kong was the refusal by HKU’s Council to 
appoint  Professor  Johannes  Chan  to  a  senior  administrative 
position.228    In  the  fall  of  2014,  HKU  appointed  a  Search 
 
guard-by-student-protests [https://perma.cc/WMK4-3YTH]. 
  224 Id. 
  225 Id. 
  226 See Stephen Young, World Must Hold Beijing Accountable for its Actions in 
Hong  Kong,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (Dec.  8,  2014,  4:59  PM), 
http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/1657363/world-must-hold-
beijing-accountable-its-actions-hong-kong  [https://perma.cc/AC2K-CMK3]  (op-ed  by 
former U.S. Consul-General to Hong Kong); see also Occupy Endgame Calls for 
Voluntary  Retreat,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (Dec.  4,  2014,  3:31  AM), 
http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/1655007/occupy-spins-out-
control-endgame-requires-voluntary-retreat  [https://perma.cc/ZD8S-7LM3];  see 
generally Frank Ching, The Government Must Take Responsibility for Ending Occupy 
Protests,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST    (Dec.  3,  2014,  6:16  PM), 
http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/1653815/government-must-take-
responsibility-ending-occupy-protests [https://perma.cc/9EQP-L8YQ] (commenting on 
the abnormal state of affairs). 
  227 See Keith Bradsher & Chris Buckley, Beijing is Directing Hong Kong Strategy, 
Government  Insiders  Say,  N.Y.  TIMES  (Oct.  17,  2014), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/18/world/asia/china-is-directing-response-to-hong-
kong-protests.html?_r=0 [https://perma.cc/P2RX-YSG3]. 
  228 For another account of interference with academic freedom in Hong Kong in 
recent years, see Johannes M.M. Chan and Douglas Kerr, Academic Freedom: Political 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  41 
Committee  (which  included  the  Vice  Chancellor)  to  lead  an 
international search to fill five Pro-Vice-Chancellor positions.229  
In November of that year, rumors surfaced that Johannes Chan, the 
former  Dean  of  HKU’s  Law  Faculty,  was  a  candidate  for  the 
position  of  Pro-Vice-Chancellor  for  academic  staffing  and 
resources.230  There are many reasons why the local and central 
governments  would  not  have  been  happy  with  this  choice.  
Johannes Chan had been a founding member of the Article 23 
Concern  Group,  which  had  helped  to  raise  public  awareness 
concerning the national security legislation, as discussed in Part III 
above.    That  organization  later  evolved  into  the  “Article  45 
Concern  Group,”  which  was  devoted  to  studying  democracy 
proposals.231  Over the years, Johannes Chan had also joined other 
moderate  pro-democracy  organizations,  including  the  Civic 
Commission on Democratic Reform and “Hong Kong 2020,” an 
organization  dedicated  to  political  reforms  in  the  territory.232  
Moreover,  while  Professor  Chan  himself  was  not  involved  in 
Occupy  Central,  some  pro-Beijing  forces  blamed  him  for  it, 
because he was Dean of the Law Faculty when his colleague, 
Benny Tai, began to plan Occupy Central.233  In a sign of Beijing’s 
 
Interference, and Public Accountability: The Hong Kong Experience, 7 J. OF ACAD. 
FREEDOM (2016). 
  229 Alan Yu & Joyce Ng, Why the Scuffle? Hong Kong University’s Appointment 
Controversy  Explained  in  6  Points,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (July  29,  2015), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/1844800/why-
scuffle-hong-kong-universitys-appointment [https://perma.cc/8RFK-3VE7]. 
  230 See,  e.g.,  Kris  Cheng,  Explainer:  The  HKU  Council  Pro-Vice-Chancellor 
Debacle,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (Sept.  30,  2015,  3:29  PM), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/09/30/explainer-hku-council-rejects-johannes-chan-
appointment-to-pro-vice-chancellor/ [https://perma.cc/38N7-X8XT] [hereinafter Cheng, 
Explainer]. 
  231 See, e.g., Jimmy Cheung, New Party to Fight for Democracy, S. CHINA MORNING 
POST (Mar. 21, 2006, 12:00 AM), http://www.scmp.com/article/541329/new-party-fight-
democracy [https://perma.cc/2VSV-27XZ] (discussing that several prominent members 
of the Article 45 Concern Group would go on to form the pro-democracy Civic Party in 
2000). 
  232 See Academic Staff, Professor Johannes M.M. Chan SC (Hon), Academic Staff, 
FAC.  L.  U.  HONG  KONG,  https://www.law.hku.hk/faculty/staff/chan_johannes.php 
[https://perma.cc/4DP9-3BTF] (last visited Sept. 16, 2016). 
  233 See Joyce Ng & Tony Cheung, Former University of Hong Kong Law Dean 
Cleared of Mishandling Occupy–Related Donation, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.) 
(Mar.  27,  2015,  12:14  AM),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-
kong/article/1748042/former-university-hong-kong-law-dean-johannes-chan-cleared 42  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
discontent, the Wen Wei Po, a Hong Kong-based Communist Party 
mouthpiece, began publishing articles that were highly critical of 
Chan.234    This  did  not  deter  the  Search  Committee,  which 
unanimously  recommended  Chan’s  appointment  in  December 
2014.235 
However, the Search Committee’s recommendation needed to 
be confirmed by HKU’s Council and the smear campaign against 
Professor Chan continued.  In January 2015 the pro-Beijing media 
obtained a leaked copy of a University Grants Committee report, 
and claimed that it provided evidence that HKU Law Faculty’s 
research  performance  had  declined  during  Chan’s  deanship, 
allegedly due to his involvement in politics.236  The next month, 
Sophia  Kao,  a  top  advisor  to  Chief  Executive  C.Y.  Leung, 
admitted that she had discussed Chan’s fitness for the Pro-Vice-
Chancellorship with unnamed persons, raising suspicions that the 
Chief Executive opposed Chan’s appointment.237 
In June 2015, perhaps due to governmental pressure, the HKU 
Council had not voted on whether to appoint Chan as Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.  Instead, it voted to delay the decision—again—until a 
new provost was appointed.238  This purported explanation drew 
considerable  skepticism,239  not  least  because  the  absence  of  a 
 
[https://perma.cc/7TSS-ARC] (showing that although Wen Wei Po published allegations 
that Johannes Chan had directed research funding to Occupy Central, he was later 
cleared of that allegation). 
  234 See (cid:48)(cid:51) [Ching Cheong], (cid:10)(cid:35)(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:39)(cid:25)(cid:8)(cid:19)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:27)(cid:38) [Respect the Facts: 
HKU  Alumni  Are  Not  Fools!],  H.K.  ECON.  J.  (Sept.  10,  2015), 
http://forum.hkej.com/node/125612 [https://perma.cc/HN6F-LYLY]. 
  235 Cheng, Explainer, supra note 230. 
  236 See Stuart Lau, “Cultural Revolution Style” Attacks on HKU Threaten Academic 
Freedom: Former Law Dean, S. CHINA MORNING POST (Feb. 3, 2015, 1:00 PM), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1700262/cultural-revolution-style-attacks-
hku-threaten-academic-freedom?page=all [https://perma.cc/D8P8-EDMQ]. 
  237 See Ada Lee, Joyce Ng, Tony Cheung & Gary Cheung, Ex-HKU Law Dean 
Johannes Chan Calls for Review of Government’s Universities Role, S. CHINA MORNING 
POST  (Feb.  13,  2015,  11:26  AM),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-
kong/article/1711745/former-hku-law-dean-calls-review-governments-universities-
role?page=all [https://perma.cc/E44C-SHDV]. 
  238 See Joyce Ng, Jeffie Lam & Shirley Zhao, Delayed Hong Kong University 
Appointment  Irks  Candidate  Recruiter,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (July  3,  2015), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/1831780/delayed-
hong-kong-university-appointment-irks?page=all [https://perma.cc/P3YS-L95Z]. 
  239 See, e.g., Alan Leong, HKU Under Threat as CY Leung Wages War on Hong 
Kong’s  Core  Values  and  Institutions,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (Aug.  2,  2015), 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  43 
provost had not prevented the Council from filling the other four 
Pro-Vice-Chancellorships.240  The  Council’s  continued 
prevarication prompted students to storm the next Council meeting 
in July of 2015.241  The student body was not alone in its outrage. 
The HKU Convocation (a body composed of staff and alumni) 
convened an emergency meeting on September 1, 2015; at that 
meeting it overwhelmingly voted in favor of Chan’s immediate 
appointment.242    Despite  widespread  opprobrium,  the  Council 
voted against Chan’s appointment on September 29, 2015, giving 
no official statement of reasons other than the “best interests” of 
HKU.243  To our knowledge, this is the first time in HKU’s history 
that the HKU Council has rejected a recommendation of a Search 
Committee.244 
Two particular features of the media campaign against Chan 
bear mentioning.  First, the attacks were based at least in part on a 
UGC report leaked to the pro-Beijing press, suggesting an attempt 
by a UGC insider to target Chan.245  Second, the extent of the 
smear  campaign  against  Chan  was  unprecedented.    Between 
November 2014 and September 5, 2015, the Wen Wei Po, along 
 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/08/02/hku-under-threat-as-cy-leung-wages-war-on-
hong-kongs-core-values-and-institutions/ [https://perma.cc/2GK8-PXF4]. 
  240 See HKU Appoints Two New Pro-Vice-Chancellors and the Dean of Arts, U. 
H.K.  (Nov.  26,  2014),  http://www.hku.hk/press/press-releases/detail/12020.html 
[https://perma.cc/V9SN-UBBS];  HKU  Appoints  Two  New  Pro-Vice-Chancellors,  U. 
H.K.  (Mar.  10,  2015),  http://www.hku.hk/press/press-releases/detail/12433.html 
[https://perma.cc/LAD5-C3XC]. 
  241 See  Arthur  Lo,  Students  Occupy  HKU  Council  Meeting  Over  Pro-VC 
Appointment;  Two  Members  Hospitalised,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (July  29,  2015), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/07/29/students-occupy-hku-council-meeting-over-
pro-vc-appointment-two-members-hospitalised/ [https://perma.cc/LJC9-XMYM]. 
  242 See  Convocation  of  the  University  of  Hong  Kong  (HKU  Convocation) 
Extraordinary  General  Meeting,  U.  H.K.  CONVOCATION  (Sept.  1,  2015), 
http://www.convocation.hku.hk/doc/egm_voting_results_eng.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/8Z9K-DL2H]. 
  243 See Kris Cheng, Johannes Chan Appointment to HKU Key Position Rejected, 12 
Votes  to  8,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (Sept.  29,  2015), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/09/29/johannes-chan-appointment-to-hku-key-
position-rejected/ [https://perma.cc/2M2F-8UUZ]. 
  244 On May 31, 2016, the HKU Council appointed Terry Au, who had been serving 
as the Acting Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Academic Staffing and Resources since January 
2016, to fill the position.  See Email from HKU Alumni Office to HKU Alumni (May 31, 
2016) (on file with authors). 
  245 Lau, supra note 236. 44  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
with fellow Hong Kong-based Party mouthpiece Ta Kung Pao, 
released nearly 350 articles vilifying Chan, an average of more 
than  one  article  a  day.246    Both  of  these  features  suggest  a 
coordinated campaign to target Chan. 
More significantly, the “reasons” given by Council members 
for rejecting Chan strongly suggest that Chan was a target for 
political retribution.  The Council officially gave no reasons for 
voting  against  Chan’s  appointment.    However,  the  statements 
made  by  Council  members  against  Chan  were  subsequently 
disclosed  by  whistle-blower  and  undergraduate  Council 
representative Billy Fung,247 as well as in a series of leaked audio 
recordings of Council proceedings.248  The reasons given included 
Chan being a “nice guy” who held no doctoral degree—a rarity in 
Hong Kong legal academia,249 and that a Google Scholar search 
showed that Chan’s research had only been searched—as opposed 
to cited—“four times in the last five years.”250  Most bizarrely of 
all, Council member Lo Chung-mau complained that Chan did not 
show sympathy after Lo fell during the altercation at the Council 
meeting in July 2015.251 
The chain of events leading to the Council’s vote against Chan 
has far-reaching implications for academic freedom within Hong 
Kong.  Chan’s stature within the Hong Kong legal community—as 
an eminent and engaged scholar of public law, and as the city’s 
first, and so far only, Honorary Senior Counsel—should have been 
beyond  question.252    As  a  result,  the  vote  against  him—and 
 
  246 Ching, supra note 234. 
  247 See Karen Cheung, Student Leader Reveals HKU Council Members’ Reasons for 
Blocking  Johannes  Chan  Appointment,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (Sept.  30,  2015), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/09/30/student-leader-reveals-hku-council-members-
reasons-for-blocking-johannes-chan-appointment/ [https://perma.cc/8CXN-4336]. 
  248 See Kris Cheng, More Leaked Audio Reveals HKU Council Member’s Criticism 
of  Pro-Democracy  Scholar,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (Oct.  30,  2015), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/10/30/more-leaked-audio-reveals-hku-council-
members-criticism-of-pro-democracy-scholar/ [https://perma.cc/8BB7-7JWN]. 
  249 See Cheng, Explainer, supra note 230; see also Press Statement on 4 October 
2015,  FAC.  L.U..  H.K.  (Oct.  4,  2015),  http://www.law.hku.hk/faculty/statement.php 
[https://perma.cc/S6K4-GGQF] (explaining, inter alia, the rarity of doctoral degrees in 
legal academia). 
  250 Cheng, Explainer, supra note 230. 
  251 Id. 
  252 Id. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  45 
comments from Council members questioning his credentials and 
his  probity—have  been  widely  seen  as  part  of  a  campaign  of 
retribution  against  academics  with  pro-democracy  views, 
especially at HKU.253  In particular, Chan appears to have been 
singled out for vilification because he was Dean when Benny Tai 
began planning Occupy Central and did not prevent his colleague 
from serving as one of the chief organizers of the campaign.254 
Chan’s fate also reflects the impact of institutional shifts in 
Hong Kong’s higher education landscape.  Following reports both 
by  the  University  Grants  Committee  and  by  the  universities 
themselves recommending restructuring,255 university councils—
including the HKU Council—have been restructured to include 
significantly greater lay participation.  Yet the Chief Executive’s 
role as ex officio Chancellor, and his power to appoint members to 
university councils, has remained unchanged.256  The result has 
been an increasingly hostile political environment for academics in 
Hong Kong.  It is particularly worrying that the HKU Council 
reacted to revelations about its “reasons” for rejecting Chan by 
seeking to discredit whistle-blowers and suppress evidence;257 this 
 
  253 See,  e.g.,  Hong  Kong  University  Purge,  WALL  ST.  J.  (Oct.  7,  2015), 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/hong-kong-university-purge-1444261236 
[http://perma.cc/4N49-BZNY]. 
  254 See Anthony Carty, What Exactly does ‘Academic Freedom’ mean to Johannes 
Chan  and  his  Supporters?,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (Oct.  7,  2015), 
http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/1864887/what-exactly-does-
academic-freedom-mean-johannes-chan-and  [https://perma.cc/86GJ-GGC5]  (op-ed  by 
HKU Visiting Professor teaching at Tsinghua University). 
  255 See, e.g., Sutherland Report, supra note 154; see also Fit for Purpose, supra note 
158. 
  256 See, e.g., University of Hong Kong Ordinance (2011) Cap. 1053, Laws of Hong 
Kong,  §  12(3),  Schedule,  Statute  XVIII,  
http://www.legislation.gov.hk/blis_pdf.nsf/3097404CFB27E75D482575EF00233639/$FI
LE/CAP_1053_e_b5.pdf  [https://perma.cc/STF8-8LMK]. 
  257 See Karen Cheung, Education Bureau Condemns Leaked HKU Council Tape as 
Police  Investigation  Deemed  “Wasteful”,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (Oct.  29,  2015), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/10/29/education-bureau-condemns-leaked-hku-
council-tape-police-investigation-waste-of-resources-scholar/  [https://perma.cc/3VTU-
FJ8C] (stating that then-Council member Arthur Li referred to whistle-blower Billy Fung 
as a “liar”); see also Karen Cheung, Scope of HKU Injunction Narrowed to Only Cover 
Contents of Council Meetings Starting From June, H.K. FREE PRESS (Nov. 6, 2015), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/11/06/scope-of-hku-injunction-narrowed-to-only-
cover-contents-of-council-meetings-starting-from-june/  [https://perma.cc/4XNJ-XPQ2] 
(stating that the Council also sought an injunction against the publication of recordings 
or documents of Council proceedings). 46  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
provides a stark contrast to the public inquiry that the Council 
ordered during the Robert Chung affair in 2000.258 
Johannes Chan is not the only academic who has been affected 
by  these  developments.    A  number  of  academics  at  HKU, 
including  the  Vice  Chancellor,  have  reported  that  their  email 
accounts have been hacked.259  The clear purpose of the hacking is 
to allow the pro-Beijing press to search for evidence that might be 
used to tarnish the reputations of academics who are perceived as 
being “pro-democracy.”  For example, Benny Tai’s HKU email 
account  was  hacked  in  2014  and  the  pro-Beijing  press 
subsequently  used  the  emails  to  claim  that  Tai  had  accepted 
“anonymous” donations to HKU in 2013 and then “funneled” the 
money to political campaigns, such as Occupy Central.260  Benny 
Tai refuted these allegations, maintaining that he only introduced a 
donor to HKU (who was later revealed to be Reverend Chu) and 
that the money did not flow to Occupy Central but rather was 
given to three units on campus (the Law Faculty, the School of 
Humanities,  and  the  Public  Opinion  Programme)  to  support  a 
variety of research and education projects related to constitutional 
development.261  In the opinion of Professor Chow Shew-Ping (the 
Pro  Vice-Chancellor  in  charge  of  fundraising  at  the  time),  the 
donations themselves were not problematic in that they came from 
a reputable local citizen who wished to support on-going academic 
activities.262 
 
  258 See Petersen, Lessons, supra note 21.  
  259 See Bryan Harris, Hackers Target Account of University of Hong Kong Vice 
Chancellor, S. CHINA MORNING POST (Apr. 26, 2015), http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-
kong/politics/article/1776567/hackers-target-email-account-university-hong-kong-vice 
[https://perma.cc/7SLE-DNPL]. 
  260 See id.; see also Joyce Ng, HKU Governing Body to Discuss Donations Accepted 
By  Occupy  Leader  Benny  Tai,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (May  22,  2015), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/1806254/universitys-governing-
body-discuss-donations-accepted-occupy  [https://perma.cc/B5LB-M858]  (stating  that 
Tai was actually more of a middleman, serving as the initial recipient of checks that he 
delivered to HKU to fund conferences and research projects in three units on campus: the 
Faculty of Law, the School of Humanities, and the Public Opinion Programme). 
  261 See Joyce Ng & Ng Kang-chung, HKU Split over Benny Tai Donations, S. 
CHINA  MORNING  POST  (Mar.  26,  2015),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-
kong/article/1747371/hku-split-over-whether-benny-tai-should-face-disciplinary-action-
over [https://perma.cc/G7A8-Q7BQ]. 
  262 See  Response  of  Professor  S.  P.  Chow  to  the  Audit  Committee  Report, 
http://www.gs.hku.hk/report/SP-Chow.pdf [https://perma.cc/G7KF-FKHV] (noting that 
Tai was actually more of a middleman, serving as the initial recipient of checks that he 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  47 
Nonetheless,  the  Secretary  for  Education  wrote  to  HKU’s 
management  and  Council  “repeatedly”  to  request  that  HKU 
conduct a thorough investigation into Tai; these letters have never 
been publicly disclosed but have been reported in the press and the 
local  legislature  and  constitute  a  serious  interference  by  the 
government  in  university  governance.263    HKU’s  Council 
subsequently did order a full investigation by an Audit Committee.  
The investigation focused on: (1) the source of the donations, (2) 
how the donations were used, and (3) whether Benny Tai or other 
HKU employees violated any HKU regulations or policies.264 
The Audit Committee’s report (consisting of thirty pages plus 
an additional twenty pages of appendices) is very detailed.265  It 
concluded that the donor introduced by Benny Tai was reputable 
and that the donations funded legitimate academic activities (e.g. 
public forums on constitutional law, and referendums conducted 
by HKU’s Opinion Poll Programme).266  It did identify a number 
of procedural problems but stressed that this was at least partly due 
to  a  lack  of  clear  guidelines  and  procedures  regarding  the 
acceptance, utilization, and reporting of donations at HKU.267 
With regard to Benny Tai, the most serious findings by the 
Audit Committee were: (1) that he re-assigned a research assistant 
from one project to other projects that were being funded by the 
same donor, a deviation from HKU guidelines;268 and (2) that he 
took too long (approximately six weeks) to reveal the identity of 
 
delivered to HKU to fund conferences and research projects in three units on campus: the 
Faculty of Law, the School of Humanities, and the Public Opinion Programme). 
  263 See id. 
  264 See The University of Hong Kong Audit Committee, University of Hong Kong, 
Report to the Council on a Matter of Public Concern As to Certain Donations Received 
by the University, Parts I–II (Mar. 11, 2015), http://www.gs.hku.hk/report/AC-Report.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/79Y9-VBMY] [hereinafter Audit Committee Report]. 
  265 Id. 
  266 Id. 
  267 Id. Part VI. 
  268 See id. ¶¶ 56–64 (noting that the research assistant was originally appointed to 
assist Benny Tai in developing a new course in the School of Humanities.  However, the 
course was postponed and she was assigned to assist in the POP polling projects and 
organizing conferences in the Faculty of Law). Although these projects were all funded 
by the same donor, the reassignment meant that one of the purposes of that donor 
(creation of the new course) was not achieved.  The Audit Committee also concluded 
that  the  research  assistant  should  have  been  re-appointed  with  a  new  letter  of 
appointment rather than simply seconded to other projects supported by the donor.  Id.  48  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
the donor after HKU’s Development and Alumni Affairs Office 
(“DAAO”) requested the information.269  The Audit Committee 
concluded that this “seeming reluctance” by Tai fell short “of the 
standards of behavior expected of an academic introducing donors 
to the University.”270  Tai maintains that he was not reluctant but 
needed to first secure permission from the donor (as the donor’s 
original intention was to remain anonymous).271 
The pro-Beijing press was not pleased by the report by the 
Audit Committee, accusing it of failing to “track down” all the 
donations and the connection to Occupy Central.272  In fact, the 
Audit Committee’s report does note, very clearly, that the donor 
was Reverend Chu and the Committee was well aware that Chu 
was a leading participant in Occupy Central.273  But it considered 
Chu  to  be  a  reputable  citizen  and  found  no  evidence  that  he 
attached any conditions to the donations that would impair HKU’s 
impartiality  when  carrying  out  the  research  and  education 
projects.274  Instead, the Audit Committee identified procedural 
errors  and  found  that  HKU’s  guidelines  were  far  too  unclear, 
subject to many different interpretations, and insufficient to guide 
HKU employees.275 
Nonetheless, HKU’s Council ultimately decided to sanction 
Benny Tai by prohibiting him from accepting donations, managing 
researchers, or assuming a managerial position for three years.276  
Some academics believe that these penalties were carefully crafted 
 
  269 See Letter from Audit Committee to Dr. C.H. Leong (Apr. 16, 2015), Letter of 
Elaborations  Provided  by  the  Audit  Committee,  ¶¶  1,  2(4),  7, 
http://www.gs.hku.hk/report/Letter-of-elaborations.pdf  [https://perma.cc/6358-DEGS] 
[hereinafter Audit Committee Letter] (noting that when the Audit Committee was asked 
by Council to summarize its extensive report and to “elaborate” on the actions of the 
individuals involved, this was one of only two paragraphs that criticized Benny Tai). 
  270 See Audit Committee Report, supra note 264, ¶¶ 56–64. 
  271 See Audit Committee Letter, supra note 269, ¶¶ 1–2, 7. 
  272 See China Daily, HKU Probe on Donation Inaccurate: Wen Wei Po, CHINA 
DAILY  ASIA  (Aug  13.  2015),  http://www.chinadailyasia.com/hknews/2015-
08/13/content_15303829.html [https://perma.cc/M2EK-CTEP]. 
  273 See Audit Committee Report, supra note 264, ¶ 2. 
  274 Id. Part VI. 
  275 Id.  
  276 See Benny Tai, Political Infiltration at the Hong Kong University Council, 
DEMOCRACY CHRONICLES (Jan. 2, 2016), https://democracychronicles.com/hong-kong-
university-council/ [https://perma.cc/4AWE-SMKW] (containing a copy of a letter, dated 
Oct. 21, 2015, from Benny Tai to the HKU Council). 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  49 
so  as  to  satisfy  the  pro-Beijing  forces  while  avoiding  any 
substantial punishment.277  One interviewee described the penalties 
as a way to show Beijing that “blood” had been drawn from its 
enemies.  In any event, Tai has strongly objected to the Council’s 
decision, arguing that it was politically motivated and designed to 
punish  him  for  his  support,  as  a  private  citizen,  for  Occupy 
Central.  Tai (who has taught Hong Kong administrative law for 
many years) has publicly accused the Council of a number of 
procedural errors in its decision-making process.278  In particular, 
he has pointed out that nothing in the University of Hong Kong 
Ordinance empowers the Council to impose disciplinary penalties 
on academic staff.279  Nor did the Council cite any “pre-existing 
rule or guideline that [Tai] breached or failed to comply with” or 
give him an opportunity to make representations in the Council 
meeting.280  Equally worrying is that HKU’s Council took rather 
extreme measures to curtail public scrutiny of its decisions, not 
only holding closed-door meetings but even directing Tai to keep 
“confidential” the letter informing him of the penalties, except to 
the extent necessary to seek legal advice.281  This constitutes a 
clear attempt to prevent students, other faculty, and the general 
public from critiquing the Council’s decision and the extent to 
which it may reflect government interference. 
At least two other academics (Dr. Robert Chung, who directs 
the Opinion Poll Programme and Professor Daniel Chua, who was 
Dean of the School of Humanities when Reverend Chu donated 
money to that School) have been sanctioned by HKU’s Council in 
a similar process.282  Interestingly, they also were directed to keep 
 
  277 See Joyce Ng, Occupy Central Co-Founder Benny Tai “Loves” His Employer 
The University of Hong Kong Too Much To Challenge It In Court, S. CHINA MORNING 
POST  (Oct.  26,  2015,  11:24  PM),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-
community/article/1872558/occupy-central-co-founder-benny-tai-loves-his?page=all 
[https://perma.cc/E4LH-79ML]. 
  278 See Tai, supra note 276. 
  279 Id. 
  280 Id. 
  281 Id. 
  282 See Joyce Ng & Shirley Zhao, Occupy Central Founder Benny Tai Banned From 
Supervising Researchers for Three Years Following HKU Donation Scandal, S. CHINA 
MORNING  POST  (Aug.  26,  2015),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-
community/article/1852595/university-hong-kong-scholars-face-disciplinary 
[https://perma.cc/LG9J-PSZS]. 50  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
the formal notification of penalties confidential unless disclosure 
was for the purpose of obtaining legal advice.  To his credit, Dr. 
Chung challenged the Council’s attempt to gag him.  In a letter 
responding to the Council (conspicuously labeled “not private” 
and “not confidential”), Dr. Chung complained that by “debarring 
individuals concerned  from disclosing or discussing the content 
of your letter(s), the Council has effectively denied the public’s 
right to know, and the rights of the individuals concerned to defend 
themselves.”283 
Ironically, the Council that took these steps was the product of 
“reforms”  that  were  intended  to  ensure  that  HKU  could  be 
effectively  governed.    Of  its  twenty-four  members,  fifteen  are 
required  to  be  outsiders—neither  students  nor  employees  of 
HKU.284  Of those fifteen, seven—including the Council Chair—
are appointed by the Chief Executive, who is appointed by Beijing 
with no mandate from the people of Hong Kong.285  Six additional 
members  are  appointed  by  the  Council  itself,  with  the  HKU 
Court—a  separate  advisory  body—electing  two  further 
members.286  A minority of members are now drawn from the 
university itself, representing full-time teaching staff (4), full-time 
non-teaching staff (1), undergraduates (1) and postgraduates (1).287 
The combination of majority outsider representation and the 
Chief Executive’s continued powers of appointment has resulted in 
a  university  Council  that  is  widely  perceived  to  be  politically 
pliant and pro-Beijing.  Indeed, at the time of the vote against 
Johannes  Chan’s  appointment,  six  out  of  twenty-two  Council 
members were also members of the National People’s Congress or 
the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Committee—posts that 
signal close political ties with the central government.288  These six 
included former education minister Arthur Li, known for his high-
handed administrative style and a long-standing grudge against 
 
  283 See Letter from Robert Chung to the Chairman of Hong Kong University’s 
Council (Oct. 20, 2015) (copy on file with authors). 
  284 See University of Hong Kong Ordinance, (2003) Cap. 1053, Schedule, Statute 
XVIII  (H.K.), 
http://www.elegislation.gov.hk/blis_pdf.nsf/3097404CFB27E75D482575EF00233639/$
FILE/CAP_1053_e_b5.pdf [https://perma.cc/STF8-8LMK]. 
  285 Id. 
  286 Id. 
  287 Id. 
  288 See Cheng, Explainer, supra note 230. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  51 
HKU.289 
Despite the political fallout from the Johannes Chan saga, the 
Chief Executive has continued to pack university councils with 
members  viewed  as  politically  pliant.    In  October  2015  he 
appointed  four  pro-establishment  figures  to  the  Council  of 
Lingnan  University;290  the  appointees  included  former  Law 
Society  president  Junius  Ho,  who  threatened  to  defund  the 
Lingnan University Student Union over a performance of “Fuck 
the Police.”291  Leung also appointed Arthur Li as Chair of the 
HKU  Council  on  December  31,  2015,292  despite  an 
overwhelmingly endorsed resolution by HKU’s Convocation that 
Li was unfit for the office.293 
In  this  atmosphere,  it  is  not  surprising  that  Hong  Kong 
academics  are  far  less  confident  in  their  freedoms  than  when 
interviewed a decade ago.  In the past two years, academics from 
various  institutions  in  Hong  Kong  have  come  forward  and 
complained publicly of politically motivated harassment.  These 
include Joseph Cheng Yu-shek (a former Chair Professor at City 
University of Hong Kong who believes that he has been targeted 
for his work with the Alliance for True Democracy), Dixon Ming 
Sing (an Associate Professor at Hong Kong University of Science 
and Technology, who has criticized China’s repression of Falun 
Gong),  and  Liz  Jackson  (an  Assistant  Professor  at  HKU  who 
perceived negative pressure from senior colleagues concerning her 
 
  289 See, e.g., Ip Kin-yuen, Why Arthur Li Should Not Be Appointed HKU Council 
Chairman, EJINSIGHT (Nov. 2, 2015), http://www.ejinsight.com/20151030-why-arthur-
li-should-not-be-appointed-hku-council-chairman/  [https://perma.cc/VUD3-EPGU] 
(containing an op-ed by the Convener of the Hong Kong University Alumni Concern 
Group). 
  290 Kris  Cheng,  Chief  Executive  Appoints  Pro-Beijing  Figures  as  Lingnan 
University  Council  Members,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (Oct.  9,  2015), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/10/09/chief-executive-appoints-pro-beijing-figures-
as-lingnan-university-council-members/ [https://perma.cc/U295-VAK6]. 
  291 Id. 
  292 Kris Cheng, CY Ally Arthur Li Appointed HKU Council Chairman Amid Strong 
Opposition,  H.K.  FREE  PRESS  (Dec.  31,  2015), 
https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/12/31/cy-ally-arthur-li-appointed-hku-council-
chairman-amid-strong-opposition/ [https://perma.cc/U78U-9HER]. 
  293 University  of  Hong  Kong  Convocation,  HKU  Convocation  Extraordinary 
General  Meeting  29  November  2015  (Nov.  29,  2015), 
http://www.convocation.hku.hk/EGM/20151129/doc/final_results.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/VT5N-9BZ3]. 52  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
plans  to  edit  a  special  issue  of  a  journal  on  the  2014  pro-
democracy  protests).294    In  confidential  interviews,  other 
academics in Hong Kong have reported that they fear (or in some 
cases know) that their email accounts have been hacked and that 
they have no confidence that their university will protect them if 
they are subjected to the type of smear campaigns that were waged 
against Johannes Chan and Benny Tai. 
It is, of course, difficult for most academics to prove that they 
have been penalized or that they are being pressured.  Very often, 
the message that one should avoid politically controversial projects 
is delivered in an “off the record” communication.  For example, 
Professor  Michael  Davis  was  led  to  believe,  from  confidential 
statements by a senior administrator, that his public criticism of 
Beijing’s policy towards Hong Kong may have adversely affected 
his  application  to  extend  his  employment  beyond  the  normal 
retirement age of sixty at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.295  
Other  academics  have  reported,  in  confidential  interviews,  that 
they  perceive  a  heightened  level  of  scrutiny  of  research  and 
community  service  projects,  particularly  projects  that  may  be 
funded by foundations from outside Hong Kong.296  Projects that 
might have been considered educational and a valuable community 
service before Occupy Central (such as the “Design Democracy” 
website established by the HKU’s Centre for Comparative and 
Public Law)297 are now easy targets for the pro-China press, which 
 
  294 See David Matthews, Unsafe Harbour? Academic Freedom in Hong Kong, 
TIMES  HIGHER  EDUC.  SUPPLEMENT  (LONDON)  (Sept.  10,  2015), 
https://www.timeshighereducation.com/features/academic-freedom-in-hong-kong-
unsafe-harbour [https://perma.cc/6RTB-J869] (showing examples of their complaints); 
Simon Denyer, Is Hong Kong’s Academic Freedom Under Chinese Attack? WASH. POST 
(Mar.  13,  2015),  https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/is-hong-kongs-
academic-freedom-under-chinese-attack/2015/03/12/8680fc60-e819-4ed0-9097-
04a9774cfd35_story.html [https://perma.cc/FKH8-8HAJ]. 
  295 Interview with Michael Davis (Apr. 2016; cited with permission).  Davis was a 
founding member of the Article 23 Concern Group and substantially involved in the 
public debate on Article 23 legislation.  In 2011, after he was denied extension by the 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Professor Davis took up an appointment as a Visiting 
Professor  at  HKU.  See  Academic  Staff  Professor  Michael  Davis, 
https://www.law.hku.hk/faculty/staff/davis_michael.php [https://perma.cc/AP9V-X6YR] 
(providing biography for Professor Michael Davis). 
  296 Summarized from a series of interviews with Hong Kong academics in 2015 and 
2016, most of whom declined to be cited by name. 
  297 See Centre for Comparative and Public Law, Design Democracy: Promoting 
Constructive  Dialog  on  the  Future  of  Hong  Kong’s  Political  System, 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  53 
labels  such  activities  as  evidence  of  foreign  influence  and 
radicalization of Hong Kong’s youth.  It is not surprising that so 
many interviewees told us that they intend to “keep their heads 
down”  during  these  difficult  times.298    The  authors  have  also 
spoken  with  foreign  academics  who  are  hesitant  to  accept 
positions at universities in Hong Kong due to their concerns that 
academic freedom has deteriorated.299  If this trend continues, the 
international  reputation  of  Hong  Kong’s  universities  will  be 
seriously undermined. 
Dr. Peter Cunich (a longstanding academic in Hong Kong and 
the author of the leading book on the history of HKU) described 
the current atmosphere in vivid terms.  He observed that threats to 
academic freedom are being discussed in Hong Kong more than at 
any time he could remember and that “[t]he degree to which HKU 
staff  are  free  to  express  their  political  beliefs  in  2015-16  (as 
opposed  to  2014  when  we  all  thought  we  had  those  rights 
protected)  has  been  a  topic  of  conversation  among  junior 
(untenured) staff in particular.”300  Dr. Cunich also admitted that he 
has “advised [his] junior colleagues to keep a low profile and get 
on  with  their  teaching  and  research.”301    He  drew  a  sharp 
distinction between 2002 and 2016, noting that “the Robert Chung 
Affair seemed to inspire us to fight back, whereas the current 
situation simply fills us all with despair.”302 
VII. The Disapearing Booksellers 
The abduction of Hong Kong-based booksellers is perhaps the 
most  potent  symbol  of  Beijing’s  determination  to  bring  Hong 
Kong  to  heel.303    On  December  30,  2015,  Lee  Bo,  a  British 
national who worked for the Causeway Bay Books bookstore in 
Hong Kong, left for his warehouse to fulfill an unusually large 
 
http://designdemocracy.hk/?lang=en  [https://perma.cc/2G7H-JKM6]  (last  visited  May 
30, 2016).   
  298 Summary of interviews of academics in 2015 and 2016. 
  299 Id. 
  300 Id. 
  301 Id. 
  302 Id. 
  303 See Nathan Vanderklippe, China Extends Reach to Take Hong Kong’s Freedom 
of  Speech  Away,  GLOBE  AND  MAIL  (TORONTO)  (Jan.  21,  2016), 
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/china-extends-reach-to-take-hong-kongs-
freedom-of-speech-away/article28332009/ [https://perma.cc/AQW6-KXYS]. 54  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
order.304  Causeway Bay Books was popular with certain mainland 
Chinese tourists because it sold books that would be embarrassing 
to the Chinese Communist Party and therefore banned in mainland 
China.305  Lee did not return; his was the fifth disappearance linked 
to Causeway Bay Books and its parent company Mighty Current 
Publishers.306 
Lee’s disappearance sent shock waves through Hong Kong.  
Like  his  colleague  Gui  Minhai—a  Swedish  national  who  had 
disappeared from Thailand weeks earlier—Lee had been born in 
China, but held a foreign passport.307  However, unlike Gui or their 
other  colleagues,  Lee  had  last  been  seen  in  Hong  Kong.308  
Eyewitnesses claim to have seen Lee bundled into a van outside of 
his warehouse in Chai Wan, presumably by state security agents 
from the mainland, who have no authority to operate within the 
territory of Hong Kong.309  For a Hong Kong public fearful of 
clandestine actions by the mainland security apparatus—ostensibly 
prohibited from operating in Hong Kong under Article 22 of the 
Basic Law—Lee’s disappearance seemed to suggest the worst. 
If Lee’s apparent abduction had set alarm bells ringing in Hong 
Kong, his reappearance weeks later did nothing to calm the Hong 
Kong  public.    In  a  peculiar  series  of  letters  faxed  from  the 
mainland, Lee claimed that he had “voluntarily” returned to the 
mainland to assist in an investigation—an implausible assertion 
because his travel documents remained at home and the Hong 
Kong Immigration Department had no records of his departure.310 
Meanwhile, Lee’s colleague Gui also resurfaced—in a ten-minute 
interview  on  State-run  television,  in  which  he  claimed  he  had 
turned himself in over a fatal drunk-driving accident twelve years 
 
  304 Id. 
  305 See id. 
  306 Id. 
  307 Id. 
  308 Id. 
  309 Kinling Lo, Waiting Game on Booksellers, STANDARD (H.K.) (Jan. 13, 2016), 
http://www.thestandard.com.hk/section-news.php?id=165119  [https://perma.cc/VV27-
N7J5]. 
  310 See Regina Tan & David Tweed, China Confirms Probe of Three Missing Hong 
Kong  Booksellers,  BLOOMBERG  (Feb.  4,  2016), 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-02-04/china-confirms-three-missing-
hong-kong-booksellers-under-probe [https://perma.cc/WL5P-BCMX]. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  55 
ago.311 Both Lee’s letters and Gui’s interview showed signs of 
coercion.312  Only  on  February  4,  2016,  did  mainland  Chinese 
authorities  officially  confirm  that  the  remaining  three  Mighty 
Current staff were also in their custody.313  In March 2016, Lee Bo 
was permitted to return to Hong Kong, but he did not give a 
credible explanation of how he wound up in custody in mainland 
China.314    Instead,  he  stated  emphatically  that  he  would  never 
again publish books that are banned in mainland China.315  This 
statement  alone  provides  clear  evidence  that  Beijing  has 
successfully employed fear and intimidation to stifle freedom of 
expression in Hong Kong. 
The  abduction  of  the  “Causeway  Bay  Five,”  as  they  have 
become known, has raised serious questions about the state of 
Hong Kong’s autonomy.  A constitutional right to free speech in 
Hong Kong means nothing if an author or publisher can simply be 
kidnapped and taken across the border for prosecution.  In a video 
that rapidly went viral, student activist Agnes Chow claimed that 
“Hong Kong is not Hong Kong anymore”316—a sentiment echoed 
by legislator Dennis Kwok, who told the New York Times that 
“this sort of stuff is just not supposed to happen in Hong Kong.”317  
 
  311 Vanderklippe, supra note 303. 
  312 Id. 
  313 Tan & Tweed, supra note 310. 
  314 Ng Kang-chung & Owen Fung, Bookseller Lam Wing-kee Reveals Explosive 
Details of his Mainland Detention, Claims Lee Po Told him he was “Taken Away From 
Hong  Kong”,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (H.K.)  (June  16,  2016), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/1976489/bookseller-lam-wing-
kee-reveals-explosive-details-his [https://perma.cc/3S27-8TPR] (reporting that on June 
16, 2016, Lee’s colleague Lam Wing-kee—who had only returned to Hong Kong earlier 
in the week—confirmed that Lee had, by his own admission, been “taken away from 
Hong Kong”). 
  315 Oliver Chou & Phila Siu, I’ll Never Publish Banned Books Again: Hong Kong 
Bookseller Lee Po Quits Book Trade Upon Return to City, S. CHINA MORNING POST 
(H.K.)  (Mar.  25  2016),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/law-
crime/article/1930513/ill-never-publish-banned-books-again-hong-kong-bookseller 
[https://perma.cc/T59D-ER95]. 
  316 Koel Chu, Hong Kong is not Hong Kong Anymore, Scholarism’s Agnes Chow 
Says, H.K. FREE PRESS (Jan. 4, 2016), https://www.hongkongfp.com/2016/01/04/hong-
kong-is-not-hong-kong-anymore-scholarisms-agnes-chow-says/ 
[https://perma.cc/A8FM-DN6E]. 
  317 Michael Forsythe, Disappearance of 5 Tied to Publisher Prompts Broader 
Worries  in  Hong  Kong,  N.Y.  TIMES  (Jan.  4,  2016), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/05/world/asia/mighty-current-media-hong-kong-lee-56  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
Even  political  figures  who  have  traditionally  toed  the  Chinese 
Communist  Party  line  have  been  moved  to  react.318    Wang 
Zhenmin, dean of Tsinghua Law School and legal affairs chief of 
the Liaison Office, told an academic conference that “[w]e are 
very concerned about the legal case . . . like you,” and that no 
Chinese law enforcement agencies could legally operate in Hong 
Kong.319 
Even prior to the abduction of the Causeway Bay Five, Hong 
Kong’s media environment had shown signs of becoming more 
restrictive.320  Over the preceding years, pro-Beijing tycoons have 
invested  heavily  in  Hong  Kong  media  companies,321  with 
Alibaba’s  acquisition  of  the  English-language  paper  the  South 
China  Morning  Post  (albeit  from  another  pro-Beijing  owner) 
being the most recent example.322  The Apple Daily, a tabloid 
known for its staunch pro-democracy editorial stance, has suffered 
from  companies’  withdrawal  of  advertising,  allegedly  under 
pressure from Beijing.323  More significantly, the Liaison Office 
itself indirectly controls three major bookstore chains, as well as a 
plethora of print and online media outlets.324  In its 2015 annual 
report,  the  Hong  Kong  Journalists  Association  cited  self-
 
bo.html [https://perma.cc/R2KV-KPZE]. 
  318 See Clare Baldwin et al., Chinese Official Expresses Concern Over Missing 
Hong Kong Bookseller, REUTERS (Jan. 15, 2016), http://www.reuters.com/article/us-
hongkong-publisher-bookshops-idUSKCN0UT19O [https://perma.cc/ZU2R-GPXM]. 
  319 Id. 
  320 Id. 
  321 S.C. Yeung, Why Print Media in Hong Kong is Entering an Ice Age, EJINSIGHT 
(July  17,  2015),  http://www.ejinsight.com/20150717-why-print-media-hong-kong-is-
entering-ice-age/ [https://perma.cc/XT3G-Q3GB]. 
  322 See, e.g., Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian et al., Can an Alibaba ‘Morning Post’ Aid 
China’s  Image  Overseas?,  CHINAFILE  (Dec.  15,  2015), 
http://www.chinafile.com/node/22441 [https://perma.cc/LZU3-UHV5]. 
  323 Enda Curran & Chester Yung, Hong Kong Newspaper Says HSBC, Standard 
Chartered Pulled Ads, WALL ST. J. (June 16, 2014), http://www.wsj.com/articles/apple-
daily-says-hsbc-standard-chartered-pulled-ads-due-to-chinese-government-pressure-
1402923219 [https://perma.cc/X2L2-PAYM]. 
  324 Ilaria Maria Sala, Creeping Censorship in Hong Kong: How China Controls Sale 
of  Sensitive  Books,  GUARDIAN  (Manchester)  (May  18,  2015), 
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/19/censorship-in-hong-kong-how-china-
controls-sale-of-sensitive-books [https://perma.cc/W44Y-C2CP]; Betsy Tse, Basic Law 
Violation Seen as LOCPG Tightens Grip on HK Publishers, EJINSIGHT (Apr. 9, 2015), 
http://www.ejinsight.com/20150409-basic-law-violation-seen-as-locpg-tightens-grip-on-
hk-publishers/ [https://perma.cc/QE2G-PLHT]. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  57 
censorship as the biggest threat facing media workers in Hong 
Kong, alongside physical threats to journalists.325  Nonetheless, 
books banned on the Mainland—such as the political pot-boilers 
peddled by Causeway Bay Books—remained available in Hong 
Kong,  a  phenomenon  which  may  have  motivated  the 
kidnappings.326  The renditions appear to have had the intended 
effect: shortly after Lee Bo’s disappearance, bookstore chain Page 
One—one of the chains not controlled by the Liaison Office—
chose  to  remove  all  politically  “sensitive”  books  from  its 
shelves.327 
More significantly, Lee Bo’s abduction suggests that Mainland 
state security forces are operating within Hong Kong with new 
levels of brazenness.328  Although Article 22(1) of the Basic Law 
explicitly  prohibits  Mainland  governmental  entities  from 
interfering in matters within Hong Kong’s autonomy, democratic 
politicians and other critics of Beijing’s rule remain subject to 
surveillance by Mainland security forces within Hong Kong.329  
Religious organizations within Hong Kong have even been warned 
not to proselytize to visitors from the Mainland.330  Although there 
have been reports of previous abductions conducted within Hong 
Kong  by  State  security,  such  incidents  have  largely  targeted 
wayward  Party  members,  rather  than  authors  of  salacious 
literature.331  Lee’s disappearance therefore represents a significant 
 
  325 Hong Kong Journalists Association, Journalists Caught Between Two Fires (July 
2015),  http://www.hkja.org.hk/site/portal/Site.aspx?id=A1-1367&lang=en-US 
[https://perma.cc/4KXS-J5R2]. 
  326 See Michael Sheridan, Leaked: China Plan to Hit Rebels Overseas, SUNDAY 
TIMES  (LONDON)  (Jan.  24,  2016), 
http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/world_news/Asia/article1659622.ece 
[https://perma.cc/WW6A-7XXA] (describing a “Guangdong Action Plan”). 
  327 Ilaria Maria Sala, Hong Kong Bookshops Pull Politically Sensitive Titles After 
Publishers  Vanish,  GUARDIAN  (MANCHESTER)  (Jan.  7,  2016), 
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/hong-kong-bookshops-pull-politically-
sensitive-titles-after-publishers-vanish [https://perma.cc/ZV3C-V5WT]. 
  328 See David Lague et al., Special Report: How China Spies on Hong Kong’s 
Democrats,  REUTERS  (Dec.  14,  2014),  http://www.reuters.com/article/us-hong-kong-
surveillance-special-report-idUSKBN0JT00120141215 [https://perma.cc/B6K4-MLVV]. 
  329 Id. 
  330 Vivienne Zeng, Hong Kong Pastors Ordered to Stop Preaching to Mainlanders, 
H.K. FREE PRESS (July 6, 2015), https://www.hongkongfp.com/2015/07/06/hong-kong-
pastors-ordered-to-stop-preaching-to-mainlanders/ [https://perma.cc/XEG9-KADX]. 
  331 Ching, supra note 28. 58  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
escalation in Beijing’s interference within Hong Kong. 
If the specter of Mainland state security operating in Hong 
Kong—in flagrant breach of the Basic Law—was not sufficiently 
alarming for Hong Kongers, their government’s reaction certainly 
was.  Chief Executive C.Y. Leung initially called for Lee Bo to 
step forward and provide information; he went on to state that 
there was no evidence that state security had been involved in his 
disappearance.332  The police was criticized—by members of the 
force itself—for sending junior officers, rather than the Serious 
Cases  squad,  to  investigate  Lee’s  abduction.333    Neither  the 
police—nor  C.Y.  Leung  himself—publicly  pressed  Mainland 
authorities for answers, even though the latter were obliged to 
report cases involving Hong Kong residents in custody to their 
Hong Kong counterparts.334  Although we may never know what 
steps  the  Hong  Kong  government  took  behind  the  scenes,  the 
absence  of  any  such  steps  taken  in  public  raises  troubling 
questions about the local government’s ability, or willingness, to 
protect Hong Kong’s autonomy and the rights of its residents. 
VIII. Conclusion 
The developments analyzed in this article are deeply troubling 
and have caused great anxiety, not only for academics but for the 
broader Hong Kong community. The dystopian film “Ten Years,” 
which depicted a Hong Kong in 2025 in which “youth guards” 
attacked a bookshop selling forbidden books, and in which a false-
flag assassination was staged to ensure public support for national 
security  legislation,  resonated  widely  among  the  city’s 
cinemagoers—outperforming  even  “Star  Wars:  The  Force 
Awakens.”335    Although  many  residents  continue  to  rely  on 
 
  332 Lai Ying-kit & Phila Siu, CY Leung on Hong Kong’s Missing Booksellers: 
Mainland China Law Enforcement Actions ‘Unacceptable,’ S. CHINA MORNING POST 
(H.K.)  (Jan.  5,  2016),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/law-
crime/article/1897784/cy-leung-hong-kongs-missing-booksellers-mainland-china-law 
[https://perma.cc/GTQ4-WFBV]. 
  333 Niall Fraser, Serving Hong Kong Police Officers Hit Out at Missing Booksellers 
Investigation,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (H.K.)  (Jan.  20,  2016), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/law-crime/article/1903505/serving-hong-kong-
police-officers-hit-out-missing [https://perma.cc/CB9F-CESB]. 
  334 Id. 
  335 James Griffiths, “Ten Years:” Dark Vision of Hong Kong’s Future Proves 
Surprise  Box  Office  Hit,  CNN  (Jan.  21,  2016), 
http://www.cnn.com/2016/01/20/asia/hong-kong-ten-years-future/ 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  59 
peaceful  means  of  protest,  the  Fishball  Riots  demonstrate  that 
some  Hong  Kongers—in  particular  those  affiliated  with  the 
“localist”  political  movements—have  lost  patience  and  are 
embracing more militant means of expressing their discontent.336 
While the more violent means of protest seen in the Fishball 
Riots  may  not  gain  significant  traction  among  Hong  Kongers, 
other ideas espoused by localists have found fertile ground among 
university  students.337    The  HKU  student-run  magazine 
Undergrad,  criticized  by  C.Y.  Leung  in  2015  for  arguing  that 
Hong Kongers were entitled to self-determination,338 published an 
issue in March 2016 advocating the territory’s independence from 
China.339  In the same month, Joshua Wong announced that he 
would disband Scholarism and set up a new political party to 
contest the legislative elections in September 2016,340 with the 
ultimate  goal  of  seeking  a  referendum  on  Hong  Kong’s 
independence.341  The growing respectability of localist ideas and 
rhetoric—including  the  idea  that  Hong  Kong  should  be 
independent from China altogether—reflect the extent to which 
public faith in “One Country, Two Systems” has been shaken.  
Unfortunately, the central and local governments have responded 
to  the  localist  rhetoric  by  attempting  to  restrict  discussion  of 
independence in public schools342 and by prohibiting individuals 
 
[https://perma.cc/PK9X-4FTD]. 
  336 Levin, supra note 34. 
  337 Isabella Steger, Hong Kong Leader Singles Out College Magazine For Helping 
Cause  “Anarchy”,  CHINA  REAL  TIME  (Jan.  14,  2015), 
http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2015/01/14/hong-kong-leader-singles-out-college-
magazine-for-helping-cause-anarchy/ [https://perma.cc/9RTH-2HW8]. 
  338 Id. 
  339 Simon Lewis, Students at Hong Kong’s Oldest University Are Calling for the 
City’s  Independence,  TIME  (Mar.  16,  2016),  http://time.com/4260624/hong-kong-
university-students-independence-localism-separatists-undergrad/ 
[https://perma.cc/Z54G-VDJL]. 
  340 Clifford Coonan, Joshua Wong Dissolves Hong Kong’s Scholarism Group, IRISH 
TIMES  (Mar.  21,  2016),  http://www.irishtimes.com/news/world/asia-pacific/joshua-
wong-dissolves-hong-kong-s-scholarism-group-1.2581800  [https://perma.cc/NT5S-
4562]. 
  341 Jennifer Pak, Hong Kong Protests: Joshua Wong to Launch Political Party, 
TELEGRAPH  (London)  (Feb.  18,  2016), 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/hongkong/12163917/Hong-Kong-
protests-Joshua-Wong-to-launch-political-party.html [https://perma.cc/4LZZ-4EQW]. 
  342 See, e.g., Raymond Yeung and Ng Kang-Chung, Watch What You Say About 60  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
who support independence from running for seats in Hong Kong’s 
local legislature.343  These attempts to restrict peaceful advocacy 
almost certainly violate the ICCPR, as well as Hong Kong’s Basic 
Law, and will only further damage public confidence in the “One 
Country, Two Systems” model.  There is also a danger that Beijing 
will use the small independence movement as an excuse to renew 
its demand that Hong Kong implement Article 23 of the Basic 
Law  by  enacting  local  criminal  laws  to  prohibit,  inter  alia, 
secession,  sedition,  and  subversion  against  the  central 
government.344  If the local legislature declined to do so, there is a 
possibility—although  hopefully  very  remote—that  the  central 
government could invoke Article 18 of the Basic Law and try to 
apply selected national criminal laws in Hong Kong.345 
Against this background, it would be an understatement to say 
that the reputation of Hong Kong—and of its universities—has 
suffered.    Nonetheless,  a  declaration  that  “One  Country,  Two 
 
Independence, CY Leung Warns Local Schools, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.) (Aug 
16, 2016), http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/2004621/watch-what-
you-say-about-hong-kong-independence-cy-leung  [https://perma.cc/53HE-RJQB]; 
Earnest Kao, Hong Kong Teachers Warned They Could Be Struck Off for Separatist Talk 
in  the  Schools,  S.  CHINA  MORNING  POST  (H.K.)  (Aug.  14,  2016), 
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/2003782/hong-kong-teachers-
warned-they-could-be-struck-separatist [https://perma.cc/7F98-75W9]. 
  343 See, e.g., Stuart Lau, New Legal Hoop for Hong Kong Legislative Council 
Candidates Muddies the Water for Upcoming Elections, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.) 
(July  22,  2016)  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/1993395/new-
legal-hoop-hong-kong-legislative-council-candidates  [https://perma.cc/Y7VD-LB9T] 
(noting that the ban was imposed administratively by the Electoral Affairs Commission 
and is currently being challenged in court); Jeffie Lam, Row Over Election Ban on 
Localists Escalates as Hong Kong Justice Minister’s Explanation Backfires, S. CHINA 
MORNING  POST  (H.K.)  (Aug.  3,  2016),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-
kong/politics/article/1998547/hong-kong-justice-secretary-defends-decision-bar-localist 
[https://perma.cc/KK6Z-ZVG6]. 
  344 See Press Release, Mr. Rimsky Yuen, Secretary for Justice, Legis. Couns. Fin. 
Comm.,  Transcript  of  Remarks  (Apr.  1,  2016), 
http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201604/01/P201604010705.htm?utm_source=dlvr.it
&utm_medium=twitter  [https://perma.cc/WW9L-KUY6]  (showing  that  nonetheless, 
Secretary for Justice Rimsky Yuen appears to have taken the view that expressing 
secessionist views is per se illegal, albeit without identifying any substantive legal basis 
for that assertion). 
  345 Although Article 18 is confined to situations in which Hong Kong falls into war 
or turmoil that is beyond the control of the local government, the NPCSC holds the 
ultimate power of interpretation and Beijing has already shown its willingness to use this 
power to effectively amend sections of the Basic Law. 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  61 
Systems” has failed would be premature—and might become a 
self-fulfilling prophecy.  On the contrary, Hong Kongers—and the 
international community—could do much to restore faith in Hong 
Kong and in the quality of its academic institutions. 
As a signatory to the Joint Declaration, the United Kingdom 
has  a  legal  right,  if  not  an  obligation,  to  monitor  Chinese 
compliance with the Joint Declaration.  Although earlier semi-
annual reports by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office have 
rightly  been  described  as  “anodyne,”346  the  six-monthly  report 
issued in February 2016 contained unusually trenchant criticism of 
China regarding Lee Bo, referring to his abduction as a “serious 
breach”  of  the  Joint  Declaration.347    In  a  similar  vein,  a  joint 
statement issued by the United States on behalf of itself and eleven 
other  countries,  including  the  U.K.,  referred  to  the  bookseller 
abductions  as  “a  violation  of  the  high  degree  of  autonomy 
promised Hong Kong under its Basic Law.”348  Such statements, as 
well as international law mechanisms, such as the periodic reviews 
conducted  by  UN  human  rights  treaty  bodies,  represent  an 
important means of ensuring that Chinese commitments under the 
Joint Declaration—in particular those regarding critical speech and 
academic freedom—are upheld.  It is crucial that the international 
community continues to remind China of its core obligations under 
the Joint Declaration. 
Universities, academic associations, and individual academics 
around the world can also assist by paying close attention to Hong 
Kong  and  commenting  upon  any  adverse  developments  in  the 
territory.  Hong Kong’s public universities are well funded and the 
government  wants  them  to  be  viewed  as  leaders  in  the  global 
 
  346 Lord Patten of Barnes CH, former British Governor of Hong Kong, Oral 
Evidence: The UK’s Relations with Hong Kong 30 years after the Joint Declaration 
(Nov.  4,  2014), 
http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/fore
ign-affairs-committee/the-uks-relations-with-hong-kong-30-years-after-the-joint-
declaration/oral/15097.html [https://perma.cc/76B3-FGP4]. 
  347 Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, The Six-Monthly 
Report  on  Hong  Kong  1  July  to  31  December  2015  (Feb.  11,  2016), 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/six-monthly-report-on-hong-kong-july-to-
december-2015 [https://perma.cc/FV29-G6HA]. 
  348 Keith Harper, U.S. Ambassador to the HRC, Item 2: Joint Statement- Human 
Rights  Situation  in  China  (Mar.  10,  2016), 
https://geneva.usmission.gov/2016/03/10/item-2-joint-statement-human-rights-situation-
in-china/ [https://perma.cc/YX8X-6ZRK]. 62  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
market for higher education.349  It is important that the Hong Kong 
government also realize that decreases in academic freedom and 
educational  autonomy  will  hurt  the  international  reputation  of 
Hong Kong’s universities, making it more difficult for them to 
recruit  international  students  and  staff,  as  well  as  to  establish 
exchange programs with foreign universities. 
In  this  regard,  it  is  encouraging  that  Scholars  at  Risk—a 
leading international network of universities supporting academic 
freedom—has  taken  a  strong  interest  in  Hong  Kong,  drawing 
attention  to  the  rising  threats  to  academic  freedom  in  the 
territory.350 
Substantive reforms to university governance are also needed 
if confidence in Hong Kong’s universities is to be restored.  The 
Chief  Executive’s  role  as  Chancellor  of  publicly-funded 
universities—a  major  facilitator  of  political  interference  in  the 
universities—is  long  overdue  for  abolition351  and  there  is 
widespread support for this reform.352  Moreover, in our view, 
even the Hong Kong government would benefit if each university 
were permitted to select its own chancellor or president.  The 
current  situation  creates  unnecessary  conflicts,  as  well  as 
unrealistic expectations in Beijing regarding the Chief Executive’s 
influence over academics and student organizations.  It would be 
 
  349 The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong: 
The  Facts,  Education  (March  2016), 
http://www.gov.hk/en/about/abouthk/factsheets/docs/education.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/U3NT-TBSC]. 
  350 See  Scholars  at  Risk,  NYU,  http://scholarsatrisk.nyu.edu/ 
[https://perma.cc/WR9H-W387] (last visited May 30, 2016) (showing that for example, 
Scholars at Risk invited two academics from Hong Kong (Robert Chung and Alvin Y.H. 
Cheung) to participate in its 2016 Global Congress, helping to raise awareness of the 
threats to academic freedom in Hong Kong.  Scholars at Risk also is considering holding 
an event on academic freedom in Hong Kong in order to demonstrate its support for 
students and academics in the territory and build solidarity.). 
  351 See Chris Patten, The Closing of the Academic Mind, PROJECT SYNDICATE (Feb. 
22,  2016),  https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/academic-freedom-under-
threat-by-chris-patten-2016-02  [https://perma.cc/25L8-YZ8M]  (explaining  that  Chris 
Patten, the last British Governor of Hong Kong, claims that he suggested allowing the 
universities select their own chancellors before the handover, although this has been 
disputed.). 
  352 Academics Vote Against CE Influence on Councils, RADIO TELEVISION HONG 
KONG  (Mar.  24,  2016),  http://news.rthk.hk/rthk/en/component/k2/1250707-
20160324.htm [https://perma.cc/6AQW-6KQ7].  See also Petersen, Lessons, supra note 
21 (proposing reforms following the Robert Chung affair). 2016  ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND CRITICAL SPEECH IN HONG KONG  63 
far better for both sides if the Chief Executive were no longer 
viewed—either by society or by Beijing—as even the titular head 
of Hong Kong’s universities. 
Similarly,  the  universities  need  to  regain  control  over  the 
appointment of the external members of their councils, so that 
universities are governed by individuals with genuine experience 
and expertise in the field, rather than by appointees of the Chief 
Executive who are primarily chosen for their loyalty to him.  It is 
encouraging that the Newby Report on governance also appears to 
recognize  that  this  is  a  serious  problem  that  needs  to  be 
addressed.353    The  University  of  Hong  Kong  has  already 
announced  that  it  will  undertake  a  review  of  its  governance 
structure, which will hopefully include an honest assessment of the 
centralization  of  power  that  occurred  after  the  Sutherland 
Report.354 
Of  course,  even  if  these  reforms  are  adopted,  the  personal 
political activities of certain Hong Kong academics, on both sides 
of the political spectrum, are likely to be a source of flashpoints in 
the  future.    In  addition  to  respecting  and  protecting  academic 
freedom, Hong Kong’s public universities have a duty to account 
for their resources and a legitimate interest in maintaining their 
political neutrality as institutions.  These can be difficult goals to 
balance, even in functioning democracies.  Many universities have 
struggled with whether to require academics to take leave when 
they engage in political activities that will require a major time 
commitment, such as running for office or managing a political 
campaign.355  One of Benny Tai’s chief objections to the decision 
 
  353 Newby Report, supra note 116, at 20. 
  354 See  KC  Ng  &  Shirley  Zhao,  Panel  to  Reform  University  of  Hong  Kong 
Governance to Meet Students and Staff in June, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.) (Mar. 
24,  2016),  http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-
community/article/1930476/panel-reform-university-hong-kongs-governance 
[https://perma.cc/QWY3-R7PL] (reporting that the review panel will begin meeting with 
students and other stakeholders in June 2016); see also University of Hong Kong Press 
Release, HKU Council Establishes the Review Panel on University Governance and 
Appoints  Members  to  Panel  (Apr.  26,  2016), 
http://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_14514.html [https://perma.cc/4GGL-YXRM]. 
  355 See Kevin Dayton, Bill to Allow Legislators to Take Jobs at UH Goes to 
Senators, HONOLULU STAR ADVERTISER (Apr. 12, 2016), 
http://www.staradvertiser.com/hawaii-news/bill-to-allow-legislators-to-take-jobs-at-uh-
goes-to-senators/ [https://perma.cc/4SXX-99KE] (explaining that for example, faculty in 
the University of Hawaii, including part-time faculty, may not simultaneously serve in 64  N.C. J. INT'L L.   [Vol. XLII 
by HKU’s Council to “discipline him” (regarding his management 
of  a  donation  to  HKU)  is  that  the  Council  never  cited  any 
particular “pre-existing rule or guideline that [he had] breached or 
failed to comply with.”356  Tai’s objection has merit: if a university 
genuinely  believes  that  it  has  the  authority  to  set  rules  or 
guidelines for academics who are politically active, then it should 
establish clear guidelines through a consultative process and then 
apply them in a transparent and politically neutral manner. 
We suggest that Hong Kong academics develop and propose 
their own guidelines, which could expressly recognize and address 
the  difference  between  politically  sensitive  research  and 
commentary, on one hand, and personal political activities that 
may require major time commitments.  Of course, both activities 
enjoy protection under the Basic Law and the ICCPR.  But it 
would not be unreasonable for Hong Kong’s universities to adopt 
politically  neutral  policies  that  seek  to  ensure  that  academics’ 
personal political activities do not prevent them from fulfilling her 
professional responsibilities. 
Although  Hong  Kong’s  universities  face  unique  political 
pressures, the experiences of other universities—and the support 
of  members  of  the  academic  community  worldwide—will  be 
indispensable in rebuilding confidence.  The challenges posed to 
the “One Country, Two Systems” model by Beijing’s increasing 
interference in Hong Kong—including those we describe in this 
article—cannot  be  overstated.    Although  Hong  Kongers  have 
mounted a robust defense of their city’s autonomy, their efforts 
need greater international attention and support.  Anything less 
might result in changes far more damaging—and permanent—to 
Hong Kong and its universities. 
 
 
the Hawaii state legislature); see also Peter Schmidt, At Central Michigan University, 
Professors Fight To Protect Their Political Ambitions, 56 CHRONICLE OF HIGHER EDUC. 
(July  22,  2010),  http://chronicle.com/article/Central-Michigan-U-Professors/123676/ 
[https://perma.cc/65WG-3BDS] (describing objections by faculty to a university policy 
that requires them to seek permission before running for office). 
  356 See Tai, supra note 276. 