 
 
2017 Monsanto Lecture 
The Complicated Business of State Supreme Court Elections: An Empirical Perspective 
 
Michael Heise ∗ 
 
Abstract 
Proponents of judicial elections emphasize existing First Amendment jurisprudence as well as 
similarities linking publicly-elected state judges and other publicly-elected state officials. 
Opponents emphasize judicial campaign contributions’ corrosive effects, including their 
potential to unduly influence judicial outcomes. Using a comprehensive data set of 2,345 
business-related cases decided by state supreme courts across all 50 states between 2010-12, 
judicial election critics, including Professor Joanna Shepherd, emphasize the potential for bias 
and find that campaign contributions from business sources to state supreme court judicial 
candidates corresponded with candidates’ pro-business votes as justices. While Shepherd’s main 
findings largely withstand replication efforts, additional (and alternative) analyses introduce 
new findings that raise complicating wrinkles for Shepherd’s strong normative claims. Findings 
from this study illustrate that efforts to influence judicial outcomes are not the exclusive domain 
of business interests. That is, judicial campaign contributions from “non-“ (and “anti-“) 
business interests increase the probability of justices’ votes favoring non-business interests. As a 
result, critiques of judicial elections cannot properly rely exclusively on the influence of business 
interests. Moreover, that both business and non-business interests can successfully influence 
judicial outcomes through campaign contributions point in different (and possibly conflicting) 
normative directions. On the one hand, even if one agrees that the judicial branch qualitatively 
differs from the political and executive branches in terms of assessing campaign contributions’ 
proper role, that the potential to influence judicial outcomes is available to any interest group 
(willing to invest campaign contributions) complicates popular critiques of judicial elections. On 
the other hand, the same empirical finding also plausibly strengthens critiques of judicial 
elections, especially for those who view the judicial domain as distinct from other political 
domains. 
 
1.0.  Introduction 
                                                 
∗ Professor, Cornell Law School.  This Article is the written version of the Monsanto Lecture, delivered at 
Valparaiso University School of Law on February 16, 2017. Joanna Shepherd, Dawn M. Chutkow, Nicole A. Heise, 
and Nicholas Stephanopoulos provided helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. 
1 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2960668   Debates over state judicial selection methods have persisted over time and increased in 
ferocity.  At the core of such debates reside questions about how best to reconcile two desired 
goals: judicial independence from and accountability to those bound by court rulings.  
Conventional wisdom typically links judicial appointments with enhanced independence and 
judicial elections with enhanced accountability.  Among an array of selection methods, many 
states select their supreme court justices through popular election and some have done so since 
the mid-nineteenth century.  While motivations for those states that use popular election as a 
judicial selection model no doubt vary, they certainly include a general impulse to increase 
judges’ accountability to the people that their decisions influence.1 
States opting for judicial elections invariably confront important campaign finance 
questions for judicial candidates.  As Professor Kritzer observes, “[t]he elephant in the room 
regarding the impact of judicial elections on judicial decisions is the question of whether judges 
who must stand for election” are “influenced by campaign contributions.”2  Legal contests over 
elections and campaign spending have forced the Supreme Court to consider the potentially 
corrosive effects of money in the electoral process and, within the bounds of the First 
Amendment, how concerns about corruption might be addressed.3  Similar and concurrent 
litigation over state judicial elections and campaign spending has imposed upon the Court 
derivative questions about whether its concerns about the role of money in elections must adjust 
when the elected public official is a judge.4 
                                                 
1 For a helpful summary see, e.g., JED H. SHUGERMAN, THE PEOPLE’S COURTS (2012). 
2 Herbert M. Kritzer, Impact of Judicial Elections on Judicial Decisions, 12 Annu. Rev. Law Soc. Sci. 1, 12 (2016). 
3 See, e.g., Citizens United v. FEC, 558 U.S. 310 (2010); Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976). 
4 See, e.g., Williams-Yulee v. Florida Bar, 135 S. Ct. 1656, 575 U.S. __ (2015); Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co., 
556 U.S. 868 (2009); Republican Party of Minn. V. White, 536 U.S. 765 (2002). 
2 
 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2960668   Even those not particularly bothered in the abstract by submitting judicial candidates 
(along with judges seeking retention) to the electoral process understand that the interaction of 
campaign spending and judicial elections heightens potential tensions.  While early judicial 
elections may have been comparatively inexpensive affairs,5 judicial elections today, by contrast, 
are frequently quite expensive.6  As a result of a transformation of campaign spending and its 
role in judicial elections, “judges spend significant amounts of time and energy raising money.”7  
As judicial campaign spending increased, the number of campaign contributors increased which, 
in turn, increased the probability that an elected judge would hear a case involving litigants (or 
attorneys) who contributed to the presiding judges’ campaigns.8  How one understands these 
tensions frequently pivots largely on one’s own perspective.  Where some see modern trends in 
judicial elections as “healthy,”9 others increasingly see “nightmarish” problems.10 
  These latent tensions frequently emerge in the context of judicial elections that feature 
pro- or anti-business campaign spending invested with an eye towards judicial engagement with 
existing or contemplated tort reform legislation.  Writing about the 1980s, judicial election 
scholars noted an emergence of a “new-style” of state supreme court campaigns that increasingly 
resembled traditional political campaigns in both tone, content, and, indeed, methods.11  These 
same political scientists noted how judicial campaigns began to reach and engage voters on even 
the “more prosaic issues such as tort law.”12  More to the point, “tort reform,” a persistent flash-
                                                 
5 SHUGARMAN, supra note 1, AT 10. 
6 Dmitry Bam, Recusal Failure, 18 N.Y.U. J. Legis. & Pub. Pol’y 631, 638 (2015). 
7 Id. 
8 Id. 
9 David Pozen, The Irony of Judicial Elections, 108 Colum. L. Rev. 265, 317 (2008). 
10 David Schultz, Minnesota Republican Party v. White and the Future of State Judicial Selection, 69 Alb. L. Rev. 
985, 985 (2006). 
11 See, e.g., Marie Hojnacki and Lawrence Baum, “New Style” Judicial Campaigns and Voters: Economic Issues 
and Union Members in Ohio, 45 West. Pol. Quart. 921 (1992). 
12 Id. at 944-45. 
3 
 point for pro- and anti-business interests and, consequently, an important political issue in many 
states, is “fought not only in state legislatures but also in state supreme courts.”13  Professors 
Kang and Shepherd characterize tort reform issues as business contributors’ “primary focus in 
state judicial races.”14  One predictable consequence in states that elect judges is that “much of 
the money contributed in judicial races tends to be given by those interested in the shape of tort 
law.”15 
While acknowledging that “any interest group might exert influence over the judiciary,” 
Kang and Shepherd’s work focuses on the influence of pro-business judicial campaign 
contributions on judicial votes in business cases.  Professors Kang and Shepherd attribute their 
focus on business’ potential influence on judicial outcomes to the business lobby’s “unique 
ability to do so.”16  This study seeks to broaden Kang and Shepherd’s scope to include non- (and 
“anti-“) business contributions as well. 
Whether judicial campaign contributions influence judicial votes and case outcomes is, at 
one crucial level, an empirical question.  How best to characterize publicly-elected judges and 
their non-judicial elected counterparts, in contrast, is better understood as a normative question.  
To a large degree, how one understands a publicly-elected state judge’s function informs one’s 
assessments about judicial elections and judicial campaign spending.  Proponents of judicial 
elections, such as Professor Hall, emphasize the similarities that link elected state supreme court 
                                                 
13 Anthony Champagne, Tort Reform and Judicial Selection, 38 Loy. L.A. L. Rev. 1483, 1488 (2005). 
14 Michael S. Kang & Joanna M. Shepherd, The Partisan Price of Justice: An Empirical Analysis of Campaign 
Contributions and Judicial Decisions, 86 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 69, 85 (2011). 
15 Id. (“It is state judge selection that produces the major battles between economic interests that are concerned with 
a state’s tort law.”); see also David A. Logan, Judges, Juries, and the Politics of Tort Reform, 83 U. Cin. L. Rev. 
903, 919-20 (2015). 
16 Kang & Shepherd, supra note 14, at 85. 
4 
 justices and other elected officials.17  For critics of judicial elections, however, this is precisely 
the problem.  Specifically, for many judicial election critics the similar ways in which campaign 
spending influences judicial, legislative, and executive elected officials contribute to problems 
with judicial elections because of the potentially fundamental ways in which the judicial branch 
differs from the legislative and executive branches.18  Consequently, many of the arguments that 
distinguish campaign spending in the judicial and non-judicial electoral contexts pivot on 
distinguishing publicly-elected state judges from other publicly-elected officials. 
  Even the U.S. Supreme Court appears genuinely conflicted over how to frame elected 
judicial actors in the campaign context.  On the one hand, in striking down a Minnesota law 
limiting judicial candidates’ political speech, the Court implicitly recognized the First 
Amendment’s similar purchase when it came to pure political speech, whether in the judicial, 
legislative, or executive electoral contexts.19  In so doing, the White decision in 2002 emphasizes 
the Court’s implicit recognition of similarities between publicly-elected judges and the non-
judicial counterparts. 
In 2015, however, the Court upheld a Florida prohibition on a judicial candidate’s direct 
campaign fundraising solicitations.20  In contrast to the White decision, the Williams-Yulee 
decision suggests that the Court (or at least five Justices) views judicial candidates differently 
than other political candidates.21  Specifically, while the White opinion implicitly frames judicial 
                                                 
17 MELINDA G. HALL, ATTACKING JUDGES: HOW CAMPAIGN ADVERTISING INFLUENCES STATE SUPREME COURT 
ELECTIONS (2015), at 126. 
18 See, e.g., Michael S. Kang & Joanna M. Shepherd, Judging Judicial Elections, 114 Mich. L. Rev. 929, 930 (2016); 
James Sample, Democracy at the Corner of First and Fourteenth: Judicial Campaign Spending and Equality, 66 
N.Y.U. Ann. Surv. Am. L. 727, 756-57 (2011)(arguing that differences in democratic expectations in the courts and 
traditional political arenas justify treating campaign spending in judicial elections differently than in political 
elections).  
19 White, 536 U.S. 765 (2002). 
20 Williams-Yulee, 135 S. Ct. 1656, 575 U.S. __. 
21 Id. at ___ (“Judges are not politicians, even when they come to the bench by way of the ballot.”). 
5 
 candidates as functionally equal to other political candidates for purposes of free speech 
protections, the Williams-Yulee opinion, by contrast, takes another tact by endeavoring to 
distinguish publicly-elected state judges other publicly-elected officials in the campaign 
contributions’ context.22  The Court’s effort to restrict judicial candidates’ fundraising in 
Williams-Yulee rests uneasily with the Court’s prior decision in Buckley v. Valeo where it 
functionally construed campaign contributions and spending as core political speech.23  Indeed, 
critics of the Williams-Yulee decision quickly noted how the Court’s analysis applies a “heavily 
watered-down version of strict scrutiny analysis”—particularly as it relates to the narrowly 
tailored prong—to enable the Court to reach its outcome yet maintain the outward appearance of 
having applied strict judicial scrutiny.24 
At a conceptual level, the contested issues run even deeper.  Whether elected state judges 
are, unlike their elected counterparts in the executive and legislative branches, charged with a 
counter-majoritarian function that is structurally threatened by judicial elections resides at the 
heart of what divides judicial election proponents and critics.  Moreover, more recent Court 
decisions imply a growing unease with “protecting the integrity of the judiciary and maintaining 
the public’s confidence in an impartial judiciary.”25  As well, the Court wants elected judges to 
steer clear of creating an “appearance of impropriety” within a constitutional regime that permits 
judicial candidate campaign speech and some forms of campaign fundraising.26  Finally, within a 
context noted for inevitably conflicting principles and impulses, it remains unclear whether the 
                                                 
22 See, e.g., id. 
23 See Buckley, 424 U.S. 1 (1976). 
24 See, e.g., Noah B. Lindell, Williams-Yulee and the Anomaly of Campaign Finance Law, 126 Yale L.J. 1577, 
1577 (2017). 
25 Williams-Yulee, 135 S. Ct. 1656, 575 U.S. __. 
26 Id. 
6 
 divide separating judicial election proponents and opponents can be bridged at all and, if it can, 
what role empirical scholarship might play in informing arguments. 
Two likely causal pathways help explain relations between judicial campaign 
contributions and judges’ votes that reflect contributors’ interests.27  One includes selection bias 
for the subpool of candidates who prevail in their judicial elections.  Specifically, prevailing 
judges may already possess a preference for (or against) business interests.  Another, more 
subtle, causal mechanism involves judges who, while otherwise agnostic about business 
interests, may favor (or dis-favor) business interests in their votes with an eye towards securing 
future campaign contributions in future judicial elections.  While this study’s data and research 
design are unable to identify which casual pathway might be salient, this study can assess 
whether and, if so, to what degree, campaign contributions from business and non-business 
interests correlate with judges’ votes in business cases. 
The data set used in this study merges state supreme court decisions by 439 state supreme 
court justices in 2,345 concluded business-related cases decided between 2010 and 2012 across 
all 50 states with information on more than 175,000 contribution records that detail every 
reported contribution to every sitting state supreme court justice in each elected state supreme 
court justice’s most recent election.  Judicial campaign contributions to judges were categorized 
based on their source as representing a pro-business, non-business, or anti-business interest. 
The central results from my initial analyses confirm Professor Shepherd’s earlier findings 
about relations between judicial campaign contributions from pro-business interests and judges’ 
pro-business votes.  Additional analyses also identify a new, though related, finding: campaign 
                                                 
27 See Kang & Shepherd, supra note 14, at 72. 
7 
 contributions from non- (and “anti-“) business interests correlate with judges’ anti-business 
votes.  Evidence that non- and anti-business interests also correlate with desired judicial votes is 
important partly because it challenges Kang and Shepherd’s critical assumption about business 
contributors’ “unique” abilities when it comes to influencing judicial votes.28 
The influence of non- and anti-business campaign contributions on judicial votes both 
challenges and complicates traditional critiques against judicial elections that focus on claims 
about business interests’ undue influence.  That is, evidence that business and non-business 
interests can successfully influence judicial outcomes through campaign contributions points in 
different (and possibly conflicting) normative directions.  Even if one agrees that the judicial 
branch qualitatively differs from the political and executive branches in terms of assessing 
campaign contributions’ proper role, that the potential to influence judicial outcomes is available 
to potentially any discrete interest group (willing to invest campaign contributions) dulls the 
dominant, business-centric public criticisms of judicial elections.  Of course, findings from this 
study also plausibly strengthen critiques of judicial elections overall, especially from those who 
view the judicial domain as distinct from other political domains. 
  This Article proceeds in six parts.  Part Two briefly maps out the major judicial selection 
models in the United States for federal and state courts as well as the broad legal terrain that 
structures contests arising out of the judicial campaign context.  In Part Three I summarize the 
leading empirical work, with particular emphasis on Shepherd’s 2013 paper that this study sets 
out to expand.  The data and methodology are described in Part Four.  Results are both presented 
and discussed in Part Five.  Part Six concludes. 
                                                 
28 Id. at 85. 
8 
 2.0.  Judicial Selection and Evolving Legal Terrain 
  While this paper focuses on empirical and normative issues raised by campaign 
contributions in state judicial elections, it remains important to note alternative methods of 
judicial selection exist.  Equally important is that the legal terrain shaping efforts to regulate 
judicial candidates’ conduct and speech as well as judges’ conduct on the bench continues to 
evolve over time. 
2.1.  Judicial Selection Variation 
Many state judges are elected to the bench, and the mechanisms used by states range 
from partisan elections to non-partisan retention elections.  The selection mechanism for Article 
III judges (and Justices) in the federal context, by contrast, involves presidential appointment and 
Senate confirmation.  Once commissioned, federal judges enjoy life tenure, subject only to 
impeachment for conduct that falls below “good Behavior.”29  By removing federal judges’ 
appointments from direct electoral processes and pressures the Founders sought to better insulate 
federal judges from the ever-shifting political winds of the day, promote independent judgment, 
and, it is thought (indeed, perhaps even assumed), enhance justice. 
Of course, appointment-based (or even merit-based) judicial selection models are far 
from immune to criticisms.  Despite important differences separating elective and appointive 
judicial models, the role of politics persists.  Indeed, President Obama’s effort to promote Judge 
Garland from the appeals court to the U.S. Supreme Court during the president’s final year in 
office and many leading Republican senators’ public declarations of their refusal to meet with 
any appointee so close to a general election have only renewed public focus and debate on 
                                                 
29 U.S. Cont., Art. III, section 1. 
9 
 judicial selection as well as politics’ proper role.  Setting aside separation of powers concerns 
and intra-branch rivalries, such debates imply that questions about the role of politics when it 
comes to selecting judges, even appointed judges, persist. 
  It has become received political cant that “unelected” federal judges make decisions that 
inform public life and shape the polity in critical ways.  To be sure, direct access to judicial 
selections by those bound by judicial decisions—through direct or retention elections—simply 
does not exist in the federal sphere.  Moreover, one critical constitutional check on federal 
judges, impeachment, has been invoked only rarely and typically incident to some of the more 
egregious cases of judicial misconduct.30 
  However, citizens are afforded some ability to “pick their brand of justice” through their 
participation in presidential and congressional elections.31  Indeed, with the Robert Bork 
hearings serving as something of a political watershed moment, subsequent presidential political 
campaigns have often featured promises about what kind of judges (and Justices) the candidate 
would nominate if elected.  Similar campaign rhetoric is heard in senatorial campaigns as well.  
Thus, even in the federal judicial space, while perhaps only indirectly, citizens nonetheless 
possess some degree of influence over the selection of judges. 
  In addition, empirical assertions about the comparative advantages (or disadvantages) of 
an elected judiciary are advanced too often as if counterfactual data do not exist.  How various 
states select state supreme court justices, however, supplies quite helpful, if imperfect, variation.  
                                                 
30 For a summary see, e.g., Raoul Berger, Impeachment of Judges and Good Behavior Tenure, 79 Yale L.J. 1475 
(1970). 
31 See generally ROBERT A. DAHL, HOW DEMOCRATIC IS THE AMERICAN CONSTITUTION? (2001). 
10 
 While federal judge selection excludes any direct electoral component, judge selection methods 
across the 50 states vary considerably and, important to this study, include judicial elections. 
  Scholarly attention to state courts and state judge selection is warranted in its own right 
as more than 90 percent of the nation’s judicial work is performed in state courts,32 and 
approximately 90 percent of all state court judges (and state supreme court justices) participate in 
some form of direct electoral activity.33  Insofar as campaign contributions remain one form of 
constitutionally protected core political speech, albeit a regulated one, it is not surprising (indeed, 
inevitable) that state judicial candidates attract campaign funding. 
  What might surprise some, however, is how the magnitude and velocity of campaign 
spending in state judicial elections has increased over time, particularly since the 1980s.  As 
Professors Kang and Shepherd note, since “money buys things,” questions about what judicial 
campaign contributions might be ‘purchasing’ deserve close attention.34  Various threats posed 
by judicial campaign contributions to the fair administration of justice (or even the appearance of 
fairness) have been considered in detail by others.35  After exploring the efficacy of ‘purchasing’ 
judicial outcomes in the state context from an empirical perspective this paper goes on to 
consider whether the state judicial experience differs in material ways from efforts to influence 
judicial selection in the federal context. 
  At this juncture it is important to make clear what this paper does not consider.  I take as 
a given that judicial canons, state rules, norms, etc., correctly regulate against any judicial 
                                                 
32 See, e.g., Shirley S. Abrahamson, Chief Justice, Wisc. Supreme Court, The Ballot and the Bench, address at the 
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. Lecture on State Courts and Social Justice (Mar. 15, 2000), in 76 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 
973, 976 (2001). 
33 Roy A. Schotland, New Challenges to States’ Judicial Selection, 95 Geo. L.J. 1077, 1105 (2007) (app. 2). 
34 Michael S. Kang & Joanna M. Shepherd, The Partisan Foundations of Judicial Campaign Finance, 86 So. Cal. L. 
Rev. 1239, 1240 (2013). 
35 See, e.g., SHUGERMAN, supra note 1. 
11 
 misconduct which would include any judge who bases a legal decision or ruling exclusively in 
response to a judicial campaign contribution.  Such activity offends any fair-minded 
understanding of what justice might mean.  Moreover, I also assume that a well-functioning 
judicial recusal doctrine, despite its limitations, provides one important instrument that can 
reduce conflicts between a judge’s private interests and the administration of impartial justice.  
By pushing to one side efforts to, quite literally, ‘purchase’ a judge (or a judicial outcome) 
though judicial campaign contributions, I focus instead on the empirical and normative contours 
of the more granular and nuanced constituent efforts to ‘purchase’ a judicial philosophy or 
perspective through judicial campaign contributions. 
2.2.  Judicial Elections’ Evolving Legal Terrain 
  Understanding how the interaction of campaign spending and judicial elections heightens 
potential tensions requires an understanding of relevant (and evolving) legal doctrines in this 
particular context.  The relevant doctrines include those relating to the First Amendment and 
campaign speech and spending and, more recently, how judicial campaign contributions 
implicate a judge’s recusal duty. 
  The Supreme Court’s Buckley v. Valeo36 decision in 1976, construing political campaign 
contributions and expenditures as core political speech (although allowing for regulations on 
contributions), continues to wield important influence. In 2002, the Court explored the contours 
of core political speech rights in the judicial electoral context. In White, the Court struck down a 
Minnesota Supreme Court canon of judicial conduct that prohibited candidates seeking elected 
                                                 
36 424 U.S. 1 (1976). 
12 
 judicial office from “announc[ing] his or her views on disputed legal or political issues” on First 
Amendment grounds.37 
Writing for the Court, Justice Scalia began by noting that strict judicial scrutiny was 
warranted as the Minnesota canon sought a content-based speech restriction that implicated the 
First Amendment’s core.38  While conceding the state’s interest in the impartial administration of 
justice as well as promoting its appearance may well be a “compelling” one, the Court 
nonetheless concluded that the speech restriction was not sufficiently narrowly tailored.  The 
Court also noted that the Minnesota judicial canon itself separately treated efforts by judicial 
candidates to announce their particular views on legal issues from candidates’ efforts to “pledge 
or promise” to deliver specific judicial conduct upon election to office.39  While the White 
opinion expressly side-steps any resolution involving the latter,40 the Court construes the latter’s 
mere existence to render restrictions on the former more problematic. 
Nested within the Court’s opinion, however, and expressly engaged by the dissenting 
Justices, is the assumption that “judicial candidates should have the same freedom to express 
themselves on matters of public importance” as do all other elected officials.41  That is, while 
five Justices implicitly refused to analytically distinguish judicial candidates from candidates for 
other publicly elected offices, at least four dissenting Justices advanced such a distinction, noting 
“the critical difference between the work of a judge and the work of other public officials.”42  To 
the dissenting Justices, their impulse that “[j]udges are not politicians”43 carries over to those 
                                                 
37 White, 536 U.S. at 770. 
38 Id. at 774. 
39 Id. at 770. 
40 Id. (“… and a prohibition that is not challenged here and on which we express no view.”). 
41 Id. at 797 (Stevens, J., Souter, J., Ginsburg, J., and Breyer, J., dissenting). 
42 Id. at 798. 
43 Id. at 821. 
13 
 state judges and justices who must submit themselves to the political processes and the 
electorate. 
  Having decided that political campaign contributions and spending constitute core 
political speech in Buckley and that state judicial candidates were free to engage with contested 
legal and political issues decided in White, in 2009 the Supreme Court was asked to speak 
directly to some practical problems posed by judicial campaign contributions, specifically how 
an elected judge’s campaign contributions implicated recusal obligations. 
In Caperton, the Supreme Court recognized for the first time Due Process concerns 
arising out of the potential for judicial bias flowing from campaign contributions from a litigant 
appearing before a judge who was the recipient of financial support from that litigant.  While 
Caperton is technically a “recusal” case, the salient facts make clear its relevance to the 
challenges arising out of campaign contributions to judges running for election to the bench.44 
The key facts in Caperton are both straightforward and compelling.  In 1998, Harmon 
Mining Company successfully sued A.T. Massey Coal Company for a contract breach.  In 2002, 
A.T. Massey Coal Company appealed the $50 million trial court verdict favoring Harmon 
Mining.  Between the trial court decision and a subsequent appeal to West Virginia’s Supreme 
Court, Don Blankenship, Massey Coal Company’s CEO, spent $3 million in 2004 to help ensure 
Brent Benjamin’s election to the West Virginia Supreme Court.  Four years after his election to 
the West Virginia Supreme Court, Justice Benjamin refused calls for his recusal from hearing 
and participating in A.T. Massey’s appeal.  Not only did he refuse recusal motions, but on two 
                                                 
44 Indeed, while formally set in a fictitious Mississippi town, it is likely that the political and legal controversy 
surrounding the Caperton case provided some inspiration for the 2008 best-selling novel by John Grisham, THE 
APPEAL (2008). 
14 
 separate occasions Justice Benjamin joined a 3-2 majority that ruled in favor of A.T. Massey and 
reversed the original 2002 $50 million trial verdict.45  Harmon Mining Company then appealed 
to the U.S. Supreme Court, arguing that Justice Benjamin’s participation was improper. 
The U.S. Supreme Court agreed with Harmon Mining, and, writing for the Court, Justice 
Kennedy’s opinion emphasizes the pending litigation that coincided with the timing of 
Blankenship’s significant campaign contribution to (now) Justice Benjamin as well as 
Blakenship’s personal financial interest in a favorable disposition of the A. T. Massey case.  As a 
consequence, Justice Kennedy concluded that, in such a circumstance, Justice Benjamin should 
have recused himself from participating in the Massey litigation due to an unacceptable 
“probability of bias” which constituted a threat to the Constitution’s Due Process Clause.46 
  In a vigorous dissent, Justice Roberts emphasized the uncertainty that necessarily flows 
from the Court’s departure from two clear situations that require a judicial recusal: “when the 
judge has a financial interest in the outcome of the case, and when the judge is trying a defendant 
for certain criminal contempts.”47  Justice Roberts voiced deep skepticism about judicial efforts 
to define when a “probability of bias” exists and, if it does, what specific probabilistic level 
warrants judicial recusal.48  To underscore his skepticism, Justice Roberts went on to list 40 
specific questions, many salient to the judicial campaign contribution context, that, in the minds 
of four dissenting justices, raise uncertainty about whether a judge should recuse under the 
                                                 
45 See Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co., Inc., 2007 WL 4150960 (Nov. 21, 2007); Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal 
Co., Inc., 223 W.Va. 624 (Apr. 3, 2008). 
46 Caperton, 556 U.S. at 887-88. 
47 Id. at 890 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). 
48 Id. at 890-91. 
15 
 guidance provided by the Court’s Caperton decision.  One consequence of the increased judicial 
uncertainty, Justice Roberts predicted, included a flood of recusal motions.49 
  Importantly, the Court’s opinion and the dissents in Caperton implicitly assume an 
empirical relation between campaign contributions to judicial candidates and their subsequent 
votes as judges.  On one level, such an assumption makes obvious—indeed, intuitive—sense.  In 
the political realm, not only is such a relation between campaign contributions and political 
candidates assumed, but is frequently expected, if not demanded, by contributors. 
  Of course, it is also important not to ignore complicating wrinkles in Caperton that are 
far less appreciated no doubt because they run against and cloud a compelling public narrative.  
While the Caperton litigation and events involving Massey Coal and West Virginia Supreme 
Court Justice Benjamin are often pointed to as an “easy” example of all that can go wrong with 
judicial elections, Justice Benjamin’s actual voting record on cases involving the Massey Coal 
Company (and other, related, Massey Energy holdings) confounds the received public narrative.  
According to a West Virginia Supreme Court press release, prepared by that court’s 
Administrative Office, during his initial four years on the Court Justice Benjamin voted against 
Massey Energy’s legal interests 81.6% of the time.50  Before the Caperton litigation, in other 
cases that also involved Massey Coal none of the parties petitioned for Justice Benjamin’s 
recusal.51  Thus, despite Justice Benjamin’s complicated judicial voting record in cases involving 
                                                 
49 Id. at 902. It warrants note that, thus far, the scholarly consensus is that Chief Justice Robert’s prediction of a 
flood of litigation activity stimulated by Justice Kennedy’s opinion in Caperton has been largely unfulfilled. See, 
e.g., Bruce A. Green, Fear of the Unknown: Judicial Ethics After Caperton, 60 Syracuse L. Rev. 229 (2010). 
50 West Virginia State Supreme Court News, Administration Office, Summary of Chief Justice Benjamin’s 
Dispositive Voting Record Regarding Massey Energy Cases from 1/1/2005 to 12/31/2008 (2 March 2009). The 
analysis of Justice Benjamin’s Massey Energy-related voting record excludes votes on such non-dispositive matters 
as motions for time extensions, exceeding page limitations on briefs, etc. Id.  See also, Roland D. Rotunda, 
Codifying Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co., 42 McGeorge L. Rev. 95, 103 (2010);  
51 See, e.g., See U.S. Steel Mining Co. v. Helton, 631 S.E.2d 559 (W. Va. 2005); Helton v. Reed, 638 S.E.2d 160 
(W. Va. 2006) (where Justice Benjamin voted against Massey companies at the merits stage); see also McNeely v. 
16 
 Massey Energy (and Massey Coal company), the prevailing public narrative surrounding Justice 
Benjamin characterizes him (fairly or not) as having been “bought” buy Blankenship to serve on 
the West Virginia Supreme Court on behalf of Massey Coal’s interests.52 
  A more recent decision in Williams-Yulee further evidences the Court’s growing wariness 
about and unease with practical implications flowing from elected judges.  In Williams-Yulee, the 
Court upheld Florida’s Code of Judicial Conduct which prohibits state judicial candidates from 
personally soliciting campaign funds.53  During her judicial campaign, Williams-Yulee sent a 
mass-mailing fundraising letter to potential contributors and then posted her letter to a campaign 
website.  Although she lost her election, the Florida Bar initiated a disciplinary review, 
concluded that she violated Florida’s Canon of Judicial Ethics, and fined Williams-Yulee 
$1,860.30.54 
  Williams-Yulee challenged the Florida Canon of Judicial Ethics’ prohibition of a judicial 
candidate’s direct, personal solicitation of campaign funds on First Amendment grounds. While 
only a plurality of the Justices concluded that Florida’s canon triggered traditional strict judicial 
scrutiny, the Court administered what at least one commentator has described as a “heavily 
watered-down version of strict scrutiny.”55  Concluding that the canon’s goal of “protecting the 
integrity of the judiciary and maintain the public’s confidence in an impartial judiciary” was, 
indeed, a compelling interest,56 and that a restriction on personal solicitation activities so to 
                                                 
Independence Coal Co., No. 042156 (W. Va. Feb. 9, 2005); Brown v. Rawl Sales & Processing Co., No. 06-1700, 
(W. Va. Sept. 7, 2007) (where he ruled against Massey at the petition stage). 
52 Richard Gillespie, Buying a Judicial Seat for Appeal: Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Company, Inc., Is Right Out 
of a John Grisham Novel, 30 J. Nat’l Ass’n Admin. L. Judiciary 309, 315 (2010). 
53 Williams-Yulee, Williams-Yulee, 135 S. Ct. 1656, 575 U.S. __. 
54 Fla. Bar. V. Williams-Yulee, 138 So. 3d 379, 384-85 (Fla. 2014)(per curium). Florida’s Code of Judicial Conduct, 
Canon 7C(1) resembles the American Bar Association’s Model Code of Judicial Conduct. 
55 Lindell, supra note 24, at 1577. 
56 Williams-Yulee, Williams-Yulee, 135 S. Ct. 1656, 575 U.S. __. 
17 
 avoid an “appearance of impropriety” was narrowly tailored, the Court went on to uphold 
Florida’s Canon 7(C)(1).57 
  Setting aside the Court’s specific application of the narrowly tailored prong analysis in 
Williams-Yulee,58 as a descriptive matter it remain accurate to note that when the Court applies 
traditional First Amendment doctrine—and the strict scrutiny test in particular—to campaign 
finance restrictions in the context of non-judicial elections, the result are complicated and mixed.  
For example, when it comes to non-judicial candidates’ ability to fundraise or spend their own 
money, First Amendment rights typically prevail, though Members of Congress are not permitted 
to solicit funds from their governmental offices.   Despite this palpable trend, in applying these 
general principles to state judicial candidates, the Court departed from its usual path in Williams-
Yulee.  Notably, the Court appeared to diminish concerns about how Florida’s Canon 7(C)(1) 
burdened judicial candidates’ speech rights in an almost transparently self-conscious manner.59 
  The dissenters in Williams-Yulee rightly point out that Florida’s Canon 7(C)(1) bans 
direct candidate financial solicitations in any form and to any person.  That is, the Canon’s 
prohibition is not necessarily limited to only those solicitations likely to create any appearance of 
impropriety.  Florida’s ban also applies even where those solicited might never have a legal 
interest in a case decided before the soliciting judicial candidate.60  Consequently, Williams-
                                                 
57 For a critique of the Court’s First Amendment analysis of regulations of judicial elections, see, e.g., Note, 
Williams-Yulee v. Florida Bar, 129 Harv. L. Rev. 231 (2015).  Language in Florida’s Canon 7(C)(1) resembles 
language in rules for federal appellate judges and Justices.  See Code of Conduct for United States Judges, Canon 2 
(“A Judge Should Avoid Impropriety and the Appearance of Impropriety in All Activities”). 
58 In his dissent, Justice Alito described Florida’s Canon 7(C)(1) as “about as narrowly tailored as a burlap bag.” 
Williams-Yulee, 135 S. Ct., at 1685 (Alito, J., dissenting). 
59 Williams-Yulee, 135 S. Ct., at 1668-70. 
60 Id. at 1679 (Scalia, J., dissenting; id. at 1685 (Alito, J., dissenting). 
18 
 Yulee implies that Court’s concerns about the potential for corruption and the appearance of 
impropriety are palpably higher in the judicial context than in the non-judicial context. 
  The Court’s critical—yet implicit—distinction between judicial and non-judicial 
elections presents in at least two critical ways.  First, when it comes to a compelling 
governmental interest, comparing Citizens United and Williams-Yulee suggests that for non-
judicial candidates the main concern pivots on the potential for a quid pro quo while for judicial 
elections the Court appears to worry about the appearance of impropriety and the public 
perception of judicial integrity. Second, a similar distinction emerges in the Court’s application 
of the narrowly-tailored requirement. The Court has consistently permitted non-judicial 
candidates to directly solicit funds, though not from a candidate’s official governmental office.  
In Williams-Yulee and the judicial electoral context, by contrast, the Court permitted Florida’s 
total ban of direct fundraising solicitations by judicial candidates. 
  More fundamentally, however, the Court felt compelled to characterize judicial and non-
judicial candidates for elected public office differently and in ways that triggered different 
judicial scrutiny over campaign finance issues. In an effort to climb out from under its earlier 
decision in Citizens United, the majority in Williams-Yulee took great pains to argue that judicial 
and non-judicial candidates are expected to act and campaign differently.61  The Court’s 
decisions simply assert that states have a broader interest in preserving the appearance of judicial 
integrity than in preserving a similar appearance for those seeking legislative and executive 
offices.62 
                                                 
61 Id. at 1667. 
62 Id. 
19 
 3.0.  Prior Empirical Scholarship 
This study builds on and extends prior scholarship by Professors Kang and Shepherd 
which used an earlier (1995-1998) state supreme court data set. 63 Their earlier work found 
strong relations between the probability of an elected state supreme court justice’s pro-business 
vote and the amount (and proportion) of campaign contributions that these justices received from 
pro-business interests. 
Kang and Shepherd’s findings in the business litigation context generally comport with 
analogous empirical work focusing on other litigation sectors.  Professor Shepherd has also 
found that interest group judicial campaign contributions increase “the probability that judges 
will vote for the litigants whom those interest groups favor.”64  In addition, an array of smaller-
scale studies of individual states note relations between lawyers’ campaign contributions and 
case outcomes when those lawyers (or the lawyers’ interests) appear in court.65 
  Professor Shepherd’s more (2013) recent empirical work focusing on the potential 
influence wielded by pro-business interests through judicial campaign contributions to state 
supreme court justices reinforces important—and uncomfortable—questions.  Examining 
business-related cases decided by state supreme courts from 2010-12, Professor Shepherd’s 2013 
report, “Justice At Risk,” similar to her prior work, finds “a significant relationship between 
                                                 
63 See Michael S. Kang & Joanna M. Shepherd, The Partisan Price of Justice: An Empirical Analysis of Campaign 
Contributions and Judicial Decisions, 86 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 69 (2011). 
64 Joanna M. Shepherd, Money, Politics, and Impartial Justice, 58 Duke L.J. 623, 669-72 & tbls.7 & 8 (2009). 
65 See, e.g., Stephen J. Ware, Politics, and Judicial Decisions: A Case Study of Arbitration Law in Alabama, 15 J.L. 
& Pol. 645, 661 (1999) (noting the influence of plaintiff and defense lawyers’ contributions and favorable arbitration 
rulings by the Alabama Supreme Court); Eric N. Waltenburg & Charles S. Lopeman, Tort Decisions and Campaign 
Dollars, 28 Southeastern Pol. Rev. 241, 256 (2000) (noting the influence of plaintiff and defense lawyers’ 
contributions and favorable torts cases in Ohio, Alabama, and Kentucky); and Madhavi McCall, The Politics of 
Judicial Elections: The Influence of Campaign Contributions on the Voting Patterns of Texas Supreme Court 
Justices, 1994-1997, 31 Pol. & Pol’y 314, 315, 330 (2003) (finding that business-related judicial campaign 
contributions influenced case outcomes in the Texas Supreme Court). 
20 
 business group contributions to state supreme court justices and the voting of those justices in 
cases involving business matters.”66  Fueled by her empirical findings, Shepherd’s normative 
perspective on the issue is clear when she characterizes campaign contributions’ role in judicial 
elections as “destructive.”67  While Shepherd’s recent brief report represents another important 
contribution to the literature, her analyses also open an array additional research questions.  This 
Article examines one of the research questions prompted by Shepherd’s report. 
  Shepherd’s 2013 report contributes to, and builds on, a nascent—through growing—
empirical literature that endeavors to assess and model judicial outcomes.68  As I discuss more 
fully below, core findings from Shepherd’s 2013 study stood up well to replication efforts as 
well as most alternative model specifications.  Setting aside one’s priors about the how to best 
reconcile constitutionally-protected core political speech, judicial campaign contributions, and 
the various selection mechanisms states employ for judges and justices, Shepherd’s (and that of 
others) broad critique advanced against business interests’ participation in judicial elections—
even if empirically accurate—may either not go far enough or, paradoxically, too far.  And only 
after deeper empirical exploration do the more abstract principles fall out of comparatively easy 
focus and nettlesome granularity and complicating wrinkles emerge. 
                                                 
66 Joanna Shepherd, Justice at Risk: An Empirical Analysis of Campaign Contributions and Judicial Decisions (ACS 
Report, June 2013), at p.1. 
67 Id. at 2. 
68 See, e.g., Stephen J. Ware, Politics, and Judicial Decisions: A Case Study of Arbitration Law in Alabama, 15 J.L. 
& Pol. 645, 661 (1999) (noting the influence of plaintiff and defense lawyers’ contributions and favorable arbitration 
rulings by the Alabama Supreme Court); Eric N. Waltenburg & Charles S. Lopeman, Tort Decisions and Campaign 
Dollars, 28 Southeastern Pol. Rev. 241, 256 (2000) (noting the influence of plaintiff and defense lawyers’ 
contributions and favorable torts cases in Ohio, Alabama, and Kentucky); and Madhavi McCall, The Politics of 
Judicial Elections: The Influence of Campaign Contributions on the Voting Patterns of Texas Supreme Court 
Justices, 1994-1997, 31 Pol. & Pol’y 314, 315, 330 (2003) (finding that business-related judicial campaign 
contributions influenced case outcomes in the Texas Supreme Court). 
21 
   Moreover, despite its contributions, a few factors, notably the potential for measurement 
error, limit the strength of Shepherd’s 2013 findings.  The data set (described more fully below) 
includes state supreme court decisions reached between 2010-12 and in states where state 
supreme court justices were elected in some manner (i.e., retention, partisan, or non-partisan 
elections).69  The data set leverages the justices’ political party affiliation as a proxy (albeit 
imperfect) for judicial ideology.  As Professor Kritzer observes, however, those state supreme 
court justices that confronted partisan elections prior to 2010 include those from southern states 
where “at least some of these justices were business-oriented Democrats.”70  As such, the specter 
of measurement error lurks. 
Any data set limitations notwithstanding, because my study extends Shepherd’s 2013 
report and data set it is particularly important to note how my study differs.  From the 
perspective of research design, Shepherd’s focus on business cases (specifically business cases 
that reached state supreme courts between 2010 and 2012 which involved a business and a non-
business litigant) makes good and obvious sense.  After all, efforts to distill judicial outcomes 
require careful strategies to “keep all else constant,” or at least as much as possible.  Despite 
important variation within “business litigation,” a focus on business litigation helps rein in the 
sometimes tremendously complicating variation that exists across various cases types and 
litigating parties.  Filtering the data set further to include only cases involving a business and a 
non-business business litigant facilitates efforts to distill each individual justice’s vote as either 
“pro-“ or “anti-business.”  The distillation of judicial votes to either a “pro-business” or “anti-
business” characterization is particularly helpful for broader generalizations to the tort reform 
                                                 
69 See infra, Subpart 4.1. 
70 See Kritzer, supra note 2, at 14. 
22 
 context that is frequently dominated by “pro-business” (or “Chamber of Commerce”) and “anti-
business” (frequently union) interests. 
  Indeed, Shepherd’s careful attention to research design only enhances a readers’ 
confidence in her results.  Observing that “[a]lthough any interest group might exert influence 
over the judiciary, business groups may be unique in their ability to do so,”71 Professors Kang 
and Shepherd’s existing work focuses on pro-business contributions’ potential influence.  What 
distinguishes business and non-business contributors, according to Kang and Shepherd, includes 
the former’s “substantial resources,” more focused political and legal agenda, greater “stake” in 
the outcome of judicial elections.72 
While Shepherd’s data set is certainly well-suited to (and, indeed, designed for) her focus 
on pro-business interests’ potential influence on judicial outcomes through campaign 
contributions, the data set also permits—even invites—further related exploration in two 
important ways.  First, the data set includes information on each justice’s campaign contributions 
from business interests as well as the total amount of each justice’s campaign contributions.  As 
such, simple data manipulations generated information on each justice’s non-business campaign 
contributions.  While each justice’s non-business campaign contributions certainly warrant 
exploration, the nature of the “non-business” campaign contributions precludes strong 
generalizations.  The interpretative limitations and ambiguity flow from the composition of the 
non-business contributions.  Sources of “non-business” judicial campaign contributions range 
from a judicial candidate’s own personal contributions to those from, for example, labor unions.  
While limiting my characterization of this sub-pool of campaign contributions as merely “non-
                                                 
71 Kang & Shepherd, supra note 14, at 85 (arguing that when it comes to influencing judicial votes, “business groups 
may be unique in their ability to do so”). 
72 Id. 
23 
 business” may reflect over-caution, the varied and wide-ranging sources of funds that compose 
non-business contributions preclude a stronger characterization.73 
Second, while the “non-business” sub-pool of campaign contributions may be inherently 
ambiguous, the data set also identifies and codes those non-business contributions from labor 
unions and democratic political party committees.  Contributions from these two sources are far 
less ambiguous and are more plausibly characterized as “anti-business.”  After all, labor unions 
enjoy a robust history opposing management and Shepherd’s paper exploits a judge’s political 
party as an ideological control variable signaling a judge’s posture to business interests.74   
Separate analyses focusing on the sub-pool of anti-business campaign contributions not only 
permits a stronger characterization of the nature of such contributions, but they also serve as a 
robustness check on the non-business findings. 
  In addition to expanding Shepherd’s work by exploring alternative dependent variables, 
my models depart in a few (albeit minor) technical ways from Shepherd’s.  First, while 
Shepherd’s main model construes business contributions in terms of their raw total as well as in 
terms of a percentage of total judicial campaign contributions, my analyses focus only on 
business (and non-business and anti-business) contributions as a percentage of total campaign 
contributions.  Second, because the political science and empirical legal literatures on judicial 
decisionmaking typically include a measure of how much time remains on a judge’s (or a 
governor’s) elected term when a decision was reached, my models include a dummy variable 
                                                 
73 Professor Shepherd herself briefly considers this issue in a footnote. While noting that the non-business 
contributions include those from “interests often opposed to business,” Shepherd felt that reflexively construing all 
“non-business” contributions as “anti-business,” invited measurement error.  See Shepherd, Risk, supra note 66, at 
22, n.64. 
74 For one perspective on labor unions’ uneasy relation with management over time see, e.g., MELVYN DUBOFSKY, 
AMERICAN LABOR SINCE THE NEW DEAL (1971). For one relatively recent essay exploring labor unions’ traditional 
political support for democrats see, e.g., Edsall, Thomas, Republicans Sure Love to Hate Unions, The New York 
Times (Nov. 18, 2014), A__. (op-ed) 
24 
 signaling whenever a justice voted on a case with two or fewer years remaining on her elected 
term to the bench. 
Third, Shepherd’s models include dummy variables identifying democrat and republican 
justices.  The reference group in Shepherd’s report, for interpretative purposes, involves those 
justices whose political affiliation was either missing or coded for something other than 
democrat or republican.  As I describe in greater detail below, my models include only one 
dummy variable identifying either democrat or republican justices.  (Alternative specifications 
include dummy variables for “democrat” and “republican,” respectively.)  In this way, my model 
specifications consciously “stack-the-deck” against the potential salience of a justice’s political 
affiliation.  Thus, where a justice’s political affiliation achieves statistical significance my coding 
decisions should increase readers’ confidence in the finding.  As I describe below, however, my 
coding decisions also contributed to some political salience results that depart slightly from 
Shepherd’s earlier results. 
4.0.  Data, Methodology, and Research Design 
To test the possible influence of campaign contributions from pro-, non-, and anti-
business sources on state supreme court justices’ votes in cases where one of the litigating parties 
is a business interest, I use a data set constructed by Professor Shepherd that itself is the product 
of four discrete data sets, each briefly described below.  First, a team of independent researchers 
from Emory University School collected and coded state supreme court decisions (N=30,355) 
between 2010 and 2012 and across all 50 states.  A sub-set of this data set, 21,105 entries (69.5 
percent), involved cases where the identified business interest was on one—and only one—side 
of the litigation.  This filtering was necessary for research design purposes as outcomes in these 
cases facilitate an assessment of the degree to which, if any, business campaign contributions 
25 
 may have informed justices’ votes in business-related cases.  For each case the researchers coded 
whether each participating justice, sitting as a member of a multi-judge appellate panel, cast 
either a pro- or anti-business vote in a case. 
A second data set includes information on the more than 175,000 contribution records 
that detail every reported contribution to every sitting state supreme court justice between 2010-
2012 in each elected state supreme court justice’s most recent election.  These data were 
collected by the National Institute on Money in State Politics (“Institute”), a non-partisan, 
nonprofit charitable organization that focuses on data gathering on campaign finance activity in 
all 50 states.   The Institute receives the data in either electronic or paper form from state 
disclosure agencies.  The Institute assigned each donor an economic interest code based on 
information included in the disclosure reports as well as deeper independent research into the 
donor’s economic background and interests.  From the Institute data, campaign contribution data 
for all judges in the sample data who were candidates in both partisan and nonpartisan state 
supreme court races were computed. 
A third data set includes political party affiliations (if any) for each of the 439 state 
supreme court justices and a fourth contains state-specific information on how each state selects 
and retains its supreme court justices.  Once merged, the final data set includes justice-level 
information on 439 state supreme court justices who participated in 2,345 concluded business-
related cases, every justice’s vote in each case, along with an array of contextual and background 
information (on the justice, campaign contributions, case, court, and state) that might help 
explain the vote. 
4.1.  Description of Key Variables 
26 
   The following key variables explore the relation between justices’ votes favoring a 
business litigant and judicial campaign contributions from business and non-business interests.  
To better isolate the independent influence of campaign contributions, the models include an 
array of standard control variables. 
4.1.1.  Dependent Variable 
  The dependent variable is a dummy variable signaling when a justice voted in favor of 
the business litigant.  A judicial vote is coded as “pro-business” if the end result favored or 
advantaged the business litigant, regardless of whether the actual judge vote took the form of a 
reversal, affirmance, or damage award alteration.  In model specifications that explore the 
influence of non- and anti-business campaign contributions, the dependent variable signals when 
a justice voted in favor on the non-business litigant. 
4.1.2.  Key Independent Variables of Interest 
  The key independent variables of interest include judicial campaign contributions from 
pro-, non-, and anti-business interests.  While an exact measure of a pro-business interest eludes, 
I followed Shepherd’s coding convention and defined pro-business interests campaign 
contributions to include those from agriculture, communications, construction, defense, energy, 
finance and real estate, and “general” business sources.75  Non-business contributions were 
computed to include all financial contributions that came from sources other than those identified 
                                                 
75 For robustness purposes, and to tether this work with prior, related work, alternative supplemental specifications 
considered a more narrow definition of “pro-business interests” that included only business-related contributions 
from finance and real estate, “general” business, and health industry sources.  Prior literature defines a narrower 
definition of business interests as those aligning with “conservative” interests and agenda. (See, e.g., Kang & 
Shepherd, Partisan, supra note 34, at 1271.)  Unpublished results from these alternative specifications are generally 
consistent with a broader definition of pro-business contributions. 
27 
 as a pro-business source.76  Finally, anti-business contributions, a sub-pool of the non-business 
contributions, include only those contributions from either labor unions or democratic party 
political committees. 
Insofar as the raw total amount of judicial campaign contributions from pro-, non-, and 
anti-business sources varied across judges, along with variation in a justice’s total campaign 
contributions, all pro-, non-, and anti-business judicial campaign contributions are expressed as a 
percentage of each justice’s total campaign contributions.  As Professor Shepherd notes, “this is 
likely a more accurate measure of business influence [on a particular justice] because the impact 
of a contribution likely depends on its importance relative to other contributions.”77 
While the pro-, non-, and anti-business contributions are expressed as a percentage of 
each justice’s total amount of campaign contributions to get a better sense as to their relative 
contribution, the magnitude of a justice’s campaign contributions also warrants attention.  
Accordingly, all of the model specifications include a variable reflecting the raw total of each 
justice’s campaign contributions.  Finally, all judicial campaign contributions are expressed as 
natural logs. 
4.1.3.  Control Variables 
  All model specifications include various control variables at the case, justice, and state 
levels.  In addition, because the outcome of individual cases within a state or by the same justice 
                                                 
76 That is, non-business contributions equaled total contributions minus pro-business contributions. 
77 Shepherd, Risk, supra note 66, at 10. Nonetheless, as a robustness check I re-ran in supplemental analyses 
(unreported) models whose results are presented in tbls.1-3, infra. Not surprisingly, substituting raw totals for 
percentages as a measure of business contributions to judicial campaigns did not materially affect the substantive 
results. 
28 
 might not include the necessary independence from one another, case outcomes are clustered at 
the state- and individual justice-levels. 
  While cases in this study are limited to business litigation (signaled by the presence of a 
business litigant), important variation can exist within business cases.  Obviously, a case’s 
underlying legal merits, to some degree, inform a justice’s vote and the legal strength of business 
cases can vary.  In this context, it is possible that some of the business cases heard by state 
supreme courts were either so strong or weak on the legal merits that justices voted for (or 
against) the business interest independent of any campaign contributions received from pro-, 
non-, or anti-business interests or the justices’ ideological preferences (signaled by a judge’s 
political party affiliation or, if none existed, by imputing to a judge an appointing governor’s 
political party).78 
  How to measure a case’s underlying legal strength, however, remains contested.  By 
definition, every case in this study persisted through a trial and, in most states, some level of 
intermediate appellate review before it reached a state supreme court for resolution.  Presumably, 
and consistent with case selection theory, cases whose underlying legal merits that strongly tilt in 
either direction (either pro-plaintiff or pro-defendant) would likely have succumbed to settlement 
pressures rather than persisting through state supreme court review.  Obviously, while Priest-
Klein theory implies that only cases where some degree of objective uncertainty exists about a 
case’s outcome would persist to a state supreme court for disposition (and, if so, this would result 
in win rates that approximate 50 percent), empirical work makes clear how important variation 
                                                 
78 For a discussion of the robustness of political party as a proxy for a judge’s ideological preferences, see, e.g., 
Gregory C. Sisk & Michael Heise, Judges and Ideology: Public and Academic Debates About Statistical Measures, 
99 Nw. Univ. L. Rev. 743 (2005). 
29 
 exists in terms of observed win rates across case types.79  What is equally clear, however, is that 
some of the assumptions underneath the Priest-Klein prediction, including asymmetric 
information, similar stakes invested by both parties to a lawsuit, and accurate ex ante 
assessments about a case’s underlying legal merits, do not hold with the precision that theory 
might imply. 
  In an effort to control for the underlying legal strength of the cases (however 
imperfectly), I incorporate the clever case strength variable crafted by Professor Shepherd.  In 
constructing a measure of case strength, Professor Shepherd initially estimated a model without a 
case strength variable to assess the most likely number of pro-business votes for the state justices 
hearing the case.  The estimated number of pro-business votes exploits information on each 
justice’s political party affiliation.  By backing-out the actual number of pro-business votes 
observed in the case decision one gains some sense of the underlying strength of the case’s legal 
merits. 
To illustrate, consider a model estimation predicting that five of the seven state justices 
would vote in favor of the business interest.  If in the actual case six of the seven justices voted 
in favor of the business interest, the value of the case strength variable in this case would be 
positive suggesting that the underlying legal strength of the case is stronger than predicted.  If, in 
contrast, only two of the seven justices voted in favor of the business interest, the case strength 
variable would be negative, indicating a comparatively weaker case on the legal merits.  By 
computing the difference (if any) between the predicted (modeled) number of pro-business votes 
and the actual, observed number of pro-business votes in each case generates the case strength 
                                                 
79 For a recent critique of the Priest-Klein “50 percent” hypothesis, see Yoon-Ho Alex Lee & Daniel Klerman, The 
Priest-Klein Hypothesis: Proofs and Generality, 48 Int’l Rev. L. & Econ. 59 (2016). 
30 
 variable which provides some insight into a case’s underlying legal strength that will influence 
judicial outcomes intendent of judicial campaign contributions from business interests. The 
inclusion of the case strength variable as a control is designed to help isolate the potential unique 
influence of campaign contributions from pro-, non-, and anti-business interests on justices’ 
decisions in business cases. 
  To further address possible selection effect influences, a final case-level control variable 
signals when then petitioner was the business litigant (in the pro-business model) and the non-
business litigant (for the non- and anti-business models). 
  At the individual justice-level, Professor Shepherd’s 2013 analysis includes dummy 
variables for both republican and democratic justices as an (imperfect) proxy for judicial 
ideology.  Consequently, for interpretative purposes, the appropriate reference for each political 
party dummy variable is the comparatively smallest group of justices (almost 12 percent) who 
are either a member of a political party of something other than republican or democrats or, in 
contrast for whom information on their political affiliation is missing. 
  My analyses, by contrast, reflect a slightly different coding decision on how best to treat 
judges whose political affiliation is either unknown, missing, or something other than republican 
or democrat.  By including in my models only one dummy variable for a justice’s political 
affiliation (republican or democrat), my model facilitates a more intuitive reference point (e.g., 
republican justices as compared to all other justices who are not republican).  Moreover, such a 
coding strategy is also structurally more conservative insofar as it treats all unknowns as 
something other than what the coefficient captures.  Insofar as my coding convention is 
structured to mute the attribute I test for, where a justice’s political affiliation variable achieves 
statistical significance confidence about its actual influence should increase. 
31 
   Finally, Shepherd’s models omit any information on how much time remains on a 
justice’s elected term when she voted in each case.  Political science literature on judicial 
outcomes emphasizes how judicial conduct may be influenced as justices approach electoral 
events, particularly in the criminal law domain.80  As a result, my model includes a dummy 
variable that signals when a judge voted in a case within two years of the end of a judicial term. 
  The models also include an array of state-level controls, beginning with variables 
signaling whether a state’s method of judicial elections were partisan or non-partisan contests.81  
As well, insofar as in states where the existing legal climate is business-friendly, one might 
reasonably expect more judicial votes favoring business interests regardless of a judge’s 
business-related judicial campaign contributions.  To better isolate the potential influence of 
campaign contributions from a state’s overall business legal climate, the models include a tort 
liability index, constructed by the Pacific Research Institute.82  Finally, as judicial votes in 
business-related cases may also reflect public preferences or ideological trends, the models 
include a traditional and well-known measure of a state’s ideological preference.83 
4.2.  Methodology and Research Design 
                                                 
80 One area of particular concern, for example, involves the influence of election cycles on the administration of the 
death penalty. See, e.g., Kenneth Bresler, Seeking Justice, Seeking Election, and Seeking the Death 
Penalty: The Ethics of Prosecutorial Candidates’ Campaigning on Capital Convictions, 7 GEO. J. 
LEGAL ETHICS 941, 941–43 (1994) (noting the pressures generated by prosecutors’ electioneering); 
Ronald J. Tabak, Commentary, Politics and the Death Penalty: Can Rational Discourse and Due Process Survive the 
Perceived Political Pressure?, 21 FORDHAM URB. L.J. 280, 280–81 (1994) (noting the perceived political 
pressures associated with death penalty decisions). Se also, Michael Heise, The Death of Death Row Clemency and 
the Evolving Politics of Uneven Grace, 66 Ala. L. Rev. 949, 979-92 (2015)(assessing the influence of reelection 
cycles on clemency grants for death row inmates). 
81 Retention elections serve as the reference category. 
82 See Lawrence J. McQuillan & Hovannes Anramyan, U.S. Tort Liability Index, 2010 Report (Pacific Research 
Institute) (the index uses data available as of Oct. 1, 2009). 
83 See William D. Berry et al., Measuring Citizen and Government Ideology in American States, 1960-93, 42 Am. J. 
Pol. Sci. 327 (1998) (the index uses updated data through 2008). 
32 
 The cases in this study are limited in two important ways.  First, the data include civil 
litigation where a business interest was on one, and only one, side of the litigation.  Limiting the 
data set in this way facilitates characterizing each justice’s vote as either pro-business or not pro-
business.  Second, the analyses include only those states where state supreme court justices are 
elected in some manner (i.e., retention, partisan, or non-partisan elections).  While not all state 
supreme court justices confront some form of election, as Figure 1 (below) makes clear, judicial 
campaign contributions do not exist where judicial elections do not exist.  While collapsing the 
three major forms of judicial elections might invite criticism, Figure 1 illustrates that even 
judicial retention elections attract some level of campaign contributions (though far less than 
non-partisan and partisan judicial elections).  Potential criticism aside, including all forms of 
judicial elections is necessary to tether this study to prior empirical work in this field. 
5.0.  Results and Discussion 
  Empirical results—both descriptive and more granular regression models—help explain 
various influences on state supreme court justices’ votes in business cases. 
5.1.  Descriptive Results 
How states structure judicial elections influences business contributions to judicial 
campaigns.  Figure 1 illustrates how business contributions to judicial campaigns distribute 
across the four major judicial selection mechanisms.  As one would expect, in states where 
supreme court justices are appointed rather than elected, justices receive no business-related 
contributions.  Where elections decide state supreme court justice, by contrast, business interests 
participate in those campaigns through financial contributions. The percentage of business-
related contributions varies among the three major judicial election forms—retention, 
33 
 nonpartisan, and partisan.  Again, consistent with common sense, Figure 1 illustrates that the 
percentage of business-related judicial campaign contributions were at their highest in partisan 
judicial elections and lowest in retention elections. 
 
Figure 1: Distribution of Pro-Business Contributions (%) Across Various Methods of State 
Supreme Court Justice Selection 
No Election Retention Election
0
0
1
0
5
s
e
c
sti
u 0
J
of  Nonpartisan Election Partisan Election
nt  00
e 1
c
r
e
P
0
5
0
0 50 100 0 50 100
Percent of Contributions from Business
 
SOURCES: Follow the Money; Shepherd (2013) data sets. 
 
One important way this Article expands on Shepherd’s 2013 analysis is by including 
judicial campaign contributions from non-business interests.  Consequently, it is important to 
view business and non-business contributions in relation to one another.  Figure 2 presents kernel 
density estimates of the distributions of (logged) business and non-business campaign 
contributions as a percentage of total campaign contributions and the line patterns inform.  
Specifically, the overall visual impression is one of an “X,” with the business and non-business 
34 
 lines intersecting just past the 50 percent point.  That is, the business and non-business lines 
essentially reflect one another.  Of course, given the somewhat reciprocal nature of the coding 
protocols for the business and non-business contribution variables the visual pattern emerging in 
Figure 2 does not surprise. While Figure 2 does reveal some degree of overlap (some justices 
received campaign contributions from both business and non-business sources), the overall 
impression is one of separation.  That is, most judicial candidates received the bulk of their 
campaign contributions from either business or non-business interests. 
 
Figure 2: Kernel density estimates, pro-business and non-business contributions 
4 Business
0
. Non-Business
3
0
.
2
0
.
1
0
.
0
0 20 40 60 80 100
(log) campaign contributions as a percentage of total contributions
 
  SOURCES: Follow the Money; Shepherd (2013) data sets. 
 
5.2.  Regression Results 
  While the descriptive results comport with intuitive notions about the relation between 
judicial selection methods and business campaign contributions in judicial elections as well as 
35 
 between business and non-business judicial campaign contribution trends, more nuanced 
regression analysis are necessary to isolate and identify possible relations between business (and 
non-business) contributions and judicial votes in business cases. 
5.2.1.  Pro-Business Judicial Campaign Contributions 
Table 1 presents results from the mixed effects models on business campaign 
contributions’ influence on judge votes in business cases.  As it relates to the key variable of 
interest—campaign contributions from business interests (expressed as a percentage of a 
justice’s total campaign receipts)—results Table 1 makes clear that the percentage of a justice’s 
campaign contributions from pro-business interests increases, so too does the likelihood of the 
justice voting in a manner that favors the business litigant.  Interestingly, at the same time an 
increase in total campaign contributions, however, corresponds with a reduction in the likelihood 
of a justice casting a pro-business vote.  Among the various types of judicial election 
mechanisms, partisan elections were more likely to generate justices who cast pro-business 
votes. 
Justices’ ideology (expressed through political party affiliation) also achieves statistical 
significance and it does so in the expected directions.  That is, while republican justices were 
more favorable to business litigants, democrat justices were systematically less so (Table 1, 
columns A and B, respectively).  A state’s tort climate, another important control variable, also 
achieves statistical significance in the expected direction.  (That is, an increase in a state’s 
liability index corresponds with a decreased likelihood of a pro-business judicial outcome.)  
Finally, case strength also proved important.  As a business case’s underlying legal strength 
increased, so too did the likelihood of a justice vote in favor of the business interest. 
36 
 Notably, when the business interest was the petitioner, the likelihood of a pro-business 
outcome decreased.  Interestingly, a similar finding emerges in both non-business models as 
well.84  That the petitioner status variable’s association with decreasing the probability of a 
favorable judge vote cuts across the business/non-business divide implies that what it signals 
may have little to do with the business (or non-business) context.  While these data and models 
do not address this particular question, it remains possible that this findings reflects a “pro-
affirmance” bias at the state supreme court level.  Setting aside selection effects’ important 
influences on appellate reversal rates as well as variations across case types, prior work on 
various civil appellate contexts (including state and federal) implies an overall impression of the 
comparative difficulty that petitioners confront when seeking to overturn a lower court 
decision.85  Thus, the finding in Table 1 suggesting that business petitioners reduce the 
probability of a judge voting in favor of the business litigant needs to be understood within an 
appellate context that, on balance, displays a tilt toward respondents independent of the business 
litigation context. 
 
TABLE 1: MIXED EFFECTS MODEL OF PRO-BUSINESS JUDICIAL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS’ 
INFLUENCE ON JUDICIAL VOTING IN BUSINESS CASES (2010-2012) 
  (A)    (B)   
Judge vote favoring business litigant:    (s.e.)    (s.e.) 
         
Pro-Business campaign contrib. (% of ttl.)  0.210 **   (0.07)  0.211 **   (0.07) 
Total campaign contrib. ($10K)  -0.111 *  (0.05)  -0.124 **  (0.05) 
         
Non-partisan judicial election  -0.150  (0.35)  -0.249  (0.34) 
Partisan election  0.775 *  (0.38)  0.915 *  (0.38) 
Justice w/in 2 years of term end  -0.044  (0.15)  -0.019  (0.15) 
Republican justice  0.712 **  (0.19)  ---  --- 
Democrat justice  ---  ---  -0.846 **  (0.20) 
                                                 
84 See tbls.2 & 3, infra. 
85 For one recent summary of empirical work on the civil appellate outcomes, see Theodore Eisenberg & Michael 
Heise, Plaintiphobia in State Courts Redux? An Empirical Study of State Court Trials on Appeal, 12 J. Empirical 
Legal Stud. 100, 110 (2015), tbl.1 (summarizing state and federal civil appeals reversal rates). 
37 
          
State tort climate  -0.761 **  (0.23)  -0.835 **  (0.23) 
State citizen ideology  -0.002  (0.01)  -0.006  (0.01) 
State elite ideology  -0.010  (0.01)  -0.012  (0.01) 
         
Business litigant was petitioner  -0.463 **  (0.10)  -0.461 **  (0.10) 
Case strength  0.072 **  (0.00)  0.072 **  (0.00) 
         
Constant  0.317  (0.58)  0.562  (0.57) 
(N)  7,112    7,112   
         
NOTES: * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.  Robust standard errors in parentheses. These models include all pro-
business campaign contributions (logged) as a percentage of a justice’s total amount of campaign 
contributions (logged). All model specifications include state- and justice-level clusters. Mixed effects 
models estimated using the “meqrlogit” command in Stata (v.14.1). Model A includes the republican 
justice dummy variable; model B includes the democrat justice dummy variable. 
  SOURCES: Follow the Money; Shepherd (2013) data sets. 
 
  Although my model specifications depart slightly from Shepherd’s,86 results in Table 1 
largely track Shepherd’s main findings presented in her 2013 report.87  Shepherd’s analyses 
focus on the influence of pro-business campaign contributions and, having successfully largely 
replicated Shepherd’s core results, this paper extends Shepherd’s by turning to the possible 
influence of non- and anti-business campaign contributions on justices’ votes that favored non-
business litigants. 
5.2.2.  Non-Business Judicial Campaign Contributions 
  Table 2 reports results after I, in essence, “flipped” Shepherd’s basic model.  That is, 
where Table 1 reports results from models assessing the relation between pro-business judicial 
campaign contributions and the probability that a justice voted in favor of the business litigant, 
Table 2, by contrast, assesses the possible influence of non-business judicial campaign 
contributions on the likelihood that a justice voted in favor of the non-business litigant. 
                                                 
86 See Sub-Part 3.0, supra. 
87 See Shepherd, Risk, supra note 66, at 17, tbl.A1. 
38 
   While a robust inference from Table 1 might induce an expectation for reciprocal 
findings in Table 2, results in Table 2 provide only partial support for such expectations.  
Specifically, as it relates to the particular variable of interest, Table 2 illustrates that non-business 
judicial campaign contributions correlate with an increased likelihood of a judicial vote favoring 
the non-business litigant.  Interestingly, a correlation between campaign contributions and 
favorable judge votes is present for both pro- and non-business settings, the influence is 
comparatively stronger for the pro-business setting. 
  While analyses of pro- and non-business judicial campaign contributions’ efficacy in 
terms of influencing favorable judicial outcomes uncovers a few subtle differences, the overall 
weight of the results conveys a stronger sense of convergence.  For example, the relation 
between non-business contributions and judge votes is just was pronounced for democratic and 
republican judges, though in the expected opposite directions.  Moreover, the case strength 
variable achieves statistical significance (and in the expected direction).88 
Finally, the influence of a non-business interest petitioner significantly decreases the 
likelihood of a non-business vote.  As discussed previously, a similar finding emerges in the pro-
business context and both may have more to do with a general “pro-affirmance” tilt in civil 
appellate litigation than with judicial campaign contributions. 
 
TABLE 2: MIXED EFFECTS MODEL OF NON-BUSINESS JUDICIAL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS’ 
INFLUENCE ON JUDICIAL VOTING IN BUSINESS CASES (2010-2012) 
  (A)    (B)   
Judge vote favoring non-business litigant:  (s.e.)  (s.e.) 
         
                                                 
88 Specifically, for Tables 2 & 3, as the underlying legal strength of a pro-business case became “stronger,” it 
reduced the probability of a judge vote favoring the non- (tbl.2) and anti-business (tbl.3) interest. 
39 
 Non-Business campaign contrib. (% of ttl.)  0.088 *   (0.04)  0.090 *  (0.04) 
Total campaign contrib. ($10K)  -0.078  (0.04)  -0.067  (0.04) 
         
Non-partisan judicial election  -0.144  (0.36)  -0.038  (0.35) 
Partisan election  -0.834 *  (0.38)  -0.986 **  (0.38) 
Justice w/in 2 years of term end  0.080  (0.15)  0.054  (0.15) 
Republican justice  -0.793 **  (0.19)  ---  --- 
Democrat justice  ---  ---  0.922 **  (0.20) 
         
State tort climate  0.641 **  (0.24)  0.721 **  (0.23) 
State citizen ideology  0.006  (0.01)  -0.003  (0.01) 
State elite ideology  0.011  (0.01)  0.012  (0.01) 
         
Non-business litigant was petitioner  -0.468 **  (0.10)  -0.466 **  (0.10) 
Case strength  -0.072 **  (0.00)  -0.072 **  (0.00) 
         
Constant  -0.103  (0.59)  -0.391  (0.57) 
(N)  7,112    7,112   
         
NOTES: * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.  Robust standard errors in parentheses. These models include all non-
business campaign contributions (logged) as a percentage of a justice’s total amount of campaign 
contributions (logged). All model specifications include state- and justice-level clusters. Mixed effects 
models estimated using the “meqrlogit” command in Stata (v.14.1).  Non-business judicial campaign 
contributions include all contributions other than pro-business contributions.  Model A includes the 
republican justice dummy variable; model B includes the democrat justice dummy variable. 
SOURCES: Follow the Money; Shepherd (2013) data sets. 
 
5.2.3.  Anti-Business Judicial Campaign Contributions 
  While judicial campaign contributions’ varied sources permit the identification of sources 
plausibly construed as “pro-business,” the construction of the non-business contributions do not, 
as Shepherd briefly notes, easily support a characterization of them as “anti-business.”  Rather, 
for interpretative purposes, results in Table 2 can only be understood (at least conservatively and 
cautiously) as “non-business.”  A deeper understanding of whether judicial campaign 
contributions plausibly characterized as “anti-business” is possible only after constructing a new 
variable that includes a sub-pool of non-business contributions limited to contributions from 
labor unions and democratic party campaign committees.  This alternative specification also 
provides something of a robustness check on the stability of the prior findings. 
40 
   As Table 3 illustrates, the main findings that emerged in Table 2 remain intact.  All of the 
variables that achieve statistical significance in the non-business model retain their significance 
in the anti-business model.  Importantly, the presence of judicial campaign contributions from 
anti-business sources systematically correlate with an increased probability of a judge voting in 
favor of the non-business litigant.  And this finding emerges after controlling for the underlying 
legal strength of the case (as well as the independent influence of other control variables).  
Similar to earlier findings, the influence of judicial campaign contributions on judicial outcomes 
achieves statistical significance only in the partisan election context.  Another factor that links 
Tables 1, 2, and 3 is the consistent salience of a party’s status as a petitioner. Again, as 
previously discussed, it remains a distinct possibility that this variable is picking up a possible 
“affirmance bias” present in state supreme courts.  Finally, if nothing else, that Tables 3’s results 
essentially track those in Table 2 conveys the overall findings’ stickiness and robustness to 
alternative model specifications. 
 
TABLE 3: MIXED EFFECTS MODEL OF ANTI-BUSINESS JUDICIAL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS’ 
INFLUENCE ON JUDICIAL VOTING IN BUSINESS CASES (2010-2012) 
         
Judge vote favoring non-business litigant:  (A)  (s.e.)  (B)  (s.e.) 
         
Anti-Business campaign contrib. (% of ttl.)  0.129 *   (0.06)  0.142 *   (0.06) 
Total campaign contrib. ($10K)  -0.024  (0.03)  -0.014  (0.03) 
         
Non-partisan judicial election  0.006  (0.35)  0.105  (0.34) 
Partisan election  -0.925 *  (0.39)  -1.080 **  (0.39) 
Justice w/in 2 years of term end  0.074  (0.15)  0.048  (0.15) 
Republican justice  -0.729 **  (0.20)  ---  --- 
Democrat justice  ---  ---  0.878 **  (0.20) 
         
State tort climate  0.775 **  (0.23)  0.854 **  (0.23) 
State citizen ideology  0.004  (0.01)  -0.005  (0.01) 
State elite ideology  0.005  (0.01)  0.006  (0.01) 
         
Non-business litigant was petitioner  -0.470 **  (0.10)  -0.470 **  (0.10) 
Case strength  -0.072 **  (0.00)  -0.072 **  (0.00) 
41 
          
Constant  0.472  (0.65)  0.288  (0.63) 
(N)  7,112    7,112   
         
NOTES: * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.  Robust standard errors in parentheses. These models include anti-business 
campaign contributions (logged) as a percentage of a justice’s total amount of campaign contributions 
(logged). All model specifications include state- and justice-level clusters.  Mixed effects models estimated 
using the “meqrlogit” command in Stata (v.14.1).  Anti-business judicial campaign contributions include 
funds from either labor unions or democratic party committees (or both). Model A includes the republican 
justice dummy variable; model B includes the democrat justice dummy variable. 
SOURCES: Follow the Money; Shepherd (2013) data sets. 
 
5.3.  Discussion 
  Results from Table 1, independently and in conjunction with prior empirical work, 
provide support for those worried about the potentially distorting influence of judicial campaign 
contributions from pro-business interests on judicial outcomes.  Indeed, similar findings from her 
own related analyses prompted Professor Shepherd to characterize pro-business judicial 
campaign contributions’ role as “destructive.”89  And Shepherd’s normative conclusions are 
echoed by others.90 
Equally important as the findings on the influence of pro-business judicial campaign 
contributions (Table 1), however, are findings on similar influences achieved by non- and anti-
business contributions (Tables 2 and 3, respectively).  Expanding and building upon Shepherd’s 
earlier work reveals that Shepherd’s analyses (and conclusions) speak to only one piece of the 
judicial campaign contribution puzzle.  The pieces provided by my additional analyses 
complicate Shepherd’s normative implications as well as prevailing wisdom.  Specifically, 
results from Tables 2 and 3 can certainly be understood to either exacerbate or reduce worries 
about business’ potential undue influence. 
                                                 
89 Shepherd, Risk, supra note 66, at 2. 
90 See, e.g., Charles G. Geyh, Why Judicial Elections Stink, 64 Ohio St. L.J. 43 (2003). 
42 
 On the one hand, the new findings may only deepen fears about elected state supreme 
court justice decisions’ vulnerability to campaign contributions.  After all, the weight of the 
results from Table 1, 2, and 3 imply that the ability to influence judicial votes extends far beyond 
pro-business efforts.  On the other hand, results illustrating that non- and anti-business interests’ 
campaign contributions influenced judicial outcomes similar to pro-business contributions may 
also, paradoxically, reduce overall worries about the relation between judicial contributions and 
outcomes.  That is to say, evidence that any interest group willing and able to invest in judicial 
campaigns can influence judicial outcomes might dilute fears about the undue influence of any 
one particular group.  While one may reasonably feel uneasy about the influence of judicial 
campaign contributions on judicial outcomes, perhaps some comfort flows from the realization 
that any such influence is not limited to one particular viewpoint (e.g., pro-business interests). 
Of course, it bears emphasis that evidence of positive relations between pro-, non-, and 
anti-business sources and favorable does not establish causation.  Indeed, in this particular 
context a critical question that endures due to research design and data limitations involves 
whether such evidence reflects selection or inducement effects. That is, to take one example, the 
positive correlation between pro-business campaign contributions to judicial candidates may be a 
function of such contributions makes it easier for pro-business candidates to win their judicial 
elections or, in contrast, that it induces winning judges to reach pro-business outcomes.91 
Important causal inference limitations notwithstanding, at the very least what my results 
accomplish at an empirical level is to help place Shepherd’s critique of business’ influence on 
state supreme courts into a broader interpretative context and expand on what we know about the 
                                                 
91 Kang & Shepherd note a similar limitation to their work as well.  See, e.g., Michael S. Kang & Joanna M. 
Shepherd, Partisanship in State Supreme Courts: The Empirical Relationship between Party Campaign Contributions 
and Judicial Decision Making, 44 J. Legal Stud.S-161, S-178 (2015). 
43 
 influence of judicial campaign contributions and judicial outcomes.  At a normative level, one 
implication from my results is that while Shepherd’s characterization of judicial campaign 
contributions as “destructive”92 may still be apt, other vantage points may inject greater 
complexity and granularity and, in so doing, persuasively frame alternative characterizations of 
judicial campaign contributions that fall somewhere between positions staked out by Professors 
Shepherd, on the one hand, and Hall on another. 
5.3.1.  From the Empirical to the Normative 
   Broadening the empirical debate to include evidence of the potential influence of extra-
legal factors on judicial outcomes from any campaign contributor (pro-, non-, or anti-business) 
might help deflect the debate from a focus on narrow empirical points to the more theoretical 
(and decidedly non-empirical) question about whether, in the context of campaign finance and 
free speech, judicial elections are different in kind from non-judicial elections and, as such, 
whether they warrant different legal treatment when it comes to campaign finance.  Within this 
still-developing normative debate two factors deserve attention.  One is that even if one concedes 
the empirical point that pro-businesses do not have any monopolistic lock on helping secure 
favorable judicial outcomes, non-business judicial contributions’ distinctive focus may engender 
a similarly distinctive level of influence.  A second factor involves questions about whether legal 
doctrine, specifically laws governing public election campaign contributions, should simply treat 
judicial elections differently than non-judicial elections. 
5.3.2.  Pro-Business Contributions Overwhelm Non- and Anti-Business Contributions 
                                                 
92 Shepherd, Risk, supra note 66, at 2. 
44 
 Even if one concedes that pro-, non-, and anti-business judicial campaign contributions 
all possess the ability to influence favorable judicial outcomes, it is plausible that the magnitude 
and nature of pro-business contributions make them comparatively more efficacious and, thus, 
more worrisome.  Business interests and lawyers (and law firms) dominate financial 
contributions to state supreme court judges’ election campaigns.  During the past decade, 
business interests, broadly defined, contributed more than $62.6 million, or 30 percent of all 
judicial campaign contributions.  Lawyers and lobbyists (principally plaintiff lawyers and their 
agents) contributed $59.3 million, or another 28 percent of total judicial campaign contributions.  
By contrast, political campaign contributions to judges from unions are a small fraction as 
compared to the donations from either business interests or lawyers and lobbyists. 
  Not only do campaign contributions from business interests exceed those from all other 
discrete interest groups, but business interests’ legal agendas are typically more focused and 
benefit from a clearer idea of which judicial candidates business interests wish to target.  Legal 
(and political) agendas advanced by lawyers and lobbyists, by contrast, are typically far less 
focused and more diverse, reflecting the various interests of a wide range of clients. 
  On balance, business interests, through their campaign contributions, are perhaps 
uniquely positioned to successfully exert influence of state supreme court judges, particularly 
when these judges are called upon to decide business cases.  If so, pro-business contributions, as 
Kang and Shepherd emphasize, may indeed pose a special threat to a collective goal for fair and 
impartial justice. 
5.3.3.  When it Comes to the First Amendment Are Judicial Elections Simply Different Than 
Other Elections? 
45 
   Arguments abound about whether the judicial and traditional political electoral contexts 
differ enough to warrant treating judicial campaign finance differently than traditional campaign 
finance.  Hall, for example, argues that whatever differences might exist they are insufficient to 
justify different legal treatment for the judicial and non-judicial elections when it comes to 
campaign finance.  Others, however, emphasize the differences between judicial and non-judicial 
elections and call for different campaign finance rules.  Professor Shepherd, for example, argues 
that judicial campaigns are particularly vulnerable to distortion (and implicitly distinct from non-
judicial elections) due to pro-business campaign contributions’ unique role in judicial elections.93 
Others share Shepherd’s conclusion but not her reasoning. Professor Sample, for 
example, emphasizes the public’s different democratic expectations for the courts and legislative 
branches and concludes that these differing expectations justify treating judicial and legislative 
campaign finance with different legal rules.94  Professor Smith similarly dwells on differences 
between the judicial and legislative branches and notes that judicial elections can involve 
spending by “specific litigants” or “specific cases” despite a public commitment to an “impartial 
adjudicator.95  Smith contrasts the judicial context with the legislative where, he notes, the public 
expects legislators to “(generally, at least) achieve the goals that the people who elected them 
wanted them to do.”96   
Apart from scholars’ perspectives, even some Supreme Court justices appear to tilt in this 
direction.  Writing for the Court in Williams-Yulee v. Florida Bar, Chief Justice Roberts wrote 
                                                 
93 Id. at 4. 
94 James Sample, Democracy At The Corner of First and Fourteenth: Judicial Campaign Spending and Equality, 66 
NYU Annual Survey of Amer. Law 727 (2011). 
95 Adam Liptak et al., Caperton and the Courts: Did the Floodgates Open?, 18 N.Y.U. J. Legis. & Pub. Pol’y 481, 
496 (2015)(Bradley Smith’s remarks). 
96 Id. 
46 
 that: “Judges are not politicians, even when they come to the bench by way of the ballot.”97  
Consequently, in a 5-4 decision the Court upheld a restriction on election speech and fundraising 
for elected judges that would be “obviously” unconstitutional if applied to other candidates for 
elected public office.98  Of course, the Court’s Williams-Yulee decision stands quite uneasily 
with the Court’s prior decision in White which struck down a Minnesota law prohibiting state 
judicial candidates from making public statements concerning disputed legal or political issues 
incident to judicial campaigns. 
  Somewhat lost in the debate is the possible analytical purchase of a distinction between 
using judicial campaign contributions to “buy” a judicial vote versus a judicial philosophy or 
outlook.  Again, all surely agree that a campaign contribution that, quite literally, pre-secures a 
specific judicial vote in a particular case—or even creates an objectively unacceptable 
impression of judicial impropriety or bias, as the Court’s decision in Massey suggests, requires 
judicial recusal. 
5.3.4.  Efforts to Purchase a Judicial Philosophy Rather Than A Judicial Outcome 
  More difficult, however, are judicial campaign contributions that do not seek to pre-
secure a specific judicial outcome in particular case in the future but, instead, seek to promote a 
judicial philosophy, theory, or outlook.  If judicial campaign contributions in state elections 
simply reflect support for a particular or general judicial philosophy, they quickly begin to 
resemble the (albeit indirect) role that campaign contributions to presidential candidates perform 
in federal election context. 
                                                 
97 135 S.Ct. 1656, 1662 (2015). 
98 See id.; Kang & Shepherd, Judging, supra note 18, at 939. 
47 
   While constitutional structure provides layers of separation between the electorate and a 
federal judge or Supreme Court Justice’s appointment, few serious observers contest the role that 
politics plays when it comes to the selection of Article III judges and Justices.  Indeed, in many 
ways our constitutional structure (to say nothing of political accountability) is designed to afford 
politics some role.  Once one concedes, either as a descriptive or normative (or both) matter, 
politics’ role in the selection of federal judges, it logically follows that campaign contributions 
exert some influence, even if indirect. 
  While the law reviews are festooned with research illustrating the role of politics, 
particularly presidential politics, in federal judicial appointments,99 a brief description of two 
recent (and still-evolving) examples deserve brief mention.  First, Justice Scalia’s recent death 
presaged a political firestorm fueled by President Obama’s decision to appoint Judge Merrick 
Garland to fill the vacant Supreme Court seat.  President Obama’s status as a lame-duck, Senate 
Leader Mitchel’s assertion that the Senate would simply not process any Supreme Court 
nominations so close to a presidential election, and Democratic presidential nominee Hillary 
Clinton’s refusal to commit to re-appointing Judge Garland if she assumed the presidency 
contributed to the political intrigue.  As Professor Malt recently noted, the Garland nomination 
serves “as a graphic reminder of the influence of presidential politics on the evolution of 
constitutional doctrine.”100 
  Judge Garland’s nomination by a lame-duck president within one year of a contested 
presidential election only heighted the electorate’s attention to one likely outcome of the 2016 
                                                 
99 The literature on the role of politics in Article III judicial selections is legion. See, e.g., TERRI J. PERETTI, IN 
DEFENSE OF A POLITICAL COURT (1999); JOHN A. MALTESE, THE SELLING OF SUPREME COURT NOMINEES (1995); 
STEPHEN L. CARTER, THE CONFIRMATION MESS (1994). 
100 Earl M. Maltz, The 2016 Election and the Future of Constitutional Law: The Lessons of 1968, 43 Hastings Const. 
L.Q. 735, 735 (2016). 
48 
 presidential election: The guarantee of one Supreme Court nomination and the not-implausible 
opportunity for additional nominations.101 
  And this latter observation leads to a second (albeit related) example.  During the recent 
presidential campaign, then-candidate Trump publicly released two separate lists of individuals 
(a total of 21) whom he proclaimed during a televised presidential candidate debate that he 
would consider nominating to the United States Supreme Court.102  Given the perception that the 
next U.S. President would likely be in a position to fill at least one seat (by definition) and, more 
probably, two or more seats, and that the next President would likely have a significant influence 
on the development of future U.S. law, as Professor Kidd et al. note, “it is not surprising that 
Republicans wanted assurances that their nominee would nominate someone whose 
jurisprudence would match that of Scalia.”103  That is to say, then-candidate Trump (as well as 
his opponent, Secretary Clinton), took pains to inform the electorate throughout their campaigns 
about the “type” of judges and Justices they planned to nominate if elected.  Moreover, both 
campaigns overtly ran campaign ads (negative and positive ads) and sought (and received) 
campaign contributions expressly over the issue of their approach toward judicial selections.104 
Finally, not only did the two main presidential candidates perceive (almost assuredly correctly) 
the need for (or strategic political advantage of) discussing with the electorate what they would 
                                                 
101 Id. at 736. 
102 See Transcript of the Second Debate, N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 10, 2016), available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/us/politics/transcript-second-debate.html?_r=0. For a compilation of the names 
from the two lists see Ed Whelan, “Trump’s Supreme Court Candidates,” Bench Memos, Nov. 9, 2016, available at 
http://www.nationalreview.com/bench-memos/442036/trump-list-supreme-court-candidates.  For an empirical 
assessment of President-Elect Trump’s promise to appoint judges very much in the Justice Scalia mold, see Jeremy 
Kidd et al., Searching for Justice Scalia: Measuring the “Scalia-Ness” of the Next Potential Member of the U.S. 
Supreme Court (2016). Available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2874794&download=yes.  
103 See Kidd et al., supra note 102, at 1. 
104 See generally NANCY SCHERER, SCORING POINTS: POLITICIANS, ACTIVISTS, AND THE LOWER FEDERAL COURT 
APPOINTMENT PROCESS 151-80 (2005) (observing that since the 1968 Presidential election, candidates have made 
the selection of Justices and judges a campaign issue). 
49 
 look for in the potential judicial nominees, but the mainstream media reinforced the perception 
that the candidates’ approaches toward judicial nominations was a legitimate and, indeed, 
important campaign issue.105 
  Very few at the time voiced any concerns with the presidential candidates’ open, 
consistent, and persistent discussion during the campaign of what they would “look for” in their 
judicial nominees.  If anything, the opposite was the case.  That is, the candidates, media, and, 
likely, a sizable portion of the electorate, felt that such discussions were an important part of the 
presidential campaign.106  To be sure, what happened during the most recent presidential election 
cycle (and similar to many prior election cycles) involved action by those seeking positions in 
the executive branch that possess the authority to nominate judges and Justices—rather than 
those who aspired to Article III commissions.  This is, of course, an important distinction.  
Distinction aside, however, one question that endures is whether this constitutes enough of a 
distinction to treat constitutional issues embedded in campaign finance laws differently for state 
judicial elections and federal elections. 
6.0.  Conclusion 
  To the extent that any campaign contribution in judicial elections facilitates “buying” 
justice, an array of obvious problems arise.  Because pro-, non-, and anti-business have 
demonstrated some (albeit slightly different) systematic ability to influence judicial votes in 
business cases, then, at the very least, one less problem emerges.  While this one less problem 
may not assuage some (or any) critics of pro-business campaign contributions in judicial 
                                                 
105 See, e.g., Jim DeMint, Gorsuch is a Model for Future Judicial Nominees, The Hill (Apr. 12, 2017); available at: 
http://thehill.com/blogs/pundits-blog/the-judiciary/328518-demint-gorsuch-is-a-model-for-future-judicial-
nominations. 
106 See id. 
50 
 elections, it nonetheless remain important to gain a full empirical picture before proceeding to 
contested normative and theoretical issues incident to assessing First Amendment protection for 
campaign contributions to judicial elections. 
  Additional empirical clarity on the relations between campaign contributions and judicial 
votes, while helpful, does not, however, reduce the difficulty of the related, and enduring, 
normative questions.  To the extent that this issue uncovers an inevitable collision of important 
values, what remains is how best to reconcile these conflicting interests.  And one best way to 
reconcile this conflict may not exist.  As Professor Karlan notes, “it is not categorically true that 
we want judges to ignore popular opinion and rely on their own consciences, or that we want to 
protect judges who ignore politically settled interpretations and rely on their own views of the 
law. Sometimes we do and sometimes we don’t.”107  Given this structural ambivalence, when it 
comes to narrower issues concerning judicial campaign contributions, the late-Justice Scalia 
likely got it right when he opined during the oral argument in White that: “Now, [judicial 
elections] may be a very bad idea, but as long as [the First Amendment’s] in your constitution, I 
find it hard to believe that it is a significant State interest of Minnesota to prevent judicial 
elections from being informed.”108 
   
                                                 
107 Pamela S. Karlan, Judicial Independence, 93 Geo. L.J. 1041, 1048 (2007). 
108 Transcript of Oral Argument at 45, White, 536 U.S. 765 (No. 01-521), 
http://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/01-521.pdf.  See also Adam Liptak et al., 
Caperton and the Courts: Did the Floodgates Open?, 18 N.Y.U. J. Legis. & Pub. Pol’y 481,482 (2015)(Liptak 
remarks). 
51 
  
 
APPENDIX TABLE A1 
  Mean  s.d.  (N) 
       
Pro-business judge vote  0.50  (0.50)  10,804 
Anti-business judge vote  0.50  (0.50)  10,804 
Business campaign contrib. (% of ttl.) (raw)  19.32  (22.59)  10,607 
Non-business campaign contrib. (% of ttl.) (raw)  59.15  (37.19)  10,607 
Anti-business campaign contrib. (% of ttl.) (raw)  3.54  (13.54)  10,607 
Total campaign contrib. ($10K) (raw)  40.91  (61.35)  10,607 
Non-partisan judicial election  0.41  (0.49)  16,083 
Partisan election  0.18  (0.39)  16,083 
Democrat justice  0.42  (0.49)  16,083 
Republican justice  0.46  (0.50)  16,083 
State tort climate  -0.13  (0.46)  16,078 
State citizen ideology  55.93  (14.66)  16,078 
State elite ideology  49.33  (13.62)  16,078 
Business litigant was petitioner  0.49  (0.50)  16,083 
Justice w/in 2 years of term end  0.24  (0.42)  16,083 
Case strength  -0.02  (43.13)  7,112 
 
       SOURCES: Follow the Money; Shepherd (2013) data sets. 
 
52 
 