Sally Yates, Ronald Dworkin, and the Best View of the Law 
W. Bradley Wendel 
 
I.   Introduction 
 
  Sally Yates was the Acting Attorney General. Held over from the Obama 
Administration, she was the head of the Department of Justice, pending the 
confirmation of Senator Jeff Sessions for the position of Attorney General. Prior to 
January 30, 2017, Yates was relatively unknown, but her actions on that day ensured 
that her name will now be remembered by generations of lawyers and law students. In 
his first week in office, President Trump issued an executive order prohibiting entry into 
the United States by all refugees and all citizens of seven majority-Muslim countries, 
even those with lawful permanent residence in the United States.1 The order was 
subsequently enjoined nationwide by a district judge in the Western District of 
Washington, and that injunction was upheld by the Ninth Circuit.2 Rather than 
following the course of litigation over the executive order, let us remain with AAG Yates. 
Three days after Trump signed the executive order, Yates wrote a letter to lawyers in the 
Department of Justice stating that the Department would not defend the order.3 The 
letter read, in part: 
 
[I]n litigation, DOJ Civil Division lawyers are charged with advancing reasonable 
legal arguments that can be made supporting an Executive Order. But . . . [m]y 
responsibility is to ensure that the position of the Department of Justice is not 
only legally defensible, but is informed by our best view of what the law is after 
consideration of all the facts. In addition, I am responsible for ensuring that the 
positions we take in court remain consistent with this institution’s solemn 
obligation to always seek justice and stand for what is right. At present, I am not 
convinced that the defense of the Executive Order is consistent with these 
responsibilities nor am I convinced that the Executive Order is lawful.4 
 
  Whether the order is lawful will be determined by the courts. What interests me, 
as a scholar of legal ethics and jurisprudence, is whether Yates got it right when she said 
the responsibility of a lawyer for the government is to seek justice and stand for what is 
right, and that the position of the Department of Justice should be informed by the 
lawyer’s best view of the law. Yates’s claim that legal advisor should be informed by the 
best view of the law sounds very much like the position of Ronald Dworkin, who argued 
that a judge should determine the legal rights and duties of the litigants by constructing 
the best possible interpretation of the principles of justice, fairness, and procedural due 
process, considered from the standpoint of the community’s political morality.5 The 
                                                           
1 See, e.g., Michael D. Shear, et al., Judge Blocks Trump Order on Refugees Amid Chaos and Outcry 
Worldwide, N.Y. TIMES (Jan. 28, 2017).  
2 See State of Washington v. Trump, 2017 WL 462040 (W.D. Wash., Feb. 3, 2017), stay pending 
appeal denied, 2017 WL 526497 (9th Cir., Feb. 9, 2017). 
3 See Michael D. Shear, et al., Trump Fires Acting Attorney General Who Defied Him, N.Y. TIMES 
(Jan. 30, 2017).  
4 The letter is available at https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3438879/Letter-From-Sally-
Yates.pdf.  
5 RONALD DWORKIN, LAW’S EMPIRE 225, 239 (1986). 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2927113 interpretation must fit with past legal decisions, but the judge’s aim is also to show the 
community’s legal practices in their best moral light.6 I do not know whether Yates was 
thinking about Dworkin when she wrote her letter, but I wish to use this essay to seek to 
persuade legal advisors – whether to the government or a private client – that their role 
is not to construct an interpretation of the law that represents the best constructive 
interpretation of political morality.  
 
  There are several reasons that lawyers should not be Dworkinian interpreters, but 
this essay will concentrate on two. First, Dworkin’s jurisprudential vision has always sat 
uncomfortably with the fact of moral pluralism. Dworkin denied that his imaginary 
Judge Hercules is merely imposing his own moral preferences under the guise of 
offering a legal interpretation.7 He insists that Hercules is instead providing the best 
account of the community’s political morality.8 But he has very little to say about the 
possibility that a faithful reconstruction of the community’s moral principles will 
establish that there are multiple moral narratives potentially bearing on the same 
question of legal interpretation.9 The American experience with immigration shows 
that, as a political community, we have a remarkable capacity for tolerating both 
expansive executive power and discrimination on the basis of nationality (and, during 
the George W. Bush administration, getting very close to the line of religious 
discrimination). We also have become increasingly tolerant of strong executive power, 
but in the immigration context the President’s plenary power goes back more than a 
century, to the Chinese Exclusion Case.10 Litigation after the September 11th attacks set 
some limits on the President’s power, but left in place the deference other branches 
show on matters pertaining to national security. A program called the National Security 
Entry-Exit Registration System (NSEERS), established by the Bush Administration, 
required the registration, fingerprinting, and questioning of aliens present in the U.S. 
from Muslim-majority countries, who were males over the age of 16; courts sustained 
the registry features of the NSEERS program against due process and equal protection 
challenges, claims that the program amounted to racial profiling, and arguments from 
lack of statutory authorization for the program.11 That is not the only story, but it is 
certainly an aspect of our political morality, sitting alongside the anti-discrimination 
norms articulated in the Constitution and numerous judicial opinions. What is a lawyer 
modeling herself on Judge Hercules to do when seeking the best view of the law?  
 
  The second reason for disfavoring a conception of legal advising as seeking the 
best view of the law is the need to preserve the legitimacy of law as a normative system 
                                                           
6 Id. at 248.  
7 Id. at 259-61.  
8 Id. at 263.  
9 See Jeremy Waldron, Did Dworkin Ever Answer the Crits?, in EXPLORING LAW’S EMPIRE: THE 
JURISPRUDENCE OF RONALD DWORKIN 155 (Scott Hershovitz, ed., (2006). 
10 Chae Chan Ping v. United States, 130 U.S. 581 (1889); see also Hiroshi Motomura, Immigration 
Law After a Century of Plenary Power: Phantom Constitutional Norms and Statutory Interpretation, 
100 YALE L.J. 545 (1990).  
11  See Rajah v. Mukasey, 544 F.3d 427, 433-34 (2d Cir. 2008) (describing program); Kandamar v. 
Gonzales, 464 F.3d 65 (1st Cir. 2006); Ali v. Gonzales, 440 F.3d 678 (5th Cir. 2006). In a case not related 
to NSEERS, the Supreme Court held that 8 U.S.C. § 1252 (g) precludes most selective-prosecution claims 
by aliens. See Reno v. Arab-American Anti-Discrimination Committee, 525 U.S. 471 (1999). 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2927113 that resists reduction to either political preferences or raw power. Writing in The 
Atlantic, conservative commentator David Frum imagines the state of the nation on the 
eve of Trump’s inauguration to a second term as President, in 2021.12 Among many 
other moves in the playbook for accumulating power, Frum cited one that is particularly 
relevant to government legal advisors: delegitimizing accountability-enforcing 
institutions by framing opposition as partisan.13 He was discussing journalism, and 
Trump’s tactic of repeating false statements (now inevitably referred to as “alternative 
facts”) and then smearing fact-checking and neutral reporting as agenda-driven “fake 
news.” A certain amount of “working the refs” and complaining about the biased media 
is an innocuous part of politics as usual, but the conflation of truth with power risks 
undermining the raison d’être of independent journalism. As Frum writes, the best 
defense against authoritarianism is “an unwearyring insistence upon the honesty, 
integrity, and professionalism of American institutions.”14 The capacity of the legal 
profession to resist the naked exercise of power depends on the perception that there is 
a difference between what is lawful and what is in someone’s interests, whether those of 
the President or of some imagined cabal of liberal opponents. By referring to the 
obligation to “seek justice and stand for what is right,” Yates left herself open to the 
criticism that she was acting as a partisan who objected to Trump’s executive order on 
policy ground, not an impartial gatekeeper advising the administration on the legality of 
its proposal. 
 
II.   Dworkin on the Best View of the Law. 
 
  Yates can cite respectable authority for the position that her role required her to 
provide the best view of the law. Two former lawyers in the DOJ’s Office of Legal 
Counsel (OLC) have argued that a legal advisor should seek the best view of the law.15 
Their argument, boiled down, is that high-level government legal advisors, such as those 
in the OLC, are acting in a quasi-judicial role. Interpreting the law and ensuring that 
government actors comply with it is not a job only for courts. The Attorney General also 
interprets and applies the law, and in many cases an opinion of the Attorney General 
will be effectively final.16 The President retains the final authority regarding questions of 
executive branch legal interpretation, but in order to carry out his obligations under the 
Take Care Clause of the Constitution,17 the President needs fair, reliable, well-reasoned 
advice. It follows that a government lawyer advising the President should assist the 
President in complying with the law, not merely finding a position that might avoid Rule 
11 sanctions if asserted in litigation.  
 
                                                           
12 David Frum, How to Build an Autocracy, THE ATLANTIC (March 2017). 
13 Id.  
14 Id. 
15 See Dawn E. Johnsen, Faithfully Executing the Laws: Internal Legal Constraints on Executive 
Power, 54 UCLA L. REV. 1559, 1579-80 (2007); Randolph D. Moss, Executive Branch Legal 
Interpretation: A Perspective from the Office of Legal Counsel, 52 ADMIN. L. REV. 1303, 1309-12 (2000). 
16 See, e.g., MARK TUSHNET, TAKING THE CONSTITUTION AWAY FROM THE COURTS (1999); Larry 
Alexander & Frederick Schauer, On Extrajudicial Constitutional Interpretation, 110 HARV. L. REV. 1359 
(1997); Michael Stokes Paulsen, The Most Dangerous Branch: Executive Power to Say What the Law Is, 
83 GEO. L.J. 217 (1994).  
17 U.S. CONST., art. II § 3 (President shall "take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed”). 
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2927113   But what happens when there are competing accounts of what the law permits or 
requires? The President’s plenary power to regulate immigration is broad, and he enjoys 
significant of statutory authority under the Immigration and Nationality Act to exclude 
“any class of aliens into the United States [whose entry] would be detrimental to the 
interests of the United States.”18 However, constitutional anti-discrimination norms 
may prohibit a travel ban that is specifically targeted at Muslims if the President’s 
decision was “motivated by discriminatory animus and its application results in a 
discriminatory effect.”19 Facially Trump’s executive order applies only to nationality, but 
as a candidate he repeatedly stated that he would implement a Muslim ban.20 Trump 
advisor Rudy Giuliani also stated in an interview that Trump had asked him how to 
implement a Muslim ban lawfully.21 There is certainly evidence – though it is unclear 
whether it is sufficient – to support the unconstitutionality of the order as an instance of 
targeted discrimination motivated by animus.  
 
  If the best view of the law is only that which reasonable lawyers would agree is 
the law, there would be nothing objectionable about Yates’s letter if it were the case that 
reasonable lawyers would agree that the order is unlawful. My suspicion, however, is 
that she was concerned that there was a sufficient basis for concluding that the executive 
order was within the President’s constitutional authority, but she regarded it as morally 
repugnant. The tipoff is the reference in her letter to the DOJ’s purported “solemn 
obligation to always seek justice and stand for what is right.” In other words, I think 
Yates is trying to be a Dworkinian. (If Hercules is Dworkin’s ideal judge, perhaps Yates 
was modeling herself after Athena.) The trouble with the Dworkinian move is that it 
depends on an unrealistic degree of consensus on the community’s political morality. 
This is not incidental to Dworkin’s theory of law, but at the very core of it. Dworkin 
combines two inquiries that are often separated in jurisprudence, namely (1) what is the 
nature or concept of law, and (2) when does law rightfully obligate? For Dworkin it is 
true by definition that law must be legitimate. Law is that which licenses the use of force 
based upon past political decisions “of the right sort.”22 Decisions of the right sort are 
those which secure equality among citizens as members of a community whose political 
decisions reflect shared moral commitments.23 Dworkin thinks a theory of law must 
walk a kind of tightrope between two dangers he calls conventionalism and pragmatism. 
Conventionalism, better known as positivism, is the view that law can be identified by its 
social sources, generally as having been promulgated by political institutions such as 
legislatures and courts. In a nutshell, Dworkin contends that conventionalism fails at 
the justificatory task he sets for law; it does not explain why past political practices 
should be decisive of present rights and duties.24 But pragmatism also fails. A pragmatic 
                                                           
18 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f).  
19 Village of Arlington Heights v. Metro. Housing Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 264-65 (1977).  
20 See, e.g., Abby Phillip & Abigail Hauslohner, Trump on the Future of Proposed Muslim Ban, 
Registry: “You Know My Plans”, WASH. POST (Dec. 22, 2016); Jenna Johnson, Donald Trump is 
Expanding His Muslim Ban, Not Rolling it Back, WASH. POST (July 24, 2016); Jenna Johnson, No, 
Donald Trump Has Not Softened his Stance on Banning Muslims, WASH. POST (May 12, 2016).  
21 See Rebecca Savransky, Giuliani: Trump Asked Me How To Do a Muslim Ban “Legally”, THE HILL 
(Jan. 29, 2017). 
22 DWORKIN, supra note __, at 93. 
23 Id. at 96, 227. 
24 Id. at 117.  theory of law would aim directly at moral considerations such as efficiency, utility, or 
fairness.25 But pragmatism, according to Dworkin, fails to give a non-strategic 
explanation for why we have rights or, to put it differently, why principled 
decisionmaking is so central to our conception of a legal system.26 For Dworkin, genuine 
rights and duties depend on a foundation not in anyone’s all-things-considered 
judgment about what people ought to do. A Herculean moral reasoner would not be 
Dworkin’s ideal judge. Rather, a judge ought to provide a constructive normative 
account that provides a reason to do something even if one disagrees as a first-order 
moral or political matter.  
 
  Dworkin’s theory of law depends on the connection between, on the one hand, 
the demand for a principled justification for the use of coercion and, on the other, the 
capacity of common membership in a political community to legitimate the practices of 
a state.27 It aims to underwrite a conclusion taking the following form: “Even though the 
President believes considerations of national security require the travel ban, officials in 
the Department of Homeland Security have an obligation to admit visa holders from the 
seven specified countries.” What kind of reasoning could justify that proposition? Law 
purports to affect the practical reasoning of citizens subject to it, including government 
officials. The President, and presumably also his political appointees, have already 
reached a conclusion about what they think ought to be done as a moral and political 
matter. How can a conclusion of law supersede their conclusion? Dworkin’s insight, 
brought out in his critique of pragmatism, is that it cannot if a proposition of law is 
merely the same type of judgment as the conclusion of moral reasoning. Although 
Dworkin does not use Joseph Raz’s terminology of first- and second-order reasons,28 he 
appears to have something like that in mind when he defends the obligations arising 
from membership in a political community. Considerations such as justice play a role in 
the reasoning process that determines the obligations that community members have, 
but they are not conclusive.29 A legitimate conclusion of law depends on showing that it 
is the best constructive interpretation of the community’s political practices, from the 
evaluative standpoint of political morality.30 A legitimate demand comes to its subject in 
the first-person plural: “We have determined that we have a right to X and an obligation 
to Y.”31 The law is therefore comprehensively intertwined with democratic self-
governance. It requires obedience because it is a scheme of rights and duties which we, 
as a community sharing a commitment to treat one another with respect, as equals, even 
when we disagree. Legitimacy demands that we offer each other principled reasons for 
the use of coercive state power.  
 
  Dworkin’s conception of legitimacy presupposes the coherence of the 
community’s political morality. In my view, law ought to presuppose that the 
                                                           
25 Id. at 152, 160. 
26 Id. at 180-83.  
27 Id. at 191. 
28 See JOSEPH RAZ, THE MORALITY OF FREEDOM 53- 62 (1986) (arguing that authorities function by 
providing reasons that preempt the reasons that would otherwise have been conclusive for the subjects of 
the authority). 
29 DWORKIN, supra note __, at 203. 
30 Id. at 263. 
31 Id. at 189 (“we are in some sense the authors of the political decisions made by our governors”). community disagrees about political and moral issues such as the balance to be struck 
between safeguarding national security and openness to immigration, the relative 
importance of a state’s identity as a nation and a member of the global community, and 
the degree to which the Executive ought to be able to make determinations about 
immigration and national security without second-guessing by the judiciary. The law is 
necessary precisely because we are nowhere close to reaching agreement on these issues 
as a matter of first-order political morality. It is too much to ask for consensus, but 
legitimacy for Dworkin does require a sufficient degree of coherence that citizens subject 
to the law can recognize, as suggested above, that the legal requirement is our demand, 
with the subject of the law being a member of the relevant “us” issuing the demand. The 
scope of the demand for integrity is significant. Dworkin believes that Judge Hercules 
has to offer an interpretation that fits with the political decisions that have come before, 
including legislation and judicial opinions, and justifies them in the light of the 
community’s political morality.32 There may be some tension in the corpus of past 
political decisions, but the labor of Hercules is to show that they actually fit together as 
elements of a morally attractive “story worth telling now.”33 
 
  To criticize Dworkin’s demand for coherence is not necessarily to assert the 
indeterminacy of law. It is perfectly clear that the Immigration and Nationality Act 
grants broad authority to the President to make the type of determination reflected in 
Trump’s executive order: 
 
Whenever the President finds that the entry of any aliens or of any class of aliens 
into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United States, 
he may by proclamation, and for such period as he shall deem necessary, suspend 
the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants, or 
impose on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deem to be appropriate.34  
 
The Supreme Court has sustained the President’s plenary power against constitutional 
challenges based on racial discrimination and the First Amendment.35 However, it is 
also clear that sufficient circumstantial evidence of discriminatory intent will support an 
equal protection or religious-discrimination claim, notwithstanding the existence of 
executive authority.36 The problem is not indeterminacy but pluralism. Hercules must 
somehow reach a conclusion that fits with the community’s past political acts – the facts 
of both expansive executive power in the immigration and national security arenas and 
the constitutional prohibition on singling out a group or religion for unfavorable 
treatment. It must not only fit both of these strands of law, but it must justify them with 
reference to our political morality, showing our political practices in their best light. 
Hercules may find the order repugnant, but in order to remain faithful to the 
community’s political-moral traditions and practices, he cannot avoid the deference 
traditionally given by courts to the political branches in matters of immigration and 
                                                           
32 Id. at 239.  
33 Id. at 227.  
34 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f). 
35 Jean v. Nelson, 472 U.S. 846 (1985); Kleindienst v. Mandel, 408 U.S. 753 (1972). 
36 Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520, 534 (1993); Arlington 
Heights, supra, 429 U.S. at 266-68.  national security. Yet he must also acknowledge that the constitution prohibits open 
discrimination that interferes with fundamental rights such as religion.  
 
  From the point of view of a judge trying to tell a coherent, morally attractive 
story, there are at least two narratives, each with its own characteristic political moral 
values, at work in the law of immigration and national security. One emphasizes the 
necessity of a strong and vigorous Executive to react quickly to danger and protect 
American citizens; the other foregrounds the vision of the United States as a nation of 
immigrants which, however imperfectly, has struggled to protect against discrimination 
on the basis of race, religion, and nationality. Any attempt to tell the American political 
and legal story would be incomplete without an acknowledgement of both preexisting 
narratives. Any given judge has the opportunity to lean more heavily on one of these 
normative visions, but fidelity to the community’s history and values requires 
acknowledging the other. A philosopher with a less imperial vision of law, like H.L.A. 
Hart, would be willing to accept that, at the margins of settled law, a judge has no option 
but to act frankly creatively, establishing new law and not interpreting law that already 
exists.37 Dworkin’s strong theory of associative political obligation, however, drives him 
to insist that Hercules provide a unitary account of the community’s political and moral 
commitments.  
 
III.  Non-Herculean Lawyering. 
 
  Reconciling diverse strands of the American political-moral tradition, as they are 
expressed in executive actions, legislation, and judicial decisions, may be an impossible 
task for a judge – the thirteenth labor of Hercules, as it were. Fortunately a lawyer is 
situated differently with respect to the values of legality, legitimacy, and integrity. The 
difference is directly related to the lawyer’s ethical role as agent of and an advisor to her 
client, and to the moral division of labor between lawyer and client. The agency 
structure of the lawyer-client relationship is not an afterthought, but one of the features 
that makes the role of lawyer ethically distinctive. Lawyers are obligated to act with 
reasonable competence and diligence to pursue their client’s lawful objectives, as 
defined by the client after consultation.38 A lawyer is free to counsel the client regarding 
“other considerations such as moral, economic, social and political factors.”39 As Acting 
Attorney General, Yates could have used such access to the President as she had to lay 
out a political and moral case against the executive order: Vetting procedures for visa 
applicants, including refugees, from Muslim-majority countries are already quite 
stringent, maybe even “extreme.” There is no need for haste in implementing the travel 
ban, and an immediate effective date may lead to chaos at airports and appear 
unnecessarily cruel. The appearance that the order is a “Muslim ban” may make our 
allies in the Islamic world understandably less likely to cooperate with the United States. 
And so on. There is nothing wrong, and a great deal right, with a high-level government 
lawyer having a conversation like this with the President. However, a lawyer, even the 
Attorney General, is always fundamentally an agent of her client. Final responsibility for 
                                                           
37 H.L.A. HART, THE CONCEPT OF LAW 135-36 (2d ed. 1994). 
38 RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF THE LAW GOVERNING LAWYERS § 16(1)-(2) (2000).  
39 MODEL RULES, supra note __, Rule 2.1.. the “moral, economic, social, and political” consequences of an action rests with the 
client, as a matter of the law of agency.  
 
  This moral division of labor characterizes the relationship between lawyers and 
private clients, and is embodied in the distinction between the objectives of the 
representation, which are for the client to decide, and technical decisions about the 
means of the representation, which are for the lawyer.40 The same vision of labor applies 
to the representation of government clients, but is further justified by the observation 
above concerning pluralism. What shows a community in its best light, from the 
standpoint of political morality, is a question about who we are as a nation, what we 
believe to be in the public interest, and what we would like our government to do on our 
behalf. These are quintessentially questions to be resolved by elections. One often hears 
that lawyers, and particularly lawyers for the government, should take into account the 
public interest while representing clients, it is often unclear how a lawyer should 
ascertain the content of the public interest. In the representation of government clients 
there is a ready answer. Elections are the means by which we determine what is in the 
public interest.41 If anything was clear in Trump’s campaign rhetoric it was that he 
intended to curtain immigration significantly. When Yates purports to reach a 
conclusion of law on the basis of considerations of what is just and right, she is required 
as an agent to base that decision on the client’s views of what is just and right. Like it or 
not, those views are now represented by the President’s policies regarding immigration. 
If the order is unlawful, as an instance of invidious discrimination or otherwise, then she 
should so advise the President. But a lawyer – even the highest-ranking advisor to the 
government – does not have an open commission to serve the public interest. Her 
obligation is to advise her client on compliance with the law, and to leave the moral and 
political decisions to the client.  
 
  Dworkin recognizes this problem and has an imaginary critic object that Hercules 
is substituting his own normative views of what the law should be for an interpretation 
of the law.42 I think Dworkin is right to say that there may be a case in which there are 
two or more competing interpretations of the law, all of which fit comfortably with past 
political decisions, among which Hercules must choose. In that case, Hercules has no 
choice but to rely on his own belief about which interpretation is best from the 
standpoint of political morality.43 This seems like an unobjectionable thing for Hercules 
to do; as H.L.A. Hart pointed decades previously, sometimes judges must make a choice 
which is neither arbitrary nor mechanical.44 But this response risks undermining the 
legitimacy of a law that purports to be binding because it is legitimate, and legitimate 
because it is grounded in our political morality. When Acting Attorney General Yates 
accounted that she would direct the Justice Department not to enforce the executive 
order because a law must be not only legally defensible, but also informed by the 
Department’s best view of what the law is, she was staking a great deal on the 
                                                           
40 MODEL RULES, supra note __, Rule 1.2(a). 
41 See Geoffrey P. Miller, Government Lawyers’ Ethics in a System of Checks and Balances, 54 U. 
CHI. L. REV. 1293, 1295 (1987). 
42 DWORKIN, supra note __, at 259.  
43 Id. at 263.  
44 HART, supra note __, at 204.  assumption that others would recognize that Trump’s executive order was not the best 
view of the law. As noted above, however, it is a plausible interpretation of the 
President’s statutory authority and plenary power over immigration. To assert that it is 
other than the “best” view of the law, then, would be to assert that it is inconsistent with 
the political morality of our community as a whole. That is where she exceeded the 
limits of the ethical rights and responsibilities of her role. She was required to provide 
the President with candid and competent legal advice, but the question of coherence 
with our community’s political morality is one which the democratic process entrusts to 
elections and whatever mandate they provide for the President to set the normative 
agenda. 
 
IV.  Conclusion. 
 
  National security scholar and former OLC attorney Marty Lederman argues that 
Yates’s critics are picking semantic nits when they focus on the “right and just” language 
in interpreting her claim that a government attorney should seek the best view of the 
law.45 The best way to read her letter is that it contends the executive order is 
unconstitutional because the President was motivated by religious discrimination, but 
she did not want to come out and say that directly. She did say she was not “convinced 
that the Executive Order is lawful,” so perhaps the reference to morality and justice was 
merely a rhetorical flourish. The “best view of the law” language may simply indicate 
that any lawyer has an obligation of competence, candid communication, and 
independent judgment.46 Surely an ethical lawyer would not want to provide only her 
second-best judgment about what the law requires. This reading of Yates’s letter may be 
persuasive, but the reason for composing this short essay, with the seemingly quixotic 
discussion of Dworkin, was to distinguish sharply between the claim that a government 
action is “stupid but legal,” as conservative commentator Charles Krauthammer put it,47 
or unlawful, full-stop. Dworkinian jurisprudence invites this confusion, and I am afraid 
Yates’s letter will set a bad example for other government lawyers advising the Executive 
on the legality of proposed actions. There may be a legal argument, avoiding the detour 
into political morality, that the travel ban is unconstitutional because it is motivated by 
invidious discrimination. Alternatively, it could be within the President’s broad plenary 
power and statutory authority. By trying to become Hercules, Acting Attorney General 
Yates gave insufficient attention to the fundamental responsibility of any attorney, 
which is to provide candid advice to her client on what the law permits or requires, and 
to repose the responsibility with the client for the political and moral consequences of 
his decision.   
 
                                                           
45 See Marty Lederman, Sally Yates Did the Right Thing, JUST SECURITY (Jan. 31, 2017), available at 
https://www.justsecurity.org/37029/sally-yates/  
46 ABA MODEL RULES OF PROF’L CONDUCT, Rules 1.1, 1.4, 2.1. 
47 Charles Krauthammer, The Travel Moratorium: A Hopeless Disaster, WASH. POST (Feb. 9, 2017). 