The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Modern History of Human Rights
Fengyu Duan
October 15, 2017
Abstract
Beginningwiththephrase“allhumanbeingsarebornfreeandequalindignityand
rights,” the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) proclaims its purpose
of establishing global human rights from the outset. As a common standard of
achievement for all signatory nations, the UDHR constitutes an essential cornerstone
in the modern history of human rights by drawing upon ancient to contemporary
philosophies, responses to the heinous crimes of World War II, and various visions
for future human rights standards. Despite diverging viewpoints from many of the
drafting parties and states, the UDHR eventually transcended conﬂict to form the
underpinnings of a moral compass for all of humankind.
This essay ﬁrst explores how the UDHR came into formation by reviewing the his-
torical origins of human rights, global dynamics prior to the UDHR, the drafting pro-
cessandkeydebatesinvolved,andﬁnallyitsachievedcompromiseandultimateunani-
mousadoption. Then, theessayexamineswaysinwhichtheUDHRhasevolved, from
both a legal and moral angle, since its adoption in the context of past achievements
and current challenges. From a historical point of view, I argue that the UDHR is
alivingdocumentthathasandisexpectedtochangeasoursocietiescontinuetoevolve.
.:taxonomy:.
/law, government and politics/legal issues/human rights (0.662526); /so-
ciety/unrest and war (0.182124); /law, government and politics [top level] (0.167871)
Keywords: human rights, human rights project, international human rights,
UDHR, Universal Declaration of Human Rights, human rights standards, Human
Rights Commission, global human rights, future human rights, United Nations,
United States Declaration of Independence, political rights, economic rights, social
rights
JEL Classiﬁcations: K38, K33, Z13, Z18, N40, K19
1Contents
1 The Historical Origins of Human Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2 Global Dynamics Preceding the UDHR’s Drafting . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3 The Drafting of the UDHR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4 Lingering Debates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5 Overcoming Barriers and Obtaining Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6 Legal Signiﬁcance of the UDHR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7 Moral Signiﬁcance of the UDHR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
8 Challenges, Criticism, and Counterargument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
8.1 Enforceability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
8.2 Cultural Relativism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
9 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
10 Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
21 The Historical Origins of Human Rights
The origins of human rights are by no means simple; they emerged and evolved in intricate
ways in distinct historical settings.1 However, these origins can be roughly categorized into
three primary categories: religious contemplations, philosophical inspirations, and political
and social theories.
Initially, the ancient worship of diverse religions led to early human rights practices.2
Given that religious grounds for human rights involve a myriad of complexities, only a few
select moments will be examined here. In the West, Judaism, a religion established more
than 3,500 years ago, has primarily emphasized the performance of duty, a notion that may
further promote respect for one’s rights.3 For example, Leviticus, the third book of the
Hebrew Bible, explicitly commands, “You shall not oppress. You shall do no injustice. You
shall love your neighbors as yourself.”4 These instructions establish responsibility toward
others. Stemming from Judaism, Christianity endows human dignity with universality, a
concept that is central in human rights today.5 Shattering divisions based upon ethnicity,
social status, and gender, Christianity acknowledges that we “are all one in Christ Jesus.”6
In the East, Hindu social ethics, which emerged around the ﬁfth century B.C.E.,
connect the notion of duty with speciﬁc legal, political, and economic rights.7 However,
such ideals rest on the belief of spiritual development, or transcendence.8 Sharing with
Hinduism the pursuit of liberation from the material world, Buddhism, established in
the sixth century B.C.E., not only assigns dignity and moral responsibility to human
nature but also rejects the caste system and claims equality for all human beings.9 Islam,
established in the seventh century C.E. and founded on the Judeo-Christian tradition,
aﬃrms the universality of human rights, proclaiming that “Jews [and, later, Christians] ...
shall practice their religion as freely as Muslims.”10
Religious visions have thus made crucial contributions to the progress of international
human rights by establishing moral codes, suggesting what ought to be, constructing
responsibility toward others, and associating duties and rights.11 Conversely, philosophical
visions seek to interpret human rights through reasoning, often followed by political and
social revolutions.
1. Paul Gordon Lauren, The Evolution of International Human Rights: Vision Seen (Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011), 5.
2. John Witte, Jr., “Law, Religion, and Human Rights,” Columbia Human Rights Law Review 28, no. 1
(1996): 13.
3. AsberMaoz,“CanJudaismServeasaSourceofHumanRights?,” Heidelberg Journal of International
Law 64 (2004): 686.
4. Lev. 19:13, 15, 16. Authorized Version.
5. Michael Novak, “The Judeo-Christian Foundation of Human Dignity, Personal Liberty, and the
Concept of the Person,” Journal of Markets & Morality 1, no. 2 (1998): 107-121.
6. Galatians 3:28. AV.
7. John Witte, Jr., “Religion,” in The Oxford Handbook of International Human Rights Law, ed. Dinah
Shelton (New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 9-31.
8. Ibid.
9. Damien Keown, “Are There “Human Rights” in Buddhism?”, Buddhism and Human Rights 2 (1998):
15.
10. Iftikhar Ahmed Mehar, Al-Islam: Inception to Conclusion (Bloomington: Authorhouse, 2003), 185.
11. Lauren, The Evolution of International Human Rights, 10.
3Prominent civilizations across the globe have bred their own perspectives on human
rights. Dating back to approximately 1780 B.C.E., the Babylonian Code of Hammurabi
invokesprogressivejusticeandcondemnsthearbitraryuseofpowertoensuretheprotection
of human rights.12 In the sixth century B.C.E., Confucian philosophy took human rights
as the “basis for a legitimate social and political order.”13 As a typical representative of
Eastern wisdom, Confucianism espouses many ideas related to human rights, including
conscience, human dignity, morality over personal interest, and social harmony.14 Roughly
contemporary to Confucianism, texts on the Cyrus cylinder, developed by ancient Persia’s
(now Iran’s) ruler Cyrus the Great, are credited as the “earliest known advocates of
religious tolerance” and sometimes even the “ﬁrst charter of human rights” with the explicit
appearance of the word “rights.”15;16 Other noteworthy contributors in the East include
the Indian philosopher and prime minister Kautilya of the fourth century B.C.E. and the
Islamic philosopher Abu Al-Farabi of the tenth century C.E.17
A continent away, the Greek classical era from 476 to 336 B.C.E. witnessed the birth
of the world’s ﬁrst democracy with citizens granted civil and political rights within city-
states.18 Several Greek philosophers, including Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, argued for
“a universal law of nature” that applied to all creation and provided the foundations for
natural rights.19 Later, the Roman Stoics systematically advanced and promulgated natural
rights by supporting the values of impartiality, egalitarianism, and cosmopolitanism.20
During the thirteenth century C.E., the Christian philosopher Saint Thomas Aquinas
further polished Aristotle’s concept of natural law.21 The Renaissance, an intellectual
movement that prevailed in the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries C.E., spread the ideals
of humanism and free expression that had previously been undermined by political and
religious authorities.22
The concepts of natural laws and natural rights have evolved and shaped the political
spheres as well. In 1215 C.E., the Magna Carta was issued and, for the ﬁrst time, exerted
legal restraints upon King John of England to protect certain liberties and the due process
12. Micheline R. Ishay, The History of Human Rights: From Ancient Times to the Globalization Era
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008), 28.
13. Joseph C. W. Chan, “Confucianism and Human Rights,” in Religion and Human Rights: An In-
troduction, ed. John Witte, Jr. and M. Christian Green (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011),
93.
14. Pinghua Sun, “Confucian Philosophy and Its Historical Contributions to Human Rights,” in Human
Rights Protection System in China (New York: Springer, 2014), 1-20.
15. W. J. Talbott, Which Rights should be Universal? (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 40.
16. Sabine C. Carey, The Politics of Human Rights: The Quest for Dignity (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2010), 19.
17. Lauren, The Evolution of International Human Rights, 12.
18. Jack Donnelly, Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
2013), 81.
19. Aristotle, Aristotle: In Twenty-Three Volumes, trans. J. H. Freese (Cambridge and London: Harvard
University Press, 1926), Book I, Chapter 13.
20. Lisa Hill, “Stoic Cosmopolitanism and the Birth of Universal Rights,” American Political Science
Association 2013 Annual Meeting Paper (2013): 27.
21. Ralph McInerny and John O’Callaghan, “Saint Thomas Aquinas,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy,Winter2016,accessedSeptember1,2017,https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aquinas/.
22. C.B.Schmitt,The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy (Cambridge:CambridgeUniversity
Press, 1988), 53.
4of law.23 In 1628, as a result of political disturbances from the same monarch, the Petition
of Right was created, listing various civil liberties upon which the king could not infringe.24
In 1689, the English Bill of Rights constituted one of the milestones in the history of
civil and political liberties, delineating free elections, open speech within parliament, and
judicial justice as privileges for all citizens.25
Soon after, the Enlightenment of the seventeenth to eighteenth centuries C.E., a
vigorous European intellectual movement emphasizing human reason and individualism,
added vitality to the ideals of human rights. The English philosopher John Locke employed
the theory of natural law to build upon the theory of natural rights, which he argued
should include “life, liberty, and possessions.”26 The German philosopher Immanuel Kant,
sometimes praised as the “giant shoulders [upon which] the modern theory of human rights
rests,” stated that humans’ freedom to choose made them distinct from other beings.27;28
Along with the eﬀorts of other Enlightenment philosophers, these ideals inspired American
and French Revolutionary thinkers and thus the following groundbreaking documents: the
U.S. Declaration of Independence in 1776, the French Declaration of the Rights of Man
and of the Citizen in 1789, and the U.S. Bill of Rights in 1791. These documents strove to
aﬃrm human rights, sometimes oﬀering legal protections for fundamental liberties and
launching the historical beginning of the constitutional movement and modern era.29 The
voice of feminism and the rights of women also ﬁrst became prominent following these
revolutions. In 1791, the French political activist Olympe de Gouges challenged patriarchal
traditions in her Declaration of the Rights of Women and the Female Citizen, announcing
that “woman is born free and remains equal to man in her rights.”30
The evolution of human rights is too complex to detail in its entirety, with many
setbacks along the way. Among the serious threats to human rights were the institution of
slavery, gender inequality, and racial prejudice. Nevertheless, these early origins supply an
essential foundation for the development of international human rights (best exempliﬁed
through the drafting of the UDHR) and illuminate the development of perceived natural
rights for all of humankind.31
The thoughts and documents reviewed here eventually formed the foundations of the
UDHR, which, for the ﬁrst time, presented a transnational commitment to deﬁning and
protecting human rights. For instance, the Magna Carta is credited with being the “most
direct ancestor of the actual language” in the UDHR, whereas the U.S. Bill of Rights served
23. Peter Linebaugh, The Magna Carta Manifesto: Liberties and Commons for All (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 2008), 368.
24. “ABritishBillofRights:InformingtheDebate,” JUSTICEConstitutionCommitteeofBritishSection
of the International Commission of Jurists, 2007, accessed September 1, 2017, http://www.statewatch.
org/news/2007/nov/uk-justice-bill-of-rights-rep.pdf.
25. Ibid.
26. John Locke, Locke: Two Treaties of Government student edition (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1988), Chap. VII, 87.
27. Michael Rosen, Dignity: Its History and Meaning (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012),
19.
28. Samuel Moyn, Human Rights and the Uses of History (New York and London: Verso, 2014), 65.
29. Reis Monteiro, Ethics of Human Rights (Heidelberg: Springer International Publishing, 2014), 66.
30. Olympe de Gouge, “Declaration of the Rights of Women and the Female Citizen.” College of Staten
Island Library: American Studies Program (1791): Article I.
31. Lauren, The Evolution of International Human Rights, 23.
5as one of the previous models upon which the drafting of the UDHR heavily depended.32
Furthermore, the diverse range of perspectives proves an imperative point: the UDHR rests
not only upon Western notions but also upon those originating in the East. Many principles
that the UDHR espouses can be found in the world’s great religious and philosophical
traditions without distinction of East or West. Thus, at least theoretically, a document was
created that is universally applicable to all.33 Although it is a relatively recent document,
the UDHR’s essence is deeply rooted in a diverse range of histories, making it, at least
theoretically and idealistically, relevant to all of humankind.
32. Susan Muaddi Darraj, Milestones in Modern World History: The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (Langhome: Chelsea House, 2010), 49.
33. Douglas Irvin-Erickson, “Protection from Whom? Tensions, Contradictions, and Potential in the
Responsibility to Protect,” in Rethinking Security in the Twenty-First Century, ed. Daniel Jacob (New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017), 112.
62 Global Dynamics Preceding the UDHR’s Drafting
Although the early roots of human rights in the religious, philosophical, and political arenas
intersected, oﬀering a wide range of perspectives fundamental to the development of civil
liberty as a concept, no global benchmark for human rights was established until the end of
World War I. The Treaty of Versailles in 1919 led to the creation of the League of Nations
and the International Labor Organization, two of the ﬁrst international organizations,
which aimed to achieve peace and encourage social justice, respectively.34 The new global
order signiﬁed an important development in international human rights. The Covenant of
the League of Nations promised “fair and humane conditions for labor,” “just treatment,”
especially for persons of formerly colonized territories and members of minority groups,
as well as “freedom of conscience and religion.”35 However, the notion of international
protection for human rights was never seriously considered or acknowledged by the
global community despite Japan’s eﬀorts to include racial equality and nondiscrimination
clauses.36
In 1929, the Institut de Droit International (Institute of International Law), a well-
respected global law organization, drafted and adopted the Declaration of the International
Rights of Man at its meeting in New York. This document proclaimed the “equal rights of
every individual to life, liberty, and property” without a basis in any particular nationality,
gender, language, or religion.37 René Cassin, a vital ﬁgure in the subsequent drafting of
the UDHR, credited the Declaration of the International Rights of Man as one of his
inﬂuences.38
Ironically, it was the outbreak of World War II and its many casualties that called
increased attention to the cause of human rights. From 1939 to 1945, the total number of
deathsfromWWII,includingAlliedandAxissoldiersandcivilians,wasestimatedtoexceed
60 million people, making it the deadliest conﬂict in human history.39 In Nazi concentration
camps, up to 11 million Jewish, Roma, Soviet prisoners of war, homosexuals, and other
victims were systematically killed.40 Atrocities within and apart from the Holocaust
included sexual violence, forced labor, mass bombings, and human experimentation.
Vowing “Never Again,” the global community committed itself to fostering international
34. Lee Swepston, “The International Labour Organization and International Human Rights System,” in
Routledge Handbook of International Human Rights Law, eds. Scott Sheeran and Sir Nigel Rodley (London
and New York: Routledge, 2013), 340.
35. “The Covenant of the League of Nations,” The Avalon Project at the Yale Law School: Documents in
Law, History and Diplomacy (New Haven: The Avalon Project, December 1924), accessed September 1,
2017, http://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/leagcov.asp.
36. Thomas Buergenthal, Dianh Shelton, and David P. Stewart, “International Human Rights in a
Nutshell,” George Washington Legal Studies Research Paper no. 2013-34 (2009): 8.
37. Institut de droit international, “Declaration of the International Rights of Man,” American Journal
of International Law 35 (1941): 664.
38. William A. Schabas, “The Rights to Life,” in Oxford Handbook of International Law in Armed
Conﬂict, eds. Andrew Clapham and Paola Gaeta (Oxord: Oxford University Press, 2014), 367.
39. Donald Sommerville and Ian Westwell, The Complete Illustrated History of World War II: An
Authoritative Account of One of the Deadliest Conﬂicts in Human History, with Analysis of Decisive
Encounters and Landmark Engagements (London: Lorenz Books, 2008), 5.
40. Darraj, Milestones in Modern World History, 17.
7cooperation to prevent such atrocities against humanity from ever occurring in the future.41
This collaboration proceeded slowly and systematically. One of the ﬁrst notable hu-
manitarian responses to the brutal war came from US President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
His Four Freedoms proposal in January 1941 identiﬁed the basic liberties to which all
persons were entitled as those of speech, religion, a lack of want, and an absence of fear,
with “supremacy of human rights everywhere.”42 Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms proved to
be rather inﬂuential; they were later incorporated into the preambles of the UDHR and
other prominent human rights documents. In August of the same year, Roosevelt and
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill drafted the Atlantic Charter, in which they
aﬃrmed the principle of self-determination and envisioned a bright future for the world
where “all men in all lands may live out their lives in freedom from fear and want” after
defeating the Axis Powers.43 In January 1942, a joint announcement of the Allies, the
Declaration of the United Nations, was signed by the US, UK, USSR, China, and 22 other
states, upholding and expanding upon the Atlantic Charter.44 Since that key moment in
history, the crusade for human rights has been integrated into a transnational commitment
to combat fascism.45 Together, the Atlantic Charter and the Declaration of the United
Nations marked the oﬃcial entry of human rights as a topic of international discussion.46
This faith in and enthusiasm for human rights, however, eventually began to fade.
Each of the involved states violated the pledge of protecting human rights embedded in
the Atlantic Charter and the Declaration of the United Nations at some point in their
subsequent history, from the repressive regime of Stalin in the USSR, to continued British
colonialism, to racial and legal segregation in the US.47 None of these powers seemed
ready to adjust their policies to meet the standards of human rights principles; thus,
these principles remained largely idealistic.48 The former Allies also feared intervention by
less-powerful states and the loss of supremacy that might result from prioritizing human
rights over national interest.49 Not surprisingly, these powers considered the human rights
project peripheral.50 At the Dumbarton Oaks Conference of 1944, an exclusive meeting
to negotiate and create a new global order, the United States suggested that respect for
individual rights should be the basis of UN membership obligation, eﬀectively eliminating
41. Jide Nzelibe, “Courting Genocide: The Unintended Eﬀects of Humanitarian Intervention,” North-
western University School of Law, Public and Legal Theory Series 8, no. 36 (2008): 3.
42. Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Message to Congress,” January 6, 1941, accessed September 1, 2017, https:
//fdrlibrary.org/four-freedoms.
43. Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston S. Churchill, Atlantic Charter (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd., 1941), Chapter B, 2.
44. Franklin D. Roosevelt, “The Pubic Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt: Humanity on the
Defensive,” American Historical Review 55, no. 4 (1942): 3–5.
45. M. Glen Johnson and Janusz Symonides, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A History of
Its Creation and Implementation 1948-1998 (Paris: UNESCO Publishing, 1998), 27.
46. Roger Normand and Sarah Zaidi, Human in the U.N.: The Political History of Universal Justice.
United Nations Intellectual History Project (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008), 94.
47. Wiktor Osiatynski, Human Rights and Their Limits (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009),
15.
48. Normand and Zaidi, Human in the U.N., 46.
49. Osiatynski, Human Rights and Their Limit, 187.
50. M. A. Glendon, A World Made New: Eleanor Roosevelt and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (New York: Random House, 2001), 4–20.
8the possibility of such liberties being extended to non-member states. Furthermore, the
USSR and the UK rejected the Chinese proposal for racial equality and eliminating bias
based upon ethnic identity from the ﬁnal statement, the Proposals for the Establishment of
a General International Organization.51 Ultimately, the proposals included only a cursory
andunenforceablereferencetouniversality:thenewlyformulatedinternationalorganization
would simply “promote respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.”52
However, WWII and the human rights promises that followed its conclusion awakened
publicandinternationaldemandforsubstantialactioninthepostwarglobalorder.However,
theabsenceofmeaningfulhumanrightsprinciplesintheplansfortheneworganizationsoon
enraged smaller states, triggering persistent criticism. This dissatisfaction was particularly
evident among many Latin American states, leading to the Inter-American Conference
on Problems of War and Peace in February 1945. With primary concerns including the
principles of sovereignty and non-intervention, the conference declared adherence to a
system of international protection for human rights as well.53
Simultaneously, the concept of liberalism, a political philosophy that values individual
rights and liberties above all, began gaining popularity throughout the world. This political
philosophy also invested in creating “a more humane world.”54 Leading organizations that
espoused this philosophy included what are now known as nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), private companies, and individuals who worked vigorously toward developing a
new mechanism for international morality.55
The combined inﬂuence of these smaller powers, international NGOs, private businesses,
andprominentindividualsmanagedtosubverttheformerAlliedpowers’planstoemphasize
only the rights of speciﬁc groups of people.56 In April 1945 at the San Francisco Conference
of the United Nations, many states, including Panama, Chile, South Africa, and Mexico,
oﬀered proposals to include human rights provisions in the Charter of the UN; the
determined lobbying of various NGOs, led by the American Jewish Committee, also made
signiﬁcant contributions.57;58 As a result of these eﬀorts, the UN Charter included the
promotion of “respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all” and mandated
the establishment of a Commission on Human Rights within the Economic and Social
51. Cathal J. Nolan, “Road to the Charter: America, Liberty, and the Founding of the United Nations,”
Paradigms 3, no.1 (1989): 29.
52. “Proposal for the Establishment of a General International Organization, Pamphlet No. 4, Pillars of
Peace,” in Documents Pertaining to American Interest in Establishing a Lasting World Peace: January
1941-February 1946 (Fort George G. Meade: Army Information School, 1946), Chapter IX, 36.
53. Ann Van Wynen Thomas and A.J. Thomas Jr., “Human Rights and Organizations of American
States,” Santa Clara Lawyer 12 (1972): 319.
54. AllidaM.Black,Casting Her Own Shadow: Eleanor Roosevelt and the Shaping of Postwar Liberalism
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), 1.
55. Roger Baldwin, “International Agreements Can Protect Speciﬁc Rights,” Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 243, no. 1 (January 1946): 134–138.
56. Joe Hoover, “Rereading the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Plurality and Contestation, Not
Consensus,” Journal of Human Rights 12 (2013): 217–241.
57. Dominic McGlodrick, The Human Rights Committee: Its Role in the Development on Civil and
Political Rights (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991), 3–4.
58. William Korey, NGO’s and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A Curious Grapevine
(London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), 2.
9Council.59 However, the charter also outlawed any UN intervention on matters within
the “domestic jurisdiction of any state,” in practice projecting barriers of enforcement
on human rights issues.60 This strategy, proposed by the US, was perhaps intended to
minimize challenges to the human rights provision. However, revealing the controversy
between sovereignty of state and the enforceability of human rights has long since remained
the crux of the debate.61
The passage of the UN Charter in June and the subsequent establishment of the UN
not only marked a signiﬁcant turning point in world politics and international relations
but also provided an unprecedented framework for international human rights protections.
Despite reluctance from some states, the highest ideals of humanity, persistently invoked
by smaller powers and civil society, would thereafter extend, at least theoretically, beyond
national borders. Thus, the world entered into the newly established order of a global
community that hoped to prevent the oﬀenses of totalitarianism from occurring again.
59. “U.N.Charter,” TheUnitedNations,accessedSeptember1,2017,http://www.un.org/en/sections/
un-charter/chapter-i/index.html.
60. Ibid.
61. Normand and Zaidi, Human in the U.N., 132.
103 The Drafting of the UDHR
Shortly after the UN Charter came into eﬀect, on November 23, 1945, the Executive
Committee of the Preparatory Commission of the UN, which was responsible for presiding
over the ﬁrst session of the UN’s primary organs, mandated that “an international bill of
rights” be formed.62 This requirement became the starting point for the drafting of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
However, the various meanings of the term “international bill of rights” triggered
controversy that perplexed those involved in drafting the UDHR. They found that there
were three possible approaches to the bill: the ﬁrst was a morally compelling declaration,
the second a legally binding document, and the third, regarding implementation, an
international institution to protect human rights.63
In February 1946, the ﬁrst session of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
established a temporary Commission on Human Rights, which was charged with proposing
suggestions for a permanent Commission on Human Rights.64 With Eleanor Roosevelt
as chairperson and nine other distinguished members working collaboratively, the com-
mission oﬀered several suggestions as “preparatory work” for the development of the
International Bill of Rights.65 The bill, as these members expected, “might become one of
the cornerstones” upon which world peace would rest and would be drafted by the full
commission as soon as possible.66 In this regard, they suggested a preference for a morally
compelling declaration.67 This group proposed that the deﬁnitive commission comprise
eighteen independent experts rather than governmental delegates.68 Furthermore, they
suggested that the ﬁnal commission should have roles not merely in drafting legal texts
but also in monitoring the practice of human rights.69 Lastly, the commission envisaged
“equitable geographical distribution” along with the guideline of “personal qualiﬁcation”
when considering nominees for the full commission, ensuring that larger and smaller states
would have an equal say.70 This ﬁnal suggestion was accepted, contributing to the perceived
universality of the commission.71
However, the ﬁrst three proposals of the temporary Commission were not followed.
Complexities of the three diﬀerent potential approaches to the International Bill of Rights
62. “Report of the Preparatory Commission of the United Nations,” The United Nations, 1946, accessed
September 1, 2017, http://dag.un.org/handle/11176/248329.
63. Johnson and Symonides, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 35.
64. Olivier De Schutter, International Human Rights Law: Cases, Materials, Commentary, (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2014), 16.
65. United Nations, Report of the Commission on Human Rights to the Second Session of the Economic
and Social Council, UN Doc. E/38, at 3 (1946).
66. Eleanor Roosevelt, “The Promise of Human Rights,” Foreign Aﬀairs (1948), 473.
67. United Nations, Report of the Commission on Human Rights to the Second Session of the Economic
and Social Council, 6.
68. Johannes Morsink, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Origins, Drafting, and Intent
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999), 4.
69. Phillip Alston, “The Commission on Human Rights,” in The United Nations and Human Rights: A
Critical Appraisal, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 126.
70. United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary of Meetings, UN Doc. E/HR. 9, at 5
(1946).
71. Morsink, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 4.
11failed to be understood or addressed when the ECOSOC discussed the document’s creation
in its June meeting, at which the permanent Commission of Human Rights was established.
Refusing to choose among the three projections for the bill, the ECOSOC instructed
the provisional commission to work on all three simultaneously. Instead of independent
experts, appointed to the commission were eighteen representatives of governments that
included Australia, Belgium, Soviet Byelorussia (the BSSR), Chile, China, Egypt, France,
India, Iran, Lebanon, Panama, the Philippines, the UK, the US, the USSR, Uruguay, and
Yugoslavia.72 Therefore, the tone was set for highly varied national values and cultural
norms that would shape the human rights project, which, to some extent, marginalized
the role of the individual from a global perspective.73 Furthermore, the commission failed
to invoke monitoring power until around the 1970s, meaning that they had little oversight
over the fulﬁllment of human rights worldwide.74
The commission held its ﬁrst session in January and February of 1947 and soon realized
that a smaller group would be more eﬀective at accomplishing a preliminary draft of the
bill. Hence, it assigned the task to a drafting subcommittee under unanimous approval.75
Initially, the drafting subcommittee included only Eleanor Roosevelt of the US, who was
elected the chair of the full commission, Peng-Chun (P. C.) Chang of China, its Vice
President, and Charles Malik of Lebanon, the Repporteur, assisted by the UN Division
of Human Rights, led by Secretariat Peters John Humphrey of Canada.76 The three
members of the subcommittee entrusted Humphrey to prepare the ﬁrst draft due to his
vast legal expertise, his access to relevant resources, and his oﬃce’s ability to conduct
the necessary research.77 Synthesizing an extensive amount of human rights statements
and suggestions by various governments, NGOs, and interested individuals, Humphrey
attempted to “include all the rights mentioned” in his draft of the document.78 The
comprehensiveness of the initial version of the UDHC surprised the drafting committee;
it totaled more than 400 pages in length and contained 48 individual items, and it was
later designated by the UN as “the most exhaustive documentation on the subject of
human rights ever assembled.”79 Humphrey’s draft provided a solid basis for the UDHR, a
masterpiece combining both existing models and emerging ideas from all over the globe.80
Meanwhile, the fourth session of the ECOSOC lasted from March to April. During this
time, the decision was made to augment the drafting subcommittee to include ﬁve other
delegates from Australia, Chile, France, the USSR, and the UK under the rationale that
these additions would allow the drafting process to be more inclusive. The eminent team
that nurtured the UDHR eventually included Eleanor Roosevelt, P. C. Chang, Charles
Malik, René Cassin of France, and Secretariat Humphrey in the most inﬂuential roles.
72. Ibid.
73. Normand and Zaidi, Human in the U.N., 139.
74. Schutter, International Human Rights Law, 15.
75. Glendon, A World Made New, 45.
76. United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the Twelfth Meeting, UN Doc.
E/CN.4/SR.12, at 5 (1947).
77. Darraj, Milestones in Modern World History, 38.
78. United Nations, Drafting Committee of the Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the
First Meeting, UN Doc. E/CN.4/AC.1/SR/1, at 5 (1947).
79. Glendon, A World Made New, 58.
80. Morsink, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 6.
12Eleanor Roosevelt’s skills in facilitating action and building consensus, along with her
diligence, enthusiasm, and public standing, made her such an invaluable asset that Malik
commented he could never imagine “how they could accomplish [the task] without her.”81
ChangandMalikstoodastheintellectualgiantsofthesubcommittee:Changwas acreative
dispute mediator who frequently incorporated Confucianism into discourse, whereas Malik,
a fastidious, unyielding man, approached the UDHR with foundations in natural law.82;
83 Cassin, a considerate, easy-going man, brought much-needed academic and personal
experience to the group and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his contributions.84
Finally, equipped with distinguished expertise, Humphrey not only produced the ﬁrst draft
of the UDHR but also served to link multiple ideological perspectives.85 Other members
included William Hodgson of Australia, Hernan Santa Cruz of Chile, Vladimir Koretsky
(whose position was frequently replaced later in the process) of the USSR, and Geoﬀrey
Wilson of Great Britain.
Ultimately, a compromise was reached, and two types of documents were prepared.
This was the beginning of the fragmentation of the International Bill of Rights to include
the more general UDHR as well as the more divisive International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR). As a result of this schism, more of the subcommittee’s attention was
devoted to the drafting of the UDHR than to the International Bill of Rights as a whole.
According to Roosevelt, the British draft of the ICCPR was far less deliberately crafted
and reviewed than the UDHR and was eventually submitted to the commission as a mere
report.86;87
The tightly knit group of those working on the declaration, including Roosevelt, Cassin,
Malik, and Wilson, entrusted Cassin personally with the development of a second draft
based on Humphrey’s earlier eﬀort. Drawing three-quarters of its provisions from the
Humphrey draft, Cassin framed his revisions as a logical rearrangement, made cautious
revisions, and expanded upon the preamble to explain the necessity of the UDHR.88
Cassin’s draft oﬀered a vital step toward completion, and some even honored him,
incorrectly, as the sole “father of Universal Declaration.”89 Reviewed and revised by the
81. A. Glenn Mower, Jr., The United States, the United Nations, and Human Rights: The Eleanor
Roosevelt and Jimmy Carter Eras (Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1979), 58.
82. Sumner Twiss, “Confucian ethics, concept-clusters, and human rights,” in Polishing the Chinese
Mirror: Essay in Honor of Henry Rosemont, ed. Jr., Marthe Chandler and Ronnie Littlejohn (New York:
Global Scholarly Publication, 2007), 60–63.
83. Sol Linowitz, Charles H. Malik, and Daniel Parker, The Creative Interface: International Busi-
ness—Governmental Relations, vol. 2 (Washington D.C.: American University Press, 1970), 3–48.
84. Kenneth Cmiel, “The Recent History of Human Rights,” American Historical Review 109 (2004):123.
85. John P. Humphrey, On the Edge of Greatness: The Diaries of John Humphrey, First Director of
the United Nations Division of Human Rights, vol. 1,1948-1949, ed. A. J. Hobbins (Montreal: McGill
University Libraries, 1994), 88.
86. “Memorandum of Conversation between Mrs. Roosevelt, Senator Austin, and Messrs Ross, Winslow
and Hendrick,” in Box 4587, ER Paper (1947), 42.
87. United Nations, Report of the Drafting Committee to the Commission on Human Rights, UN Doc.
E/CN.4/21, at 5 (1947).
88. JayWinterandAntoineProst,René Cassin and Human Rights: From the Great War to the Universal
Declaration (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 246.
89. Ibid, 237.
13drafting subcommittee on June 17, 1947, Cassin’s revisions were then submitted to the
full commission in Geneva, Switzerland. In December, the larger Commission on Human
Rights carefully reviewed the materials before engaging in numerous discussions. During
this time, members of the commission took part in prolonged debates, eventually emerging
with a third version of the document, referred to as the Geneva draft. Still, the commission
continued its eﬀorts on the three fronts—the declaration, the convention, and the measures
for implementation. Despite the fact that there was only a rudimentary draft of the
UDHR and little progress made toward revising the ICCPR and ICESCR, both were later
completed, and the International Bill of Rights was born.90
90. James Frederick Green, The United Nations and Human Rights (Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution, 1956), 25.
144 Lingering Debates
Arguments regarding the purpose of the UDHR were largely driven by political dilemmas
and ideological discrepancies, which interweaved with one another and created formidable
hurdles. At the time, the wartime alliance against fascism was on the verge of fragmentation
following Joseph Stalin’s declaration in February 1946 that the coexistence of communism
and capitalism was impossible.91 Winston Churchill delivered his famous Iron Curtain
Speech one month later, warning that a “shadow... alike in the west and in the east
falls upon the world.”92 Meanwhile, in a long telegram, US diplomat George Kennan
anonymously framed what would become known as the US containment policy against
Soviet aggression. Together, these actions signaled increased tensions between the US and
the USSR, two major superpowers in the world at the time, and, more broadly, the Eastern
and Western Blocs. This anxiety would eventually lead to the conﬂict that became known
as the Cold War, a period of geopolitical tension that has shaped the course of human
rights to this day.
To fully understand the intriguing dynamics at play among UN member states, it is
essential to remember that the delegates on the Human Rights Commission represented
governments rather than independent persons, companies, or NGOs. As a result, these
delegates were required to express opinions based upon political aﬃliation rather than
personal belief. Roosevelt, for instance, constantly strove to include American ideals in the
UDHR by taking advantage of her chairperson position.93 Although Roosevelt’s arguments
sometimes diﬀered from those of the US State Department, she remained dedicated to
serving US interests ﬁrst and foremost.94 Due to her lobbying skills, her friendships with
other subcommittee members, and her prestige and position within the UN along with the
geopolitical powers of the US, almost all disagreements that emerged in the discussion
were settled in favor of American interests.95
Therefore, intensiﬁed tensions between the U.S. and USSR permeated this transnational
human rights project, to some extent changing the very notion of human rights into a
philosophical weapon to be used against one’s enemies in the decades-long Cold War. The
US accused the USSR of human rights abuses, including religious prosecution, suppression
ofspeechandpress,aswellasarbitraryandunjusttrials.Similarly,theSovietUnionargued
that the US was violating human rights standards as a result of race-based discrimination,
lynchings, and other violence, both systemic and interpersonal, against African Americans,
labeling the US a “hypocrite.”96
91. Joseph P. Stalin, “Speech Delivered by J. V. Stalin at a Meeting of Voters of the Stalin Electoral
District,” 1946, accessed September 1, 2017, https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stalin/
works/1937/12/election/index.htm.
92. Winston Churchill, “The Sinews of Peace (‘Iron Curtain Speech’),” International Churchill Society,
March5,1946,accessedSeptember1,2017,https://www.winstonchurchill.org/resources/speeches/
1946-1963-elder-statesman/the-sinews-of-peace.
93. Kirsten Sellars, The Rise and Rise of Human Rights (Thrupp: Sutton, 2002), 18.
94. Alfred William and Brain Simpson, Human Rights and the End of the Empire: Britain and the
Genesis of the European Convention (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 427.
95. Kirsten Sellars, The Rise and Rise of Human Rights, 23.
96. Carlos Iván Fuentes, René Provost, and Samuel G. Walker, “E Pluribus Unum-Bhinneka Tunggal
Ika? Universal Human Rights and the Fragmentation of International Law,” in Dialogue on Human Rights
15More complex still was the issue of ideological diﬀerences between the Western Bloc,
the countries that supported the US and allied with NATO against the USSR, and the
pro-Soviet Eastern Bloc, largely composed of socialist states that signed the Warsaw Pact.
Holding individualism as a key value due to its unique history and traditions, the US
vigorously encouraged the prioritizing of political and civil rights.97 Conversely, challenging
the notion of individualism as the proper basis for human rights as an idea biased in favor
of Western democracy, the USSR stated the necessity of “perfect harmony between the
individual and the community,” giving priority to the collective spirit of socialism and
emphasizing economic and social rights.98
With these tensions in mind, Cassin crafted a draft that reﬂected a hierarchy of rights
in line with the Western Bloc. Although he recognized economic, social, and cultural rights
as important, he privileged their political and civil peers. He rationalized this decision
by arguing that the latter rights (civil and political liberties) were more controllable
on an international stage, whereas the former (economic, social, and cultural liberties)
required national rather than international eﬀorts for realization.99 Chang added another
justiﬁcation for this hierarchy of rights, arguing that such a perspective coincided with the
chronological order in which rights historically developed.100 Although the Eastern Bloc
opposed such arguments, they met with minimal success due to pressure from Roosevelt
and pro-Western intellectuals such as Charles Malik and P. C. Chang.
Interestingly, on the issue of enforcement, the US and the USSR agreed, forming
an anti-enforcement pact. Whereas the US argued that implementation should not be
“an immediate, practicable objective,” the Soviet Union openly voiced its opposition to
enforcement measures, which, in their view, could disturb international relations and
undermine peace eﬀorts.101 As Malik noted, the issue of enforcement produced major
disagreement between smaller and larger powers as well, with the former eagerly pursuing
and the latter strongly objecting.102 As previously mentioned, this divisiveness resulted in
the fragmentation of the International Bill of Rights into three separate items. This highly
unpopular consequence among activists and the general public alike weakened the human
rights project as a whole.103
Similarly,theissueofself-determinationledtomajorconﬂictbetweenlargerandsmaller
powers. Primarily due to opposition from the US and the UK, this issue was essentially
omitted from the UDHR. In the post-WWII era, nationalist movements emerged across
the globe, particularly in Asian and African states that struggled to acquire independence
and oust colonial powers. As a result, many of these would-be nations turned to the
and Legal Pluralism, ed. R. Provost and C. Sheppard (New York: Springer, 2013), 39.
97. Daniel A. Bell, East Meets West: Human Rights and Democracy in East Asia (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2000), 5.
98. United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the Eighth Meeting, UN Doc.
E/CN.4/SR.8, at 4 (1947).
99. United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the Seventy-Second Meeting,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/SR.72, at 4 (1948).
100. Normand and Zaidi, Human in the U.N., 190.
101. William and Simpson, Human Rights and the End of the Empire, 426.
102. United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the Twenty-Eighth Meeting,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/SR.28, (1947).
103. René Cassin, La Pensée et l’Action (Paris: Lalou, 1972), 105–106.
16fundamental principles of human rights and self-determination for inspiration.104 However,
dominated by greater powers that often also functioned as colonizers, the discussion of
rights per the UDHR often excluded the voices of these suppressed groups despite the
USSR’s eﬀorts to include the doctrine of self-determination in a series of amendments
proposed at the last moment.105
Another political battleﬁeld emerged as a result of ethnic conﬂict arising between
Arab League states and Israel in May 1948. According to the “Partition Plan” produced
in the UN General Assembly Resolution, the British Mandate over Palestine was to be
terminated, resulting in two independent states—one Arab and the other Jewish—within
the borders of what had previously been Palestine.106 The resolution triggered an outbreak
of aggression as Arab nations attempted to use force, namely, the volunteer-based Arab
Liberation Army, to thwart the creation of the new Jewish state of Israel.107 A ﬁrm Zionist,
Cassin supported the establishment of Israel, which he believed would save his people
from their plight as perpetual outsiders.108 This view put him in direct conﬂict with Malik,
an Arabic man whose state, Lebanon, contributed substantially to the Arab Liberation
Army.109 The political landscape became even more fraught over the summer with the
Soviets’ blockade in Berlin, the communists’ support for unions in Italy and France, and
Mao Tse-Tung’s battle against nationalist forces in China.110
Thus, much compromise and discussion, to say the least, were required to develop the
UDHR as a document that satisﬁed multiple ethnic viewpoints and philosophies held by
the UN’s diverse member states. In 1948, membership included more than 35 nations from
Judeo-Christian traditions, 11 from Islamic traditions, 4 adherent to Buddhism and 1 to
Hinduism as well as 6 other nations rooted in secular, communism-based ideologies.111
Because some semblance of agreement was desired, the UDHR would need to transcend
diﬀerences in language, nationality, and culture to establish these foundational guidelines.
Thus, the wording of the draft was continuously revised in an attempt to accommodate
diﬀerent perspectives. Some particular areas of dispute included the expression “brothers”
in article 1, which some believed indicated sexism.112 Ultimately, the reference was changed
to “in a spirit of brotherhood” rather than alternate proposals that included “members of
the same family” and “in a spirit of brotherhood and sisterhood” because it was decided
that such language “suﬃciently expressed the idea advocated.”113
104. Roland Burke, Decolonization and the Evolution of International Human Rights (Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2010), 19.
105. United Nations, Union of Soviet Socialist Republic, Amendments to the draft Declaration proposed
by the Third Committee, UN Doc. A/784 (1948).
106. United Nations, General Assembly, Oﬃcial Record of the Second Session, UN Doc. A/519 (1947).
107. Asher Maoz, “War and Peace—An Israeli Perspective,” Constitutional Forum 24, no. 2 (2005): 35.
108. Winter and Prost, René Cassin and Human Rights, 323.
109. Ibid, 336.
110. AllidaM.Black,“EleanorRooseveltandtheUniversalDeclarationofHumanRights,” OAH Magazine
of History 22, no. 2 (2008): 35.
111. David Mayers, “Humanity in 1948: The Genocide Convention and Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,” Diplomacy & Statecraft 26 (2015): 459.
112. William A. Schabas, editor. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: The Travaux Preparatoires,
vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), ci.
113. United Nations, Commission on Status of Women, Summary Record of the Ninth Meeting, UN Doc.
E./CN.6/SR.28, at 4 (1948).
17In addition, women’s rights activists worked to forward their cause. Hansa Jivraj Mehta
of India battled gender inequality in marriage, polygamy, and a sexist legal system while
the American Eleanor Roosevelt simultaneously worked toward equal opportunities in the
workplace and public life regardless of gender.114 However, Roosevelt, along with many
other delegates, both male and female, believed that biological diﬀerences based upon sex
meant that women should fulﬁll diﬀerent roles from men, particularly when it came to the
shaping of children’s lives.115 As a result, the only two speciﬁc mentions of women in the
UDHR include provisions for the “equal rights of men and women” in the preamble and
the rights of men and women “to marry and to found a family” in article 16.116
Additionally, speciﬁc word choices addressing the origin of human rights caused dis-
agreement, mainly questioning whether such liberties should be based upon religious or
secular rationales. The delegation from Brazil proposed the notion of God as an explanation
for human reason and conscience, whereas France and the Philippines submitted the phrase
“by nature” and the Netherlands suggested “man’s divine origin and immortal destiny.”117
The Soviet Bloc, in contrast, claimed such language inappropriate, arguing against incorpo-
rating any religious notions into the UN document on the basis of it being a fundamentally
secular organization.118 Eventually, Chang was able to facilitate a compromise; he reasoned
that the term “nature” indicated both materialistic and spiritual aspects of humanity. In
the end, no references to God or nature were included.119
During the second commission meeting in Geneva, in December of 1947, the UDHR
underwentmanydraftsandwaswidelydiscussedduetoamyriadofpoliticalandideological
opinions among delegates. However, as we shall see, these barriers did not completely
hinder the progress of the project; rather, with certain common grounds established and
some compromises made, the group overcame various diﬃculties to stand as a milestone
for human rights.
114. Jane Adolephe, “The Holy See and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Working Towards a
Legal Anthropology of Human Rights and Family,” Ave Maria Law Review 343 (2006): 357.
115. Ibid.
116. “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” Preamble; Article 16, 1.
117. Adolephe, “The Holy See and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” 354.
118. United Nations, The Third Committee, Summary Record of the Hundred and Sixty-Fifth Meeting,
UN Doc. A/C.3/SR.165, at 765 (1948).
119. Morsink, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 287.
185 Overcoming Barriers and Obtaining Adoption
In the spring of 1948, feedback from various governments regarding the Geneva draft began
pouring in to the commission. Many of these comments were minor, addressing minute
details that certain states felt should be altered slightly for transparency. For example,
Egypt suggested that it should be clariﬁed that the economic and social rights enumerated
in articles 23–26 should be exercised only if “the economic conditions and potentialities
of each State permit.”120 Other nations raised concerns about the compatibility of the
explicitly stated rights with their own national laws and traditions. For example, according
to Swedish law, it was legally impossible for members of the Swedish State Church to
relinquish their membership, which the government worried may conﬂict with the freedom
of religion principle expressed in the UDHR.121
With these comments in hand, in a subcommittee meeting on May 3, 1948, Roosevelt
urged the working group to proceed “as quickly as possible,” focusing on the discussion of
detailed terms and appealing against time-consuming theoretical conjecture.122 However,
dissatisﬁed with setbacks to a pro-Soviet agenda, the delegate Pavlov of the USSR
suggested that a completely new draft be prepared and that discussion be focused on
broader principles.123 In his speech on May 4, Pavlov blatantly criticized the existing draft
as “a serious mistake” due to its lack of warning against fascism and Nazism as well as
the unguarded Western Bloc rhetoric on certain economic and social human liberties,
such as the right to work and anti-discrimination.124 Pavlov’s hostility outraged many
subcommittee members, making cooperation even more diﬃcult.
Under the guidance of Roosevelt and with the assistance of NGOs such as the World
Jewish Congress and the American Federation of Labor, the drafting subcommittee began
its tedious review of the document article by article. Beginning on May 24, the third
session of the Human Rights Commission conducted another exhaustive examination of
the UDHR. The group came to the consensus that there was no time to consider the
question of implementation or the covenant in precise detail; instead, the group decided to
forward a working draft to the commission that was expected to be completed later.125
Pavlov expressed dissatisfaction with the revised draft, maintaining that it was vague and
ineﬀective, while simultaneously condemning the unwillingness of the commission to issue
many of the USSR’s proposals.126 This solution evidently alienated the USSR, causing
120. United Nations, Collation of the Comments of Government on the Draft International Declaration
on Human Rights, Draft International Covenant on Human Rights and the Question of Implementation,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/85, at 42 (1948).
121. United Nations, Report of the Drafting Sub-Committee Consisting of the Representatives of Chile,
China,UnitedStatesofAmerica,UnionofSovietSocialistRepublics,onArticle5,6,7,oftheInternational
Declaration on Human Rights, UN Doc. E/CN.4/82/Add.11, at 2 (1948).
122. United Nations, Second Session of Drafting Committee, Summary Record of the Twentieth Meeting,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/AC.1/SR.20, at 1–2 (1948).
123. UnitedNations,SpeechbyMr.A.N.Pavlov,RepresentativeoftheUnionofSovietSocialistRepublics
in the Drafting Committee of the Commission on Human Rights, UN Doc. E/CN.4/AC.1/29 (1948).
124. Ibid.
125. United Nations, Report of the Third Session of the Commission on Human Rights, UN Doc. E/800,
at 5 (1948).
126. United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of Eighty-First Meeting, UN Doc.
E/CN.4/SR.81, at 28 (1948).
19them to withdraw their support.127 Ultimately, the draft of the UDHR was approved by
the full commission by 12 votes to zero, with 4 abstentions that included the Eastern Bloc
Countries of the USSR, Yugoslavia, the BSSR, and Ukraine.128
Next, the draft was forwarded to the ECOSOC’s seventh session in July and August,
where it met with more impediments. At that time, the ECOSOC was overwhelmed
by multiple tasks regarding other subjects on their agenda, making it diﬃcult for the
UDHR to receive adequate attention.129 Additionally, some delegates noted that the UDHR
draft was far from perfected and regretted the absence of materials that would appear
in the ICESCR and ICCPR, both of which resulted from tight time limitations.130 The
delegation from New Zealand argued that the UDHR should not be adopted before careful
reconsideration by the commission “in the light of detailed comments by government,”
which would take another year.131i Furthermore, the Danish delegation argued that three
weeks was an insuﬃcient period of time for governments to consider the draft of such an
important document.132 Pavlov, who was also part of the USSR delegation to the ECOSOC,
reiterated his opinion that the document was “unsatisfactory” and “less comprehensive”
than it ought to be, though he eventually agreed to send it to the General Assembly for
further recommendations.133
Despite widespread suspicion, the president of the ECOSOC, none other than Malik
himself, eﬀectively facilitated the decision to transfer the draft to its next phase with
unanimousapproval.HeldfromSeptembertoDecember1948inParis,theThirdCommittee,
or the Social and Humanitarian Committee of the General Assembly, did not reach a
consensus as easily.134 During this meeting, the Soviet Union contended that debate and
voting regarding the UDHR was required and that the document should be discussed
“article by article and line by line.”135 Furthermore, the Soviet delegation proposed a series
of last-minute amendments regarding the right to self-determination, the protection of
national minorities, and the aﬃrmation of electoral rights without discrimination. Partly
owing to the diplomatic strength of Malik, who also chaired the proceedings of the Third
Committee, the draft won approval by 29 to none, with 7 abstentions, after 85 lengthy
meetings over a two-month period.136
At that time, the title of the document, previously referred to internally as the
International Declaration of Human Rights, was changed to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, as proposed by Cassin. Cassin argued that such a change would strengthen
127. United Nations, Economic and Social Council, Summary Record of the Two Hundred and Fifteenth
Meeting, UN Doc. E/SR.215, at 659 (1948).
128. United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of Eighty-First Meeting, 29.
129. United Nations, Note by Representative of Canada, UN Doc. E/965 (1948).
130. United Nations, Economic and Social Council, Summary Record of the Two Hundred and Fifteenth
Meeting, 659.
131. Ibid, 652.
132. Ibid, 654.
133. Ibid, 659.
134. Kathleen Renee Cronin-Furman, “60 Years of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Towards
an Individual Responsibility to Protect,” American University International Law Review 25 (2010): 181.
135. Richard N. Gardner, “The Genesis of the Declaration: A Fresh Examination,” Pace International
Law Review 27 (1999): 39.
136. United Nations, Third Committee, Summary Record of the Hundred and Seventy-Ninth Meeting,
UN Doc. A/C.3/SR.179, at 893 (1948).
20the ideal of universality and help the UDHR apply equally to all persons.137 Finally, the
UDHR arrived at its last hurdle: the Plenary of the United Nations General Assembly.
During the Plenary of the General Assembly meeting on December 9 and 10 of 1948,
Malik, Roosevelt, and Cassin all gave memorable speeches in wholehearted support of the
UDHR. Malik paid tribute to the arduous yet meaningful drafting process of the document
as well as the able work of many representatives, including Pavlov of the USSR.138 He
further concluded that the UDHR would not only promote respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms but also help bring about changes in legal practices across
the world.139 Roosevelt stressed the importance of the UDHR as the ﬁrst and foremost
declaration of basic principles, articulating a common standard for all nations, a “Magna
Carta of all mankind.”140
In response to the consistent amendments forwarded to the meeting by the USSR,
Roosevelt also harshly denounced their reluctance to cooperate.141 Cassin highlighted that
a complete agreement on doctrine was impossible but that an agreement based on ideals
could and must be achieved.142 He also summarized four fundamental pillars upon which
the UDHR rested, including the ideas of personal rights, relationships between all humans,
public liberties and fundamental political rights, and economic and social rights. At this
point, Cassin aﬃrmed that each of these liberties was equally important.143
Again, the Eastern Bloc voiced concerns regarding state sovereignty and other issues
related to their unsuccessful amendments.144 Thus, on December 10, the Soviet representa-
tives proposed several revisions, which were essentially the same as those that had been
defeated in the Third Committee, in a vain attempt to postpone the document’s adoption
until the following year.145 These concerns, however, did not prove irreconcilable. The
only change made was the elimination of one article and the placement of the same idea
in article two; this text concerned the universal application of the UDHR in trust and
non-self-governing territories, primarily colonial territories.146 Hence, the total number of
articles within the document came to an even thirty.
Finally, around midnight, a roll call vote was issued. A historical moment was thereafter
achieved; the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted by the United Nations,
with 48 votes to zero plus 8 abstentions (the BSSR, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Ukraine, the Union of South Africa, USSR, and Yugoslavia).147
137. United Nations, Third Committee, Summary Record of the Hundred and Sixty-Third Meeting, UN
Doc. A/C.3/SR.163, at 742 (1948).
138. United Nations, General Assembly, Verbatim Record of the Hundred and Eightieth Plenary Meeting,
UN Doc. A/PV.180, at 857–860 (1948).
139. Ibid, 861.
140. Ibid, 862.
141. Ibid, 861.
142. Ibid, 865.
143. Ibid, 866.
144. Ibid, 854–857.
145. United Nations, Amendments Proposed by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the Draft
Declaration, UN Doc. A/784 (1948).
146. United Nations, United Kingdom, Amendment to Article 3 of the Draft Declaration proposed by the
Third Committee, UN Doc. A/778/Rev.1 (1948).
147. United Nations, General Assembly, Verbatim Record of the Hundred and Eighty-Third Plenary
Meeting, UN Doc. A/PV.183, at 933 (1948).
216 Legal Signiﬁcance of the UDHR
“The single most important reference point” for transnational and cross-cultural discussions
on human rights and fundamental freedoms, the UDHR, proved to be a groundbreaking
document that demonstrated that there could be an eﬀective consensus to assert a
commitment to human rights for all of humankind.148 That the document was adopted
with unanimous approval, that the Eastern Bloc cautiously abstained rather than voting
against it, and that of some 1,233 individual votes taken in the Third Committee, 88.08
percent proved aﬃrmative all demonstrate how morally compelling and publicly prevalent
the human rights project had become.149
Although there was ostensibly general approval of the UDHR, its worth and prospects
were interpreted in radically diﬀerent ways by diﬀerent parties.150 What remains most
uncertain is the precise legal signiﬁcance of the document. For the most part, the architects
of the UDHR believed that it provided moral guidelines rather than acting as a legal
instrument. The working group considered the convention much more responsible for
implementation than the Declaration itself, which was “consequently not legally binding in
the strict sense of the term.”151
Shortly after its adoption, Sir Hersch Lauterpacht, probably the best-known interna-
tional law scholar of the time, struck a sobering tone on the UDHR, stating that “by its
nature and by the intention of its parties,” it existed outside of state and international
law.152;153 Many observers agreed with this perspective at the time, arguing that the
Declaration was primarily symbolic and that its political and moral importance outweighed
its legal signiﬁcance.154 By the general deﬁnition of law, legal validity and normativity are
required, which essentially ensured that the Declaration was not technically law given the
challenge of directly enforcing it.155
Despite this contention, it has since been argued that the Declaration does in fact have
legal weight. Proponents of this argument contend that the UDHR derives its legal power
from two essential sources: its composition as based upon customary international law and
its incorporation into national legislations.
The ﬁrst argument for the document’s power is often closely associated with the
UDHR’s relevance to the UN Charter. René Cassin frequently insisted that the Declaration
148. Mary Ann Glendon, “The Rule of Law in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” Northwestern
Journal of International Human Rights 1 (2004): 19.
149. United Nations, General Assembly, Verbatim Record of the Hundred and Eightieth Plenary Meeting,
UN Doc. A/PV.180, at 860 (1948).
150. Gabriel Moran, “Human Rights Need a Human Tradition,” CrossCurrents 62, no. 1 (2012): 76.
151. Commission on Human Rights, Draft Report of the Working Group on Implementation, UN Doc.
E/CN.4/53, at 2 (1947).
152. Hersch Lauterpacht, “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” British Yearbook of International
Law 25 (1948): 365–369.
153. Hersch Lauterpacht, International Law and Human Rights (London: Stevens & Son, 1950), 416–417.
154. Jochen von Bernstorﬀ, “The Changing Fortunes of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
Genesis and Symbolic Dimensions of the Turn to Rights in International Law,” European Journal of
International Law 19, no. 5 (2008): 905.
155. Andrei Marmor and Alexander Sarch, "The Nature of Law," in The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Fall 2015 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta, accessed September 1, 2017, https://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/lawphil-nature.
22was not “a purely theoretical instrument,” but one that may potentially envelop “the
binding forces of the provisions of the Charter.”156 From this perspective, the document
may be understood as an explicit elaboration of the rights granted by the UN Charter, a
perspective that supports the understanding of UDHR as a part of treaty law or, more
precisely, a codiﬁcation of customary international law. Initially, this view was held only
by a handful of people, including John Humphrey, though it came to be adopted far more
broadly over time.157
Achievement after achievement following the document’s adoption have evidenced that
the UDHR is now a benchmark for international legal norms regarding human rights.158;
159 The UN General Assembly has frequently cited the Declaration in its resolutions - 75 in
total by 1969 - at least once every session.160 When battling racial discrimination in South
Africa, the General Assembly called for the principles of the UN Charter and UDHR to
be taken into consideration.161 The UDHR was also invoked by the UN as a moral and
political standard against which to consider issues of forced labor, freedom of movement
in Eastern Europe, and discrimination in non-self-governing and trust territories.162 By
1960, the General Assembly had come to aﬃrm that all states should “observe faithfully
and strictly” the language of the Declaration, leading nations to follow the document’s
guidelines more closely.163
In fact, since its ﬁnal drafting, the UDHR has been reaﬃrmed on various international
stages, including at conferences and within multiple institutions. In 1968, at the ﬁrst UN
International Conference on Human Rights held in Tehran, Iran, the Proclamation of
Tehran was issued and later endorsed by the UN Assembly as an “important and timely
reaﬃrmation” of the central doctrines enshrined within the UDHR.164 The Proclamation
of Tehran stated that the UDHR constituted “a common understanding” as well as “an
obligation” for the entire global community concerning the inalienable rights of all mankind,
urging faith and action in conformity with the UDHR’s provisions.165 Later, in 1993, the
UN World Congress on Human Rights held in Vienna, Austria, approved the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action; in drafting this new human rights legislation,
156. United Nations, General Assembly, Verbatim Record of the Hundred and Eightieth Plenary Meeting,
866.
157. JohnP.Humphrey,Human Rights and United Nations: A Great Adventure (NewYork:Transnational,
1984), 65.
158. Vasily Tatsiy, “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: The Worldwide Humanism Manifesto,”
Law of Ukraine, no. 5–6 (2011): 32.
159. Richard B. Lillich, “The Growing Importance of the Customary International Human Rights Law,”
Georgia Journal of International and Comparative Law 25 (1996): 1–30.
160. Samuel A. Bleicher, “The Legal Signiﬁcance of Re-Citation of General Assembly Resolutions,”
American Journal of International Law 63 (1969): 463.
161. United Nations, Treatment of People of Indian Origin in the Union of South Africa, UN Doc. A/Res.
265(III), OP 1.
162. Egon Schwelb, “Human Rights and the International Community,” in The Roots and Growth of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, ed. Roger Stenson Clark (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1963), 55.
163. UnitedNations,DeclarationontheGrantingofIndependencetoColonialCountries,UNDoc.A/Res.
1514(XV), OP 7.
164. United Nations, International Conference on Human Rights, Resolution adopted on the Report of
the Third Committee, UN Doc. A/RES/2442(XXIII) (1968).
165. UnitedNations,ProclamationofTehran,FinalActoftheInternationalConferenceonHumanRights,
UN Doc. A./CONF.32/41, at 3 (1968).
23representatives observed that the UDHR had been “the basis for the United Nations in
making advances in standard settings” of human rights.166 This observation was reaﬃrmed
when the newly devised UN Human Rights Council invented the Universal Periodic Review,
an innovative peer-review mechanism for monitoring adherence to human rights standards,
and established the UDHR as the basis for the review.167
The International Court of Justice (ICJ), one of the primary enforcement mechanisms
of international conventions, also alluded to the UDHR when assessing the case of the Iran
hostage crisis, during which ﬁfty-four US diplomats were held by supporters of the Iranian
Revolution for more than a year. The ICJ concluded that, according to the principles of
the UDHR, hostage-taking itself constituted wrongdoing.168 Earlier, Fouad Ammoun, the
Vice-President of ICJ, had remarked that the Declaration could “bind States on the basis
of custom” because it “acquired the force of custom through a general practice accepted as
law.”169 Indeed, it has been argued by many that the very deﬁnition of “rule of law” should
include the defense of natural justice personiﬁed in the UDHR and other documents.170
The second rationale depends upon the reality that international treaties have also been
important in terms of the UDHR’s enforcement. In 1966, two covenants—the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR)—were adopted and came into eﬀect over
the next decade. Evident in the preambles of the ICCPR and ICESCR is the paramount
role of the Declaration as a bridge between the human rights provisions in the UN Charter
and the two covenants themselves.171 Although delayed considerably due to irreconcilable
Cold War tensions between the Western and Eastern Blocs, which were also responsible for
the division of the covenant into two parts, the ICCPR and ICESCR were still expected
to act as binding legal instruments that safeguarded human rights in accordance with the
UDHR across nations.
For many, the two covenants were automatically considered superior to and thus more
valuable than the UDHR because their legally binding natures seemed more punitive and
enforceable.172 However, many international law scholars disagreed with this proposition,
as both the ICCPR and ICESCR have been accepted by more than three-fourths of UN
member states by signature and ratiﬁcation. Although a signature on a UN covenant
merely conveys the willingness of a signatory state to proceed to the treaty-ratifying
process, such an action suggests further ratiﬁcation towards embracing that covenant as a
166. “ViennaDeclarationandProgrammeofAction,” WorldConferenceonHumanRightsinVienna,1993,
accessed September 1, 2017, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/Vienna.aspx.
167. Noelle Higgins, “Advancing the Rights of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples: Getting UN Attention
Via the Universal Periodic Review,” Netherland Quarterly of Human Rights 32, no. 4 (2014): 379-407.
168. UnitedStatesDiplomaticandConsularStaﬀinTehran(UnitedStatesofAmericav.Iran)Judgment,
ICJ Report, at 42 (1980).
169. “Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West
Africa) Notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), ICJ Reports, 1971, p. 16,” American
Journal of International Law 66, no. 1 (1972): 145–183.
170. Carol Wang, “Rule of Law in Afghanistan: Enabling a Constitutional Framework for Local Account-
ability,” Harvard International Law Journal 55, no. 1 (2014): 212-249.
171. Johannes van Aggelen, “The Preamble of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights,” Denver
Journal of International Law and Policy 28, no. 2 (2000), 138.
172. Stephen Gardbaum, “Human Rights as International Constitutional Rights,” European Journal of
International Law 19, no. 4 (2008): 749–768.
24legally binding force in the future. However, the list of parties that have not ratiﬁed also
includes approximately 30 states for each covenant—for example, the US is not a party to
the ICESCR, and China has not ratiﬁed the ICCPR. As a result, the covenants’ sizes and
ranges of inﬂuence are limited.173
The UDHR reaches a much broader audience than the ICESCR or the ICCPR by
utilizing the term “universal,” meaning that its provisions apply to every individual and
every organ of society on the planet. Furthermore, the relatively vague wording of its
provisions foster more ﬂexibility in terms of legal interpretation, in contrast to the precise
and detailed language of the covenants.174 Moreover, in practice few relevant cases based on
the covenants have been submitted to the ICJ, and those that have achieved only limited
success, meaning that these two covenants have played a largely idealistic role, similar to
that of the Declaration.175 Hence, it is not surprising that Charles Malik admitted in 1986,
“Wherever the question of human rights has risen throughout the world, the appeal has
been far more to the Declaration than to the covenants.”176 According to the International
Law Association, recognition of the UDHR as a primary global human rights standard
and source for state legislation throughout the world “distinguishes it from conventional
obligation.”177
In addition to the ICCPR and ICESCR, more than 70 conventions on human rights
have been established throughout the globe since the adoption of the UDHR; all of these
directly or indirectly found inspiration in the original document, and many reference it in
their preambles.178 The paramount conventions adopted by the UN since the UDHR are:
the Convention on the Rights of the Child; the Convention Against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. These four conventions, along
with others, have elaborated rights outlined in the UDHR and speciﬁed liberties to which
certain groups of people are entitled on an international level.
The principles of human rights embodied in the Declaration have been consistently
aﬃrmed in regional treaties, such as the African Charter of Human and Peoples’ Rights,
which was adopted in 1981 and has been ratiﬁed by every state on the African continent.179
A more recent example is the Gulf Declaration on Human Rights adopted by the Gulf
Cooperation Council in 2014, which epitomizes a regional customary human rights system
in the form of reconciliation between complex cultural values and universal principles.180
173. Sam McFarland, “The Slow Creation of Humanity,” Political Psychology 32, no. 1 (2011): 12.
174. Schabas, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2013), cxvii.
175. Ibid, cxvi-cxvii.
176. Charles Malik, “1948—The Drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” UN Bulletin on
Humanitarian Rights 97 (1986).
177. Sandy Ghandhi, “The International Bill of Rights and the European Conventions on Human Rights,”
Legal Information Management 6 (2006): 284.
178. Tatsiy, “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” 32.
179. “AfricanCharterofHumanRightsandPeoples’Rights,” AfricanCommissiononHumanandPeoples’
Rights, 1986, accessed September 1, 2017, http://www.achpr.org/instruments/achpr/.
180. Khalifa A. Alfadhel, “The GCC Human Rights Declaration: An Instrumentation of Cultural Rela-
tivism,” Arab Law Quarterly 31 (2017): 89-98.
25Between 1988 and 1997, the percentage of cases accepting the UDHR as a precedent
for international law almost doubled, to 50 percent.181 In today’s context, the Declaration
serves as a milestone in the development of many key legal concepts (for example, the
injustice of excluding persons from international refugee protection based on criminal
conduct) that are understood and applied under the auspices of other international
conventions.182 The norms expressed by the UDHR as well as the ways that they are
contextualized have also provided a benchmark for evaluating controversial policies, such
as migration control and refugee protection.183
The second means by which the UDHR has become a legal document is through
its incorporation into national legislations. Initially, the document’s architects expected
jurisprudence at the national level to be “the best and surest legal means” for ensuring
human rights protection, yet such usage did not begin with the adoption of the UDHR
itself.184 Since its inception, multiple national governments have agreed to shoulder the
ﬁnal responsibility for defending human rights within their territories. Hence, examining
the impact of the Declaration on law at a national level is of vital importance in any
eﬀort to assess its practical legal signiﬁcance. At least 25 states have explicitly referred
to the UDHR in their constitutions, many of which are African states that have emerged
from under colonial rule, and approximately 80 states have constitutionally recognized the
norms of international law, which implicitly renders legal support for the Declaration.185
There is also strong empirical basis for the argument that the inclusion of rights in the
UDHR boosts the likelihood of its incorporation in a national constitution by more than
ﬁfty percent, which illuminates the UDHR’s power to shape domestic rights structures
and increase actual rights compliance.186 Furthermore, despite criticisms that the UDHR’s
inherent ambiguities are responsible for its inconsistent eﬃcacy, it has been explicitly cited
in at least 166 national cases as the rationale for domestic judicial decisions or opinions,
so it clearly serves as a guide for legal judgments worldwide.187;188
However, it should also be noted that the Declaration and the abundance of conventions
and resolutions that followed from it all confront one basic failure: they have not been put
into practice by a substantial number of UN member states, more than half of which are
dominated by dictatorial regimes whose constitutions, ironically, exhibit greater similarity
to the UDHR than do those of common law countries, but where these legislative guidelines
181. Tai-Heng Cheng, “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights at Sixty: Is It Still Rights for the
United States?”, Cornell International Law Journal 41 (2008): 251.
182. Sibylle Kapferer, “Article 14(2) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Exclusion from
International Refugee Protection,” Refugee Survey Quarterly 27, no. 3, (2008): 75.
183. Thomas Gammeltoft-Hansen and Hans Gammeltoft-Hansen, “The Right to Seek—Revisited. On
the UN Human Rights Declaration Article 14 and Access to Asylum Procedures in the EU,” European
Journal of Migration and Law 10 (2008): 439-459.
184. Glendon, “The Rule of Law,” 12.
185. Hurst Hannum, “The Status of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in National and Interna-
tional Law,” Georgia Journal of International and Comparative Law 25 (1995): 287.
186. ZacharyElkins,TomGinsburg,BethSimmons,“GettingtoRights:TreatyRatiﬁcation,Constitutional
Convergence, and Human Rights Practice,” Harvard International Law Journal 54, no. 1 (2013): 61-95.
187. Tai-Heng Cheng, “The Universal Declartaion of Human Rights at Sixty: Is It Still Right for United
States,” Cornell International Law Journal 41, no. 2 (2008): 251-305.
188. Hurst Hannum, “The Status of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in National and Interna-
tional Law,” 287.
26have remained largely rhetorical.189;190 Even in democratic regimes, international human
rights laws fail to restrain executive action when rationales regarding national security
and military necessity are oﬀered.191 Nonetheless, the Declaration, through its role as
international customary law and its incorporation into domestic legal practice, has derived
its legitimacy and served to positively shape the current international human rights system.
Thus, it, “perhaps, is law in the making.”192
189. Jacob Dolinger, “The Failure of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” University of Miami
Inter-American Law Review 47 (2016): 191.
190. David S. Law and Mila Versteeg, “The Declining Inﬂuence of the United States Constitution,” New
York University Law Review 87 (2012): 762-858.
191. Natsu Taylor Saito, “Justice Held Hostage: U.S. Disregard for International Law in the World War
II Internment of Japanese Peruvian—Case Study,” Boston College Third World Law Journal 19, no. 1
(1998): 275.
192. Egon Schwelb, “The Inﬂuence of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on International and
National Law,” Proceedings of the American Society of International Law 53 (1959): 229.
277 Moral Signiﬁcance of the UDHR
Originally, the focus on the moral value and authority of the UDHR was echoed and
supported by the document’s architects. Roosevelt in particular was conﬁdent in its eﬃcacy,
partly due to her perception of the way the Declaration of Independence had evolved and
acted as a guide for conduct throughout the US.193 However, the moral importance of the
UDHR is bound up in its legal signiﬁcance; the document continues to evolve and grow
in strength on the merit of the ideologies it contains. Inevitably, the role of global-scale
morality is tied to the various changes in the geopolitical landscape.
In terms of acting as a standard for ethical behavior, the Declaration is widely viewed
as the guiding source for contemporary human rights activism, whose functional organs
are primarily NGOs.194;195 The moral spirit of the Declaration, sometimes referred to as a
“worldwide secular religion,” has operationalized the responsibility to protect (R2P) norm,
which requires that state parties protect not only their own citizens but also persons within
other countries’ borders who may be harmed by their own governments.196
The nongovernmental human rights movement, which predominantly emerged in the
1970s, has been the driving force for application of human rights protections worldwide.197
The best-known NGO dedicated to human rights may be Amnesty International, which
was founded in 1961 and has received the Nobel Peace Prize for its work. This organization
has united 7 million people in more than 150 countries and territories and is committed
to ending human rights abuses worldwide through research, lobbying, and other global
campaigns.
In conjunction with governmental and international institutions, humanitarian NGOs
such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have successfully redeﬁned policy
to remedy human rights abuses by utilizing what is referred to as the “shaming-and-naming
strategy.”198 This tactic rests upon the moral duty fostered by the UDHR that the entire
international community must not stand by any government that abuses the human
rights of its citizens.199 By actively using popular media to proliferate their campaigns,
humanitarian NGOs provoke moral outrage and mobilize disgrace as a means of causing
social sanctions and enforcing compliance with human rights commitments. For example,
in the case of the abuses at the US-run Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, a shaming campaign
led by Amnesty International led to remedial action by the US government.200
193. Glendon, “The Rule of Law,” 11.
194. AryehNeier,TheInternationalHumanRightsMovement:AHistory (Princeton:PrincetonUniversity
Press, 2012), 158.
195. Makau Mutua, Human Rights NGOs in East Africa: Political and Normative Tensions (Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009), 164.
196. Elie Wiesel, “Voices: A Tribute to Human Rights,” in The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Fifty Years and Beyond, ed. Yael Danieli (Amityville: Baywood, 1999).
197. Dilys M. Hill, “Rights and Their Realisation,” in Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights: Progress
and Achievement, ed. Ralph Beddard and Dilys M. Hill (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1992), 7.
198. Louis Henkin, “Human Rights and State Sovereignty.” Georgia Journal of International and Compar-
ative Law 25, no. 31 (1995): 31-45.
199. Kathleen Renee Cronin-Furman, “60 Years of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Towards
an Individual Responsibility to Protect,” American University International Law Review 25 (2010): 184.
200. Sandeep Gopalan, “Alternative Sanctions and Social Norms in International Law: The Case of Abu
Ghraib,” Michigan State Law Review (2007): 786.
28Indeed, recent studies have provided quantitative evidence from around the globe sup-
porting the “conditional importance” of humanitarian NGOs’ shaming tactics in improving
human rights in targeted states, particularly in reducing the likelihood and severity of
one-sided government killings of the sort seen in genocides and politicides.201;202;203 The
eﬀects of this strategy are conditional, however; in some cases, ambivalent outcomes are
produced due to ineﬀective approaches by NGOs, uneven capacities for targeted states to
reform, regime types, and other reasons.204;205 Subsequent empirical analyses show that
naming and shaming may indirectly inﬂuence government behavior not only by creating
international pressure but also by shaping domestic public opinion.206
In addition to NGOs, multinational corporations (MNCs) have been motivated to
shoulder human rights as their corporate social responsibilities, albeit with blurred lines
that resist clear classiﬁcation into legal or ethical categories.207 The “shaming-and-naming
strategy” is eﬀective in diminishing the amount of investment from MNCs to targeted
states, thereby imposing substantial economic costs to the states.208 The practicability of
the shaming-and-naming strategy indicates that the moral imperatives of the Declaration
are not merely substitutes for legal enforcement but might oﬀer an equal, and sometimes
even more powerful, tool for battling human rights abuses.
The UDHR has also proven to be an essential device for global politics by oﬀering
education and inspiring various political and social movements across the world. In the
two decades after WWII and among predominantly Asian, African, and Arab states,
the promise of universal human rights has delegitimized the practice of colonialism and
oﬀered moral grounds on which such persons may demand the liberty of self-determination,
thereby contributing to the proliferation of newly independent states.209 For example,
Nnamdi Azikiwe, a leading ﬁgure of modern nationalists in Nigeria, persistently referred
to the UDHR when criticizing the denial of fundamental human rights to many African
persons and describing his vision for a democratic system for Nigeria. As a devotee to the
UDHR, Azikiwe hopes to integrate human rights into the system of governance in Nigeria
and has even outlined a Pan-African union based on existing conventions.210
201. Amanda M. Murdie and David R. Davis, “Shaming and Blaming: Using Events Data to Assess the
Impact of Human Rights INGOs,” International Studies Quarterly 56 (2012): 1.
202. MatthewKrain,“J’accuse!DoesNamingandShamingPerpetratorsReducetheSeverityofGenocides
or Politicides?”, International Studies Quarterly 56, no. 3 (2012): 574-589.
203. Jacqueline H. R. DeMeritt, “International Organizations and Government Killing: Does Naming and
Shaming Save Lives?”, International Interactions 38, no. 5 (2012): 597-621.
204. Pascal Vennesson, “War Under Transnational Surveillance: Framing Ambiguity and the Politics of
Shame,” Review of International Studies 40 (2014): 25–51.
205. Cullen S. Hendrix and Wendy H. Wong, “What is the Pen Truly Mighty? Regime Type and the
Eﬃcacy of Naming and Shaming in Curbing Human Rights Abuses,” British Journal of Political Science
43, no. 3 (2013): 651-672.
206. Jacob Ausderan, “How Naming and Shaming Aﬀects Human Rights Perceptions in the Shamed
Country,” Journal of Peace Research 51, no. 1 (2014): 93.
207. Ann Elizabeth Mayer, “Human Rights as a Dimension of CSR: The Blurred Lines Between Legal
and Non-Legal Categories,” Journal of Business Ethnics 88 (2009): 561-577.
208. Colin M. Barry and K. Chad Clay, “Avoiding the Spotlight: Human Rights Shaming and Foreign
Direct Investment,” International Studies Quarterly 57, no. 3 (2013): 532-544.
209. Christian Reus-Smit, “Human Rights and the Social Construction of Sovereignty,” Review of Inter-
national Studies 27 (2001): 520.
210. Jan Eckel, “Human Rights and Decolonization: New Perspectives and Open Questions,” Humanity:
29Other ﬁgures, such as Julius Nyerere of Tanzania and Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana,
have also explicitly invoked the human rights framework, although their interpretations
have varied and have mostly served as a symbolic means of confronting the dominance
of First World nations.211 As Nelson Mandela, a leading anti-apartheid activist in South
Africa, once said, “The simple and noble words of the Universal Declaration were a sudden
ray of hope at our darkest moments.”212
However, although the language of the UDHR gives anticolonial movements tremendous
moral support, the document is essentially neutral with regard to civil wars and does not
automatically oﬀer legitimacy to any one government. Instead, triumphant movements for
self-determination produce retroactive legitimacy, whether by drawing upon the UDHR or
by forming their own ideologies.213
The moral strengths embedded in the Declaration also transformed the political
landscape of the Cold War. By injecting human rights into the diplomacy of détente to
relieve tensions between the Eastern and Western Blocs, the Conference on Security and
Cooperation of Europe negotiated the Helsinki Final Act in 1975 and explicitly demanded
that participating states conform to the guidelines of the UDHR. Far from a legally binding
agreement, the Helsinki Final Act was a Declaration of intention with only moral and
political obligations.214 Nevertheless, based on an ethical commitment spurred by human
rights activism, a transnational network was developed that pressed Soviet leaders to
improve conditions and even helped to facilitate the end of the Cold War.215
The neoconservative human rights movement led by the US gained prominence in the
1970s and 1980s. Distinct from the liberal human rights groups that developed earlier, it
redeﬁned political rights in article 21 of the Declaration as referring to democratic rights,
in order to justify combatting the rise of communism in Latin America.216 This approach
has since been criticized for “[fracturing] the human rights community.”217 Perhaps this
is because, although human rights are closely associated with politics, they are always
expected to be a form of morality that is inherently idealistic, principled, purposive—in
some ways, Kantian—and therefore do not conform to or explicitly oppose any one political
party in the manipulation of powers.218;219
The rise of the developing world through the process of decolonization, the relieving
of Cold War tensions through détente, and the liberal foreign policy espoused by the US
An International Journal of Human Rights, Humanitarianism, and Development 1, no. 1 (2010): 116.
211. Ibid.
212. Mary Robinson, “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A Living Document,” Australian
Journal of International Aﬀairs 52, no. 2 (1998).
213. Brad Simpson, “The Biafran Secession and the Limits of Self-determination,” Journal of Genocide
Research 16, no. 2–3 (2014): 337–354.
214. Sarah B. Snyder, Human Rights Activism and the End of the Cold War: A Transnational History of
the Helsinki Network (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 5.
215. Ibid, 1–3.
216. Mara Elizabeth Sankey, “Promoting Democracy? The Role of Transnational Non-State Actors in
Inter-American Relations 1980-1993” (PhD diss., University College London, 2016), 1-297.
217. Ibid.
218. Devin O. Pendas, “Towards a New Politics? On Recent Historiography of Human Rights,” Contem-
porary European History 21, no. 1 (2012): 95–111.
219. Luke Maclnnis, “Agency and Attitude: Kant’s Purposive Conception of Human Rights,” Philosophy
and Social Criticism 42, no. 3 (2016): 289-319.
30following the Vietnam War were all catalysts for the explosive era of human rights activism
in the 1970s.220 The UDHR has aﬀorded human dignity a prominent place in geopolitics,
which philosophically explains why all persons are born in possession of inalienable human
rights and why protection of these liberties matters.221 Over time, this focus on morality
has led to intensiﬁed appeals that cannot be separated from the UDHR’s legal relevance
because they create “a crystalized consensus of state practice” and make the Declaration
part of customary international law.222 Indeed, the role of morality in the UDHR may be
ambiguous because the detailed contents of dignity sometimes vary with regard to a given
community’s particular social, religious, and traditional values.223 However, by identifying
a consensus around the general notion of the inner worth of human beings, the document
can capture the emotional energy (which is more important than pure rationality) that
appreciably characterized 1970s activism and that may make the Declaration’s purpose
even more meaningful in years to come.224
Perhaps even more signiﬁcantly, the focus on dignity within the UDHR has allowed
states to embrace multiple interpretations, thereby enabling their potential to develop
additional and even more accessible rights.225 This reality is particularly evident in light of
the recent proliferation of human rights, especially economic, social, and cultural liberties,
as a potential response to the challenges posed by the contemporary era, such as the
process of globalization.226
The human rights language within the Declaration has even penetrated the global
commerce association, the World Trade Organization (WTO), persuading policymakers to
ensure that the rules for international systems of trade are compatible with human rights,
particularly those relating to labor.227 To address increased transnational communication,
the public right to information clause within the UDHR has been used to support the
adoption of global freedom of information legislation.228 Moreover, to safeguard endangered
cultures, the non-discrimination principle within the Declaration has been invoked as
grounds for the protection of linguistic diversity.229
Following the vigorous trend of social revolution, LGBTQI (lesbians, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, and intersex) groups have also found grounds on which to campaign for
220. Samuel Moyn, Human Rights and the Uses of History (New York and London: Verso, 2014), 164.
221. CharlesR.Beitz,“HumanDignityintheTheoryofHumanRights:NothingbutaPhrase?” Philosophy
& Public Aﬀairs 41, no. 3 (2013): 260–290.
222. Rex D. Glensy, “The Right to Dignity,” Columbia Human Rights Law Review 43 (2011): 103.
223. MarcioRicardoStaﬀen,“TheLegalDevelopmentoftheNotionofHumanDignityintheConstitutional
Jurisprudence,” Revista Brasileira de Direito 12, no. 2 (2016): 108-126.
224. Roland Burke, “Flat Eﬀect? Revisiting Emotions in the Historiography of Human Rights,” Journal
of Human Rights 16, no. 2 (2015): 123–141.
225. Adrienne Anderson, “On Dignity and Whether the Universal Declaration of Human Rights Remains
a Place of Refuge After 60 Years,” American University International Law Review 25, no. 1 (2009): 142.
226. Sumner B. Twiss, “History, Human Rights, and Globalization,” Journal of Religious Ethics 32, no. 1
(2004): 39–70.
227. Susan Ariel Aaronson, “Sleeping in Slowly: How Human Rights Concerns Are Penetrating the WTO,”
World Trade Review 6 (2007): 413–449.
228. Jeannie E. Relly, “Freedom of Information Laws and Global Diﬀusion: Testing Roger’s Model.”
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 89, no. 3 (2012): 431–457.
229. Bruno De Witte, “The Protection of Linguistic Diversity Through Fundamental Rights,” European
University Institute (1985): 621.
31their rights by employing language from the Declaration regarding the rights to families,
marriage, and equality between sexes.230 The universal character of human rights already
condemns discrimination, harassment, and violence against certain populations due to
various characteristics; thus, such groups merely extend these rationales to their own
contexts, including sexual orientation and gender identities. Speciﬁcally, the equality,
human dignity, and nondiscrimination clauses within the UDHR, along with language
pertaining to the rights to marriage and family integrity and noninterference with private
life, have not only been interpreted to protect the interests of European transgender
communities against forced sterilization and mandatory divorce laws, but have also been
applied to challenge anti-gay propaganda in Russia.231;232
Furthermore, the Declaration is often understood as a key document that informs the
World Health Organization (WHO) in creating their human rights criteria for mental
health legislation, indirectly inspiring laws in Ireland in 2001 and the UK in 2007.233 In
general, the expanded applications of human rights in the global governance of health
can contribute to an improvement in human rights, particularly for those with mental
disabilities.234 The UDHR, along with the philosophical traditions that preceded it and the
international laws that followed it, has established a natural right to health care, obligating
states to provide relevant fair and just implementation.235 The clause regarding rights to
housing, health care, and adequate food in the Declaration has also proven foundational
for alleviating urban poverty and slums.236 Similarly, the right to decent minimum water
rations to meet drinking, sanitation, and other basic needs has recently been conceptualized
and encouraged.237
In the developing biological technology (biotech) industry, the unstated reliance on
“nature” to derive inherence, inalienability, and universality for human rights within the
Declaration has led to the theory of the biological foundation of human rights and the
discourse of bioethical inquiry.238 In reference to intellectual property issues, the right to
“cultural life” and the right to “share in scientiﬁc advancement and its beneﬁt” in article 27
of the UDHR are examined to provide the meaning of cooperative justice in an innovation
230. Nick J. Mule, Maryam Khan, and Cameron McKenzie, “The Growing Presence of LGBTQIs at the
UN: Arguments and Counter-arguments,” International Social Work (2017): 5.
231. Rebecca Lee, “Forced Sterilization and Mandatory Divorce: How A Majority of Council of Europe
Member States’ Laws Regarding Gender Identity Violate the Internationally and Regionally Established
Human Rights of Trans People,” Berkeley International Journal of Law 33 (2015): 128.
232. StephanPolsdofer,“PrideandPrejudiced:Russia’sAnti-GayPropagandaLawViolatestheEuropean
ConventionsonHumanRights,” AmericanUniversityInternationalLawReview 29,no.5(2014):1069-1096.
233. Brendan Desmond Kelly, “Human Rights Protection for the Mentally Ill though Mental Health Law
in England and Ireland,” (PhD diss., University of Leicester, 2012): 1-345.
234. Lance Gable, “The Proliferation of Human Rights in Global Health Governance,” Journal of Law,
Medicine & Ethics 3, no. 1 (2009): 534–544.
235. Jason T. Eberl, Eleanor D. Kinney, and Matthew J. Williams, “Foundation for A Natural Right to
Health Care,” Journal of Medicine and Philosophy 36 (2011): 537-557.
236. James C.N. Paul and Roktim Kaushik, “Urban Poverty and the Right to a Decent Habitat as
Established by International Human Rights Law,” Rutgers Law Review 63, no. 3 (2011): 905-939.
237. The Rt Hon Lady Justice Arden, “Water for All? Developing a Human Right to Water in National
and International Law,” International Law and Comparative Law Quarterly 65, no. 4 (2016): 771-789.
238. David Keane, “Survival of the Fairest? Evolution and the Geneticization of Rights,” Oxford Journal
of Legal Studies 30, no. 3 (2010): 467–494.
32incentive system.239 In reaction to the environmental crisis, activists often cite article 3
of the UDHR, noting that “everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.”
This article became one justiﬁcation for a 2005 petition against the US by indigenous Inuit
people, which framed climate change as infringing upon their enjoyment of the right to
life.240 In 2010, a similar incorporation of human rights into climate issues ﬁrst appeared
in a UN agreement, formally broadening the scope of negotiation and implementation.241
With prominent legal and moral signiﬁcance, the UDHR has become a living document.
Although its relevance has never faltered in the decades since its adoption, interpretations
of the text have adapted to the changing world. The salience of human rights, which since
the 1970s has emerged in political, social, and intellectual spheres across the globe, is
sometimes considered a “hazy expression of hope” for the perseverance of basic values in
a world that is full of great uncertainties and possible turbulence.242 In this sense, the
Declaration has proven to be a meaningful guide.
239. Cristian Timmermann, “Sharing in or Beneﬁting from Scientiﬁc Advancement?”, Science and Engi-
neering Ethics 20 (2014): 111-133.
240. Timo Koivurova, Sébastien Duyck, and Leena Heinämäki, “Climate Changes and Human Rights,” in
Climate Change and the Law, Ius Gentium: Comparative, ed. E. J. Hollo (New York: Springer, 2013), 292.
241. Linda Wallbott and Andrea Schapper, “Negotiating by Own Standards? The Use and Validity of
Human Rights Norms in UN Climate Negotiations,” International Environmental Agreement: Politics,
Law, and Economics 17 (2017): 209.
242. Samuel Moyn, “Substance, Scale, and Salience: The Recent Historiography of Human Rights,” The
Annual Review of Law and Social Science 8 (2012): 136.
338 Challenges, Criticism, and Counterargument
8.1 Enforceability
Despite the declaration’s legal and moral imperatives, its enforceability has always been
challenged. After all, along with the other human rights agreements and treaties, the
UDHR has failed to satisfy the entirety of the promises made due to its inherently idealistic
character. Excluded are hundreds of millions of people who live in conditions of injustice,
inequality,insecurity,andabusesbydictatorialleadershipandwhoareunabletoenjoytheir
full rights. This global assault on human rights, however, is not the fault of the declaration
itself but results from the absence of an eﬀective, collective enforcement mechanism at
both the national and international levels.243
Itisanundeniablefactthatmanyinternationalagreementsarepracticallyunenforceable
and remain essentially aspirational until states become more willing to soften their stance
regarding sovereignty.244 State sovereignty has formed the pillar of the international system
since the drafting of the UDHR and remains so sixty years later. The claim is that
sovereignty, the unregulated exercise of self-governing, is in itself a basic human right.245
This view is particularly popular among Asian states. National sovereignty, territorial
integrity, and non-interference policies have consistently been hallmarks of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations’ (ASEAN) approach to human rights, as evidenced in the 2009
ASEAN Human Rights Declaration.246
Other voices have rejected the notion of absolute sovereignty, stating that international
relations should be characterized not only by equality and independence but also by
interdependence.247 If the UDHR is viewed as a codiﬁcation of international law, it is,
by its very nature, nothing more than a social contract similar to the constitution of a
democratic government. In this regard, the declaration itself allows for the free exercise of
self-governance, albeit on the international level. There has been increasing recognition of
individuals, rather than merely states, as subjects of international law.248 Nevertheless,
when drafted, both the UN Charter and the declaration ﬁrmly denounced any infringement
upon state sovereignty. Whether such a notion has or should evolve remains at the center
of controversy to this day.
One concern about absolute state sovereignty involves holding individuals in power
accountable for human rights abuses, such as in the cases of the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda. The war crimes in these two countries were addressed by temporary international
criminal tribunals that mirrored those that occurred in Nuremberg and Tokyo in 1946 but
243. “The Human Rights Trend of the Last 60 Years,” Amnesty International, 2008, accessed September
1, 2017, https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/act30/025/2008/en/.
244. Andrew Truitt, “Ancient Roots and Modern Oﬀshoots: The Development of International Human
Rights,” Regents Journal of International Law 7 (2009): 220.
245. Robert Araujo, “Sovereignty, Human Rights, and Self-Determination: The Meaning of International
Law.” Fordham International Law Journal 24 (2001): 1477-1478
246. Attilio Pisano, “Human Rights and Sovereignty in the ASEAN Path Towards a Human Rights
Declaration,” Human Rights Review 15, no. 4 (2014): 391.
247. Johan D. van der Vyver, “A Reality Check: The Binding Force of Economic and Social Rights Listed
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” Hamline Journal of Public Law and Policy 30 (2008): 153.
248. Rosalyn Higgins, “Conceptual Thinking About the Individual in International Law,” British Journal
of International Studies 4, no. 1 (1978): 1–19.
34that failed to impugn the various state leaders.249 In 2002, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) was established, the world’s ﬁrst permanent international judicial institution. The
ICC currently oversees trials involving four types of crimes (i.e., genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes, and crimes of aggression) and provides certain accountabilities for
the worst human rights abuses.250 In Prosecutor v. Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, for
example, the ICC was able not only to address the humanitarian crisis in Darfur but
also to challenge international immunity for heads of state.251 Thus, in some ways, the
court acts to prevent the worst human rights violations possible from occurring under the
umbrella of absolute sovereignty.
The irony between state sovereignty and internationalism may be addressed by a new
dual theory of human rights. Under this model, coercive domestic forces may provide
instruments “to ensure people are treated like human beings,” whereas international force
can only intervene when people are denied their fundamental human rights.252 Like a
compromise, the dual theory not only agrees with the UN Charter and the framers of
the UDHR in arguing that essential human rights are matters of domestic sovereignty
but also aﬃrms the conditional role of internationalism in the form of cooperation and
intervention.253 This theory is supported by the feasibility of fulﬁlling economic and
social rights for children in developing states through both domestic resource mobilization
and international assistance.254 It may be promising in addressing pressing issues in
Sub-Saharan Africa, such as multifaceted poverty and insuﬃcient access to social and
economic services. NGOs may be able to oﬀer international assistance by empowering local
communities with the integration of native cultural values and identiﬁcation.255 It may
also be eﬀective when combining both international pressure and national mechanisms to
remedy systemic violence toward women and other vulnerable groups.256 Nonetheless, the
condition and scope of global intervention remain the focus of debate.
The enforceability of the declaration has also been challenged by skepticism. Many
perceive the UDHR as a mere symbol of unity in an increasingly fragmented and controver-
sial political environment.257 From this perspective, the declaration is simply a collection
of utopian ideals facing the realism of geopolitics and international relations that are
essentially based in self-interest rather than principles. This view is partly supported
249. Peter R. Baehr, “Controversies in the Current International Human Rights Debate,” Human Rights
Review 2, no. 1 (2000): 18.
250. Fatou Bensouda, “Forward,” in The Law and Practice of the International Criminal Court, ed.
Carsten Stahn (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), xii.
251. Ramona Pedretti, Immunity of Heads of State and State Oﬃcials for International Crimes (Leiden:
Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 2014), 202–205.
252. MarcusArvan,“ABetterDualTheoryofHumanRights,” The Philosophical Forum 45(2014):17–47.
253. Monteiro, Ethics of Human Rights, 143.
254. MichaelNyongesaWabwile,“LegalProtectionofSocialandEconomicRightsofChildreninDeveloping
Countries: Reassessing International Cooperation and Responsibility,” PhD diss., University of Leicester,
2009.
255. John F. Jones and James Herbert Williams, “Summary and Conclusion: A View from the Bridge,” in
Conﬂict and Human Security in Africa: Kenya in Perspective, ed. Asfaw Kumssa, John F. Jones, and
James Herbert Williams (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), 197.
256. Bonita Meyersfeld, “A Theory of Domestic Violence in International Law,” JSD Thesis, Yale Law
School (2016), 334.
257. Bernstorﬀ, “The Changing Fortunes,” 924.
35by the unjust double standards applied by some of the permanent members in the UN
Security Council when referring humanitarian crimes to the ICC, especially through their
use of the veto power to protect allies.258 These double standards are also evident in the
practice of exceptionalism by global powers such as the US in their noncompliance with
human rights law, although the fragmentation of political powers has been one convincing
rationale for this occurrence as well.259
Moreover, no consensus has been reached regarding which techniques beyond legal
ramiﬁcationsmaybeeﬀectivelyemployedtoprotecthumanrightsinternationally.Economic
sanctions may hurt at-risk populations indiscriminately, military interventions may cause
mass destruction, and diplomatic condemnation may lead to further politicization and
denigrationofhumanrights.260 Thenotionofjusticeitselfmayalsobeconstantlychallenged;
thenotionofa“justwar”—forexample,thewaronterrorinthepost-September11era—has
also been denounced as a rhetorical cover for neoliberal imperialism.261 Similar narratives
occur when military intervention of more developed states occurs in failed or less powerful
states to resolve conﬂicts and restore peace, making justice diﬃcult to assess.262 From
this perspective, the declaration, and perhaps the international legal system as a whole,
oﬀers little guidance on judicial procedure and aﬀords too much discretion on the part of
individual states, thereby threatening the integration of accurate and relevant scientiﬁc
information into judicial resolution.263
Admittedly, the UDHR is an idealistic document, making it extremely diﬃcult, if not
impossible, for it to fulﬁll all its promises for both sovereignty and political consideration.
However, it is exactly the inspiring force of idealism within the declaration that makes it
morally signiﬁcant. Furthermore, the document is not purely based in utopianism but also
in “a realism that demand[s] possible” change and develops mechanisms to obtain legal
restitution.264
8.2 Cultural Relativism
Even more threatening to the strength of the UDHR is the challenge to the notion of
universalism. Under the philosophy of cultural relativism, the concept of human rights is
258. Richard Dicker, “International Criminal Court and Double Standards of International Justice,” in
The Law and Practice of the International Criminal Court, ed. Carsten Stahn (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2015), 3–12.
259. Anna Unger, Stuart Wallace, and Tamas Dezso Ziegler, “The Role of Human Rights in EU-US
Bilateral Relations,” FRAME Deliverable 6, no. 5 (2016): 22.
260. Matthew Lippman, “Human Rights Revisited: The Protection of Human Rights under the In-
ternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,” Netherland International Law Review 26 (1979):
276.
261. Mark Evans, “Just War, Democracy, Democratic Peace,” European Journal of Political Theory 11,
no. 2 (2011): 191.
262. John Yoo, “Fixing Failed States,” California Law Review 99 (2011): 150.
263. Remi Moncel, “Dangerous Experiments: Scientiﬁc Integrity in International Environment Adjudi-
cations after the ICJ’s Decision in Whaling in the Antarctic,” Ecology Law Quarterly 42, no. 2 (2015):
305.
264. Justin Zaremby, “On the Uses and Disadvantages of History for Human Rights Law: Reading Samuel
Moyn’s The Last Utopia: Human Rights in History,” Yale Human Rights and Development Journal 15
(2012): 161.
36thought to be, like other beliefs and norms, solely the product of socialization and power
and to vary from culture to culture and from time to time. Hence, universalism is deemed
inherently invalid in this view. Indeed, cultural relativism seems appealing because it
involves equal respect for all cultures and value systems.265
The quarrels during the drafting process—most notably the one that occurred between
the Western and Eastern Blocs regarding political and civil rights versus economic, social,
and cultural rights—proved that diﬀerent societies emphasize diﬀerent rights. Even in the
1980s, it was a common understanding that in the US, human rights should only include
life, liberty, and property, which were best satisﬁed by a free market and without state
intervention.266 Later, some Third World intellectuals introduced another perspective on
human rights that focused primarily on self-determination and economic development,
arguing that the UDHR was a tool for Western cultural imperialism.267 In the eyes of
non-Westerners, societies should be duty-driven rather than rights-based, focused on
collectivity rather than individuality, and, ﬁnally, adhering to restorative rather than legal
methods.268 Such societies argue that the declaration does not reﬂect their values but
Western ones; only 6 of the UDHR’s 25 paragraphs mention collective rights. Furthermore,
the declaration was initially drafted only by several individuals and formulated and adopted
by only 56 states prior to the era of decolonization.269 Thus, despite some involvement from
non-Western states in the drafting and debating process as well as the incorporation of
some Eastern ideas, many believe that the declaration’s Western origins are “underpinning”
the declaration.270; 271
Cultural relativism presents many complicated issues, one of which is Islamic funda-
mentalism, such as in the aforementioned case of Iran. With the overthrow of the more
secular government of Iran in 1979, Islamic fundamentalism has led the country to become
a religious state wherein strict Sharia Law (laws based upon Islam and, particularly the
Quran and the Hadith) is enforced. Under such systems, conﬂicts such as gender inequality
and religious persecution emerge between Islamic traditions and the human rights ideals
in the declaration.272 In 2009, Iran issued a national report to the UN General Assembly
declaring the nation’s adherence to Sharia law, asking that UN member states respect
265. Michal Freeman, “Universalism of Human Rights and Cultural Relativism,” in Routledge Handbook
of International Human Rights Law, ed. Scott Sheeran and Sir Nigel Rodley (New York: Routledge, 2013),
49.
266. Greg Grandin, “The Liberal Traditions in the Americas: Rights, Sovereignty, and the Origins of
Liberal Multilateralism,” American Historical Review 117, no. 1 (2012): 90.
267. AmyJ.McMaster,“Human Rightsat theCrossroads:WhenEast MeetsWest.” Vermont Law Review
29 (2004): 127.
268. Bonny Ibhawoh, “Deﬁning Persecution and Protection: The Cultural Relativism Debate and the
Rights of Refugees,” in Problems of Protection: The UNHCR, Refugees, and Human Rights, ed. Niklaus
Steiner, Mark Gibney, and Gil Loescher (New York and London: Routledge, 2003), 61–75.
269. Christian Tomuschat, Human Rights Between Idealism and Realism (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2003), 63.
270. Aristoteles Constantinides, “Questioning the Universal Relevance of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,” Harvard Human Rights Journal 15 (2000): 101-125.
271. Harold K. Jacobson, “Structuring the Global System: American Contributions to International
Organization,” The Annals of the American Academy 428 (1976): 87.
272. Heiner Bielefeldt, “Western Versus Islamic Human Rights Conceptions?: A Critique of Cultural
Essentialism in Discussion of Human Rights,” Political Theory 28, no. 1 (2000): 103.
37cultural diversity, and rejecting pressures from other nations to adopt “Western standards
of human rights.”273 Today, Iranian women still face discrimination related to issues of
marriage, education, employment, and legal proceedings.274 Fundamentalist movements are
not exclusive to Iran or Islam but can be both religious and secular in nature and often form
the main basis for opposition to cultural homogenization in an era of cosmopolitanism.275
As a result, many philosophers oﬀer counterarguments to the concept of cultural
relativism. First, cultural relativism itself involves a logical inconsistency because it
assumes that a qualiﬁed sense of right and wrong exists in diﬀerent cultures while judging
interference from other cultures as wrong in an absolute sense.276 In other words, the
theory fails to address why one should observe rules of culture and not adhere to universal
standards of human rights or even an international response to violations of human
rights.277 Second, as the antithesis of universalism, cultural relativism is considered morally
unfavorable to many because it encourages toleration of cultures that are brutal, prejudiced,
and imposing in nature, which might nurture such movements as Nazism.278 Essentially,
cultural relativism provides little protection for individuals or cultures. In contrast, human
rights universalism is largely deemed more morally sound because it values tolerance with
qualiﬁcations and stands against human rights abuses.279
Finally, the UDHR may have largely Western origins, but its merits have been deemed
universal to all human beings; this is, perhaps, what truly matters.280 It is not imperialistic,
because it oﬀers criticism against colonialism; it is not the antithesis of diversity, because
it encourages heterogeneity as a way of life as long as human rights and fundamental
freedoms are satisﬁed. Thus, we may argue that the declaration, which has transcended
diﬀerent cultures, is a universal document endorsed by people all over the world. Hence,
its universality should not be disregarded.
273. United Nations, Islamic Republic of Iran’s National Report Submitted to Human Rights Commission
in Accordance with Paragraph 15(a) of Resolution 5/1, UN Doc. A/HRC/WG.6/7/IRN/1, at 130 (2010).
274. “Amnesty International’s submission to the Commission on the Status of Women regarding Concerns
about Harassment and Imprisonment of Women, Including Rights Defenders and Members of Minorities,
in Iran,” Amnesty International, 2012, accessed September 1, 2017, https://www.amnesty.org/en/
documents/mde13/054/2012/en/.
275. Jose A. Lindgren Alves, “The Declaration of Human Rights in Postmodernity,” Human Rights
Quarterly 22 (2000): 498.
276. Milos Bogicevic, “Cultural Relativism and Human Rights,” International Journal of Rule of Law,
Transnational Justice and Human Rights 3, no. 3 (2013): 153.
277. Ibid.
278. James W. Nickle, Making Sense of Human Rights, 2nd ed. (New York: Blackwell, 2007), 172.
279. John J. Tilley, “Cultural Relativism,” Human Rights Quarterly 22, no. 2 (2000): 542–543.
280. Freeman, “Universalism of Human Rights and Cultural Relativism,” 53.
389 Conclusion
The history of human rights extends into multiple ancient philosophic and religious
traditions, both Western and Eastern, oﬀering a diverse and complex basis upon which
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is founded. Nevertheless, an international
framework for human rights protection was not carefully considered until, ironically, one
of the most vicious violations of human rights in recorded history. The atrocities of World
War II—in particular, the crimes committed by the Nazis during the Holocaust—struck
the nerves of humankind and reaﬃrmed the importance of global cooperation to prevent
such atrocities. Owing much to the eﬀorts of smaller powers and civil society, the human
rights promise is enshrined within the Charter of the UN, the strongest international
mechanism for world peace and order.
The task of drafting the International Bill of Rights was assigned to a small group
consisting of ﬁve distinguished individuals: Eleanor Roosevelt, P. C. Chang, Charles Malik,
René Cassin, and John Peters Humphrey. The drafting and discussion process proved to be
tedious.Arguingabouteverythingfrombroadprinciplestodetailedlanguage,thearchitects
of the declaration diverged in both the ideological and the political sense. As the Cold
War loomed, tensions between the US and the USSR intensiﬁed and frequently impeded
communication between Western and Eastern Bloc states. However, an agreement was
ultimately achieved that transcended diﬀerences in culture and nationality long enough for
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the UN General Assembly
in 1948 without a single dissenting vote.
The signiﬁcance of the UDHR is clear from both a legal and a moral perspective.
The legal imperatives of the declaration, which were initially neglected but are gradually
evolving, have been justiﬁed through its role informing international customary law as
well as its incorporation into various national legislations. Meanwhile, the UDHR’s moral
imperatives not only inform human rights activism, as illustrated through humanitarian
NGOs’ practice of naming and shaming, but also inspire changes in the geopolitical
landscape, evidenced by the decolonization process and fading of the long Cold War.
Perhaps most importantly, the UDHR is observed to embrace many diﬀerent types of
interpretation and, hence, oﬀers great potential for growth over time. Indeed, it is a living
document that is adaptable to the changing world more than six decades after its adoption.
However, there remain two core challenges to the UDHR: its enforceability and the
concept of cultural relativism. These diﬃculties, far from weakening the relevance of
the declaration in today’s society, prove that the declaration has drawn more attention
to the issue of human rights. Furthermore, many improvements can be made to the
further realization of the document as it continues to evolve over time. The UDHR carries
invaluable legal and moral weight. It has and will continue to provide insight into the
well-being of all of humankind.
3910 Bibliography
Aaronson, Susan Ariel. “Sleeping in Slowly: How Human Rights Concerns Are Penetrating
the WTO.” World Trade Review 6 (2007): 413–449.
Adolephe, Jane. “The Holy See and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Working
Towards a Legal Anthropology of Human Rights and Family.” Ave Maria Law Review
343 (2006): 343-384.
African Charter of Human Rights and Peoples’ Rights, African Commission on Human
and Peoples’ Rights, 1986. Accessed September 1, 2017, http://www.achpr.org/
instruments/achpr/.
Aggelen, Johannes van. “The Preamble of the United Nations Declaration of Human
Rights.” Denver Journal of International Law and Policy 28, no. 2 (2000): 129-144.
Alfadhel, Khalifa A. “The GCC Human Rights Declaration: An Instrumentation of
Cultural Relativism.” Arab Law Quarterly 31 (2017): 89-98.
Alston, Phillip. “The Commission on Human Rights.” In The United Nations and Human
Rights: A Critical Appraisal, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Alves, Jose A. Lindgren. “The Declaration of Human Rights in Postmodernity.” Human
Rights Quarterly 22 (2000): 478-500.
Amnesty International, The Human Rights Trend of the Last 60 Years, 2008. Accessed
September 1, 2017, https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/act30/025/2008/
en/.
Amnesty International, Amnesty International’s submission to the Commission on the
StatusofWomenregardingConcernsaboutHarassmentandImprisonmentofWomen,
Including Rights Defenders and Members of Minorities, in Iran. 2012. Accessed
September 1, 2017, https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/mde13/054/2012/
en/.
Anderson, Adrienne. “On Dignity and Whether the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights Remains a Place of Refuge After 60 Years.” American University International
Law Review 25, no. 1 (2009): 115-143.
Araujo, Robert. “Sovereignty, Human Rights, and Self-Determination: The Meaning of
International Law.” Fordham International Law Journal 24 (2001): 1477-1532.
Arden, The Rt Hon Lady Justice. “Water for All? Developing a Human Right to Water in
National and International Law.” International Law and Comparative Law Quarterly
65, no. 4 (2016): 771-789.
Aristotle, Aristotle: In Twenty-Three Volumes, translated by J. H. Freese. Cambridge
and London: Harvard University Press, 1926.
40Arvan, Marcus. “A Better Dual Theory of Human Rights.” The Philosophical Forum 45
(2014): 17–47.
Ausderan, Jacob. “How Naming and Shaming Aﬀects Human Rights Perceptions in the
Shamed Country.” Journal of Peace Research 51, no. 1 (2014): 81-95.
Baehr, Peter R. “Controversies in the Current International Human Rights Debate.”
Human Rights Review 2, no. 1 (2000): 7-32.
Baldwin, Roger. “International Agreements Can Protect Speciﬁc Rights.” Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science 243, no. 1 (January 1946):
134–138.
Barry, Colin M. and K. Chad Clay. “Avoiding the Spotlight: Human Rights Shaming
and Foreign Direct Investment.” International Studies Quarterly 57, no. 3 (2013):
532-544.
Beitz, Charles R. “Human Dignity in the Theory of Human Rights: Nothing but a Phrase?”
Philosophy & Public Aﬀairs 41, no. 3 (2013): 260–290.
Bell, Daniel A. East Meets West: Human Rights and Democracy in East Asia. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2000.
Bensouda, Fatou. “Forward.” In The Law and Practice of the International Criminal
Court, edited by Carsten Stahn. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Bernstorﬀ, Jochen von. “The Changing Fortunes of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights: Genesis and Symbolic Dimensions of the Turn to Rights in International
Law.” European Journal of International Law 19, no. 5 (2008): 903-924.
Bielefeldt, Heiner. “Western Versus Islamic Human Rights Conceptions?: A Critique of
Cultural Essentialism in Discussion of Human Rights.” Political Theory 28, no. 1,
(2000): 90-121.
Black, Allida M. “Eleanor Roosevelt and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.”
OAH Magazine of History 22, no. 2 (2008): 34-37.
Black, Allida M. Casting Her Own Shadow: Eleanor Roosevelt and the Shaping of Postwar
Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.
Bleicher, Samuel A. “The Legal Signiﬁcance of Re-Citation of General Assembly Resolu-
tions.” American Journal of International Law 63 (1969): 444-478.
Bogicevic, Milos. “Cultural Relativism and Human Rights.” International Journal of Rule
of Law, Transnational Justice and Human Rights 3, no. 3 (2013): 151-156.
Buergenthal, Thomas, Dianh Shelton, and David P Stewart. “International Human Rights
in a Nutshell.” George Washington Legal Studies Research Paper no. 2013-34 (2009):
1-28.
41Burke, Roland. “Flat Eﬀect? Revisiting Emotions in the Historiography of Human Rights.”
Journal of Human Rights 16, no. 2 (2015): 123–141.
Burke, Roland. Decolonization and the Evolution of International Human Rights. Philadel-
phia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2010.
Carey, Sabine C. The Politics of Human Rights: The Quest for Dignity. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Cassin, René. La Pensée et l’Action. Paris: Lalou, 1972.
Chan, Joseph C.W. “Confucianism and Human Rights.” In Religion and Human Rights:
An Introduction, edited by John Witte Jr. and M. Christian Green. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2011.
Cheng, Tai-Heng. “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights at Sixty: Is It Still Rights
for the United States?” Cornell International Law Journal 41, no. 2 (2008): 251-305.
Churchill,Winston.“TheSinewsofPeace(‘IronCurtainSpeech’).” International Churchill
Society.March5,1946.AccessedSeptember1,2017,https://www.winstonchurchill.
org/resources/speeches/1946-1963-elder-statesman/the-sinews-of-peace.
Cmiel, Kenneth. “The Recent History of Human Rights.” American Historical Review
109 (2004): 117-135.
Constantinides, Aristoteles. “Questioning the Universal Relevance of the Universal Decla-
ration of Human Rights.” Harvard Human Rights Journal 15 (2000): 101-125.
Cronin-Furman, Kathleen Renee. “60 Years of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
Towards an Individual Responsibility to Protect.” American University International
Law Review 25 (2010): 175-198.
Darraj, Susan Muaddi. Milestones in Modern World History: The Universal Declaration
of Human Rights Langhome: Chelsea House, 2010.
DeMeritt, Jacqueline H. R. “International Organizations and Government Killing: Does
Naming and Shaming Save Lives?” International Interactions 38, no. 5 (2012):
597-621.
Dicker, Richard. “International Criminal Court and Double Standards of International
Justice.” In The Law and Practice of the International Criminal Court, edited by
Carsten Stahn. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Dolinger, Jacob. “The Failure of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” University
of Miami Inter-American Law Review 47 (2016): 164-199.
Donnelly,Jack.Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice.Ithaca:CornellUniversity
Press, 2013.
42Eberl, Jason T., Eleanor D. Kinney, and Matthew J. Williams. “Foundation for A Natural
Right to Health Care.” Journal of Medicine and Philosophy 36 (2011): 537-557.
Eckel, Jan. “Human Rights and Decolonization: New Perspectives and Open Questions.”
Humanity: An International Journal of Human Rights, Humanitarianism, and De-
velopment 1, no. 1 (2010): 111-135.
Elkins, Zachary, Tom Ginsburg, Beth Simmons. “Getting to Rights: Treaty Ratiﬁcation,
Constitutional Convergence, and Human Rights Practice.” Harvard International
Law Journal 54, no. 1 (2013): 61-95.
Evans, Mark. “Just War, Democracy, Democratic Peace.” European Journal of Political
Theory 11, no. 2 (2011): 191-208.
Freeman, Michal. “Universalism of Human Rights and Cultural Relativism.” In Routledge
Handbook of International Human Rights Law, edited by Scott Sheeran and Sir Nigel
Rodley. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Fuentes, Carlos Iván, René Provost, and Samuel G. Walker. “E Pluribus Unum-Bhinneka
Tunggal Ika? Universal Human Rights and the Fragmentation of International Law.”
In Dialogue on Human Rights and Legal Pluralism, edited by R. Provost and C.
Sheppard. New York: Springer, 2013.
Gable, Lance. “The Proliferation of Human Rights in Global Health Governance.” Journal
of Law, Medicine & Ethics 3, no. 1 (2009): 534–544.
Gammeltoft-Hansen, Thomas and Hans Gammeltoft-Hansen. “The Right to Seek—
Revisited. On the UN Human Rights Declaration Article 14 and Access to Asylum
Procedures in the EU.” European Journal of Migration and Law 10 (2008): 439-459.
Gardbaum, Stephen. “Human Rights as International Constitutional Rights.” European
Journal of International Law 19, no. 4 (2008): 749–768.
Gardner, Richard N. “The Genesis of the Declaration: A Fresh Examination.” Pace
International Law Review 27 (1999): 27-65.
Ghandhi, Sandy. “The International Bill of Rights and the European Conventions on
Human Rights,” Legal Information Management 6 (2006).
Glendon, Mary Ann. “The Rule of Law in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.”
Northwestern Journal of International Human Rights 1 (2004): 1-19.
Glendon,MaryAnn.A World Made New: Eleanor Roosevelt and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. New York: Random House, 2001.
Glensy, Rex D. “The Right to Dignity.” Columbia Human Rights Law Review 43 (2011):
65-142.
Gopalan, Sandeep. “Alternative Sanctions and Social Norms in International Law: The
Case of Abu Ghraib.” Michigan State Law Review (2007): 785-839.
43Gouge, Olympe de. “Declaration of the Rights of Women and the Female Citizen.” College
of Staten Island Library: American Studies Program (1791).
Grandin, Greg. “The Liberal Traditions in the Americas: Rights, Sovereignty, and the
Origins of Liberal Multilateralism.” American Historical Review 117, no. 1 (2012):
68-91.
Green, James Frederick. The United Nations and Human Rights. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution, 1956.
Hannum, Hurst. “The Status of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in National
and International Law.” Georgia Journal of International and Comparative Law 25
(1995): 287-397.
Hendrix, Cullen S. and Wendy H. Wong. “What is the Pen Truly Mighty? Regime Type
and the Eﬃcacy of Naming and Shaming in Curbing Human Rights Abuses.” British
Journal of Political Science 43, no. 3 (2013): 651-672.
Henkin, Louis. “Human Rights and State Sovereignty.” Georgia Journal of International
and Comparative Law 25, no. 31 (1995): 31-45.
Higgins, Noelle. “Advancing the Rights of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples: Getting
UN Attention Via the Universal Periodic Review.” Netherlands Quarterly of Human
Rights 32, no. 4 (2014): 379-407.
Higgins, Rosalyn. “Conceptual Thinking About the Individual in International Law.”
British Journal of International Studies 4, no. 1 (1978): 1–19.
Hill, Dilys M. “Rights and Their Realisation.” In Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights:
Progress and Achievement, ed. Ralph Beddard and Dilys M. Hill. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 1992.
Hill, Lisa. “Stoic Cosmopolitanism and the Birth of Universal Rights.” American Political
Science Association 2013 Annual Meeting Paper (2013): 1-30.
Hoover, Joe. “Rereading the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Plurality and
Contestation, Not Consensus.” Journal of Human Rights 12 (2013): 217–241.
Humphrey, John P. Human Rights and United Nations: A Great Adventure. New York:
Transnational, 1984.
Humphrey, John P. On the Edge of Greatness: The Diaries of John Humphrey, First
Director of the United Nations Division of Human Rights, vol. 1,1948-1949, edited
by A. J. Hobbins. Montreal: McGill University Libraries, 1994.
Ibhawoh, Bonny. “Deﬁning Persecution and Protection: The Cultural Relativism Debate
and the Rights of Refugees.” In Problems of Protection: The UNHCR, Refugees, and
Human Rights, edited by Niklaus Steiner, Mark Gibney, and Gil Loescher. New York
and London: Routledge, 2003.
44Institut de droit international. “Declaration of the International Rights of Man.” American
Journal of International Law 35 (1941): 664.
Irvin-Erickson, Douglas. “Protection from Whom? Tensions, Contradictions, and Potential
in the Responsibility to Protect.” In Rethinking Security in the Twenty-First Century,
edited by Daniel Jacob. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017.
Ishay, Micheline R. The History of Human Rights: From Ancient Times to the Globaliza-
tion Era. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008.
Jacobson, Harold K. “Structuring the Global System: American Contributions to Inter-
national Organization.” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science 428, no. 1 (1976): 79-90.
James W. Nickle, Making Sense of Human Rights, 2nd ed. (New York: Blackwell, 2007),
172.
Johnson, M. Glen and Janusz Symonides. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A
History of Its Creation and Implementation 1948-1998. Paris: UNESCO Publishing,
1998.
Jones, John F. and James Herbert Williams. “Summary and Conclusion: A View from
the Bridge.” In Conﬂict and Human Security in Africa: Kenya in Perspective, edited
by Asfaw Kumssa, John F. Jones, and James Herbert Williams. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2011.
JUSTICE Constitution Committee of British Section of the International Commission
ofJurists.“ABritishBillofRights:InformingtheDebate.2007.AccessedSeptember1,
2017,http://www.statewatch.org/news/2007/nov/uk-justice-bill-of-rights-rep.
pdf.
Kapferer, Sibylle. “Article 14(2) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
Exclusion from International Refugee Protection.” Refugee Survey Quarterly 27, no.
3, (2008): 53-75.
Keane, David. “Survival of the Fairest? Evolution and the Geneticization of Rights.”
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 30, no. 3 (2010): 467–494.
Kelly, Brendan Desmond. “Human Rights Protection for the Mentally Ill though Mental
Health Law in England and Ireland.” (PhD diss., University of Leicester, 2012):
1-345.
Keown, Damien. “Are There “Human Rights” in Buddhism?” In Buddhism and Hu-
man Rights, edited by Damien Keown, Charles S. Prebish, and Wayne R. Husted.
Richmond. Surrey: Curzon Press, 1998.
Koivurova, Timo, Sébastien Duyck, and Leena Heinämäki. “Climate Changes and Human
Rights.” In Climate Change and the Law, Ius Gentium: Comparative, edited by E. J.
Hollo. New York: Springer, 2013.
45Korey, William. NGO’s and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A Curious
Grapevine. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
Krain,Matthew.“J’accuse!DoesNamingandShamingPerpetratorsReducetheSeverityof
Genocides or Politicides?” International Studies Quarterly 56, no. 3 (2012): 574-589.
Lauren,PaulGordon.The Evolution of International Human Rights: Vision Seen.Philadel-
phia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011.
Lauterpacht, Hersch. “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” British Yearbook of
International Law 25 (1948): 354–381.
Lauterpacht, Hersch. International Law and Human Rights. London: Stevens & Son, 1950.
Law, David S. and Mila Versteeg. “The Declining Inﬂuence of the United States Consti-
tution.” New York University Law Review 87 (2012): 762-858.
Lee, Rebecca. “Forced Sterilization and Mandatory Divorce: How A Majority of Council of
Europe Member States’ Laws Regarding Gender Identity Violate the Internationally
and Regionally Established Human Rights of Trans People.” Berkeley International
Journal of Law 33 (2015): 114-152.
Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia
(South West Africa) Notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), ICJ
Reports. American Journal of International Law 66, no. 1 (1972): 145–183.
Lillich, Richard B. “The Growing Importance of the Customary International Human
Rights Law.” Georgia Journal of International and Comparative Law 25 (1996):
1–30.
Linebaugh, Peter. The Magna Carta Manifesto: Liberties and Commons for All. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2008.
Linowitz, Sol, Charles H. Malik, and Daniel Parker. The Creative Interface: International
Business—Governmental Relations, vol. 2. Washington D.C.: American University,
1970.
Lippman, Matthew. “Human Rights Revisited: The Protection of Human Rights under
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.” Netherlands International
Law Review 26 (1979): 221-277.
Locke, John. Locke: Two Treaties of Government student edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1988.
Maclnnis, Luke. “Agency and Attitude: Kant’s Purposive Conception of Human Rights.”
Philosophy and Social Criticism 42, no. 3 (2016): 289-319.
Malik, Charles. “1948—The Drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” UN
Bulletin on Humanitarian Rights 97 (1986).
46Maoz, Asber. “Can Judaism Serve as a Source of Human Rights?” Heidelberg Journal of
International Law 64 (2004): 677-722.
Maoz, Asher. “War and Peace—An Israeli Perspective.” Constitutional Forum 24, no. 2
(2005): 35-76.
Marmor,AndreiandAlexanderSarch,"TheNatureofLaw,"inThe Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (Fall 2015 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta, last modiﬁed Fall 2015.
Accessed September 1, 2017, https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/
entries/lawphil-nature.
Mayer,AnnElizabeth.“HumanRightsasaDimensionofCSR:TheBlurredLinesBetween
Legal and Non-Legal Categories.” Journal of Business Ethnics 88 (2009): 561-577.
Mayers, David. “Humanity in 1948: The Genocide Convention and Universal Declaration
of Human Rights,” Diplomacy & Statecraft 26 (2015): 446-472.
McFarland, Sam. “The Slow Creation of Humanity.” Political Psychology 32, no. 1 (2011):
1-20.
McGlodrick, Dominic. The Human Rights Committee: Its Role in the Development on
Civil and Political Rights. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.
McInerny, Ralph and John O’Callaghan. “Saint Thomas Aquinas.” The Stanford En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy. Last edited Winter 2016. Accessed September 1, 2017,
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aquinas/.
McMaster, Amy J. “Human Rights at the Crossroads: When East Meets West.” Vermont
Law Review 29 (2004): 109-146.
Mehar, Iftikhar Ahmed. Al-Islam: Inception to Conclusion. Bloomington: Authorhouse,
2003.
Memorandum of Conversation between Mrs. Roosevelt, Senator Austin, and Messrs Ross,
Winslow and Hendrick, Box 4587, ER Paper, 1947.
Meyersfeld, Bonita. “A Theory of Domestic Violence in International Law.” JSD Thesis,
Yale Law School, 2016.
Moncel, Remi. “Dangerous Experiments: Scientiﬁc Integrity in International Environment
Adjudications after the ICJ’s Decision in Whaling in the Antarctic.” Ecology Law
Quarterly 42, no. 2 (2015): 305-345.
Monteiro, Reis. Ethics of Human Rights. Heidelberg: Springer International Publishing,
2014.
Moran, Gabriel. “Human Rights Need a Human Tradition.” CrossCurrents 62, no. 1
(2012): 75-88.
47Morsink, Johannes. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Origins, Drafting, and
Intent. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999.
Mower, A. Glenn Jr. The United States, the United Nations, and Human Rights: The
Eleanor Roosevelt and Jimmy Carter Eras. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press,
1979.
Moyn, Samuel. “Substance, Scale, and Salience: The Recent Historiography of Human
Rights.” The Annual Review of Law and Social Science 8 (2012): 123-140.
Moyn, Samuel. Human Rights and the Uses of History. New York and London: Verso,
2014.
Mule, Nick J., Maryam Khan, and Cameron McKenzie. “The Growing Presence of
LGBTQIs at the UN: Arguments and Counter-arguments.” International Social
Work (2017): 1-28.
Murdie, Amanda M. and David R. Davis. “Shaming and Blaming: Using Events Data
to Assess the Impact of Human Rights INGOs.” International Studies Quarterly 56
(2012): 1-16.
Mutua, Makau. Human Rights NGOs in East Africa: Political and Normative Tensions.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009.
Neier,Aryeh.TheInternationalHumanRightsMovement:AHistory.Princeton:Princeton
University Press, 2012.
Nolan, Cathal J. “Road to the Charter: America, Liberty, and the Founding of the United
Nations.” Paradigms 3, no. 1 (1989): 24-37.
Normand, Roger and Sarah Zaidi. Human in the U.N.: The Political History of Universal
Justice. United Nations Intellectual History Project. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 2008.
Novak, Michael. “The Judeo-Christian Foundation of Human Dignity, Personal Liberty,
and the Concept of the Person.” Journal of Markets & Morality 1, no. 2 (1998):
107-121.
Nzelibe, Jide. “Courting Genocide: The Unintended Eﬀects of Humanitarian Intervention.”
Northwestern University School of Law, Public and Legal Theory Series 8, no. 36
(2008): 1-64.
Osiatynski, Wiktor. Human Rights and Their Limits. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2009.
Paul, James C.N. and Roktim Kaushik. “Urban Poverty and the Right to a Decent
Habitat as Established by International Human Rights Law.” Rutgers Law Review
63, no. 3 (2011): 905-939.
48Pedretti, Ramona. Immunity of Heads of State and State Oﬃcials for International
Crimes. Leiden: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 2014.
Pendas, Devin O. “Towards a New Politics? On Recent Historiography of Human Rights.”
Contemporary European History 21, no. 1 (2012): 95–111.
Pisano, Attilio. “Human Rights and Sovereignty in the ASEAN Path Towards a Human
Rights Declaration.” Human Rights Review 15, no. 4 (2014): 391-411.
Polsdofer, Stephan. “Pride and Prejudiced: Russia’s Anti-Gay Propaganda Law Violates
the European Conventions on Human Rights.” American University International
Law Review 29, no. 5 (2014): 1069-1096.
Proposal for the Establishment of a General International Organization, Pamphlet No. 4,
Pillars of Peace. In Documents Pertaining to American Interest in Establishing a
Lasting World Peace: January 1941-February 1946. Fort George G. Meade: Army
Information School, 1946.
Relly, Jeannie E. “Freedom of Information Laws and Global Diﬀusion: Testing Roger’s
Model.” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 89, no. 3 (2012): 431–457.
Reus-Smit, Christian. “Human Rights and the Social Construction of Sovereignty.” Review
of International Studies 27 (2001): 519-538.
Robinson, Mary. “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A Living Document.”
Australian Journal of International Aﬀairs 52, no. 2 (1998): 117-120.
Roosevelt, Eleanor. “The Promise of Human Rights.” Foreign Aﬀairs, 1948.
Roosevelt, Franklin D. “Message to Congress.” January 6, 1941. Accessed September 1,
2017, https://fdrlibrary.org/four-freedoms.
Roosevelt, Franklin D. and Churchill, Winston S. Atlantic Charter. John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd., 1941.
Roosevelt, Franklin D. “The Pubic Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt:
Humanity on the Defensive.” American Historical Review 55, no. 4 (1942): 1-552.
Rosen, Michael. Dignity: Its History and Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2012.
Saito, Natsu Taylor. “Justice Held Hostage: U.S. Disregard for International Law in the
World War II Internment of Japanese Peruvian—Case Study.” Boston College Third
World Law Journal 19, no. 1 (1998): 275-348.
Sankey, Mara Elizabeth. “Promoting Democracy? The Role of Transnational Non-State
Actors in Inter-American Relations 1980-1993.” PhD diss., University College London,
2016.
49Schabas, William A. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: The Travaux Prepara-
toires, vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Schabas, William A. “The Rights to Life.” In Oxford Handbook of International Law
in Armed Conﬂict, edited by Andrew Clapham and Paola Gaeta. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2014.
Schmitt, C. B. The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1988.
Schutter, Olivier De. International Human Rights Law: Cases, Materials, Commentary.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Schwelb, Egon. “Human Rights and the International Community.” In The Roots and
Growth of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, edited by Roger Stenson
Clark. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1963.
Schwelb, Egon. “The Inﬂuence of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on Interna-
tional and National Law,” Proceedings of the American Society of International Law
53 (1959): 217-229.
Sellars, Kirsten. The Rise and Rise of Human Rights. Thrupp: Sutton, 2002.
Simpson, Brad. “The Biafran Secession and the Limits of Self-determination.” Journal of
Genocide Research 16, no. 2–3, (2014): 337–354.
Snyder, Sarah B. Human Rights Activism and the End of the Cold War: A Transnational
History of the Helsinki Network. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Sommerville, Donald, and Ian Westwell. The Complete Illustrated History of World War
II: An Authoritative Account of One of the Deadliest Conﬂicts in Human History,
with Analysis of Decisive Encounters and Landmark Engagements. London: Lorenz
Books, 2008.
Staﬀen, Marcio Ricardo. “The Legal Development of the Notion of Human Dignity in
the Constitutional Jurisprudence.” Revista Brasileira de Direito 12, no. 2 (2016):
108-126.
Stalin, Joseph P. “Speech Delivered by J. V. Stalin at a Meeting of Voters of the Stalin
Electoral District.” 1946. Accessed September 1, 2017, https://www.marxists.org/
reference/archive/stalin/works/1937/12/election/index.htm.
Sun, Pinghua. “Confucian Philosophy and Its Historical Contributions to Human Rights.”
In Human Rights Protection System in China. New York: Springer, 2014.
Swepston, Lee. “The International Labour Organization and International Human Rights
System.” In Routledge Handbook of International Human Rights Law, edited by Scott
Sheeran and Sir Nigel Rodley. London and New York: Routledge, 2013.
Talbott, W.J. Which Rights should be Universal? Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
50Tatsiy, Vasily. “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: The Worldwide Humanism
Manifesto.” Law of Ukraine, no. 5–6 (2011): 28-34.
Thomas, Ann Van Wynen and A.J. Thomas Jr. “Human Rights and Organizations of
American States.” Santa Clara Lawyer 12 (1972): 319-376.
Tilley, John J. “Cultural Relativism.” Human Rights Quarterly 22, no. 2 (2000): 501–547.
Timmermann, Cristian. “Sharing in or Beneﬁting from Scientiﬁc Advancement?” Science
and Engineering Ethics 20 (2014): 111-133.
Tomuschat, Christian. Human Rights Between Idealism and Realism. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2003.
Truitt, Andrew. “Ancient Roots and Modern Oﬀshoots: The Development of International
Human Rights.” Regents Journal of International Law 7 (2009): 199.
Twiss, Sumner B. “History, Human Rights, and Globalization.” Journal of Religious
Ethics 32, no. 1 (2004): 39–70.
Twiss, Sumner. “Confucian ethics, concept-clusters, and human rights.” In Polishing the
Chinese Mirror: Essay in Honor of Henry Rosemont, Jr., edited by Marthe Chandler
and Ronnie Littlejohn. New York: Global Scholarly Publication, 2007.
Unger, Anna, Stuart Wallace, and Tamas Dezso Ziegler. “The Role of Human Rights in
EU-US Bilateral Relations.” FRAME Deliverable 6, no. 5 (2016): 1-216.
United Nations, Amendments Proposed by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the
Draft Declaration, UN Doc. A/784, 1948.
United Nations, Collation of the Comments of Government on the Draft International
Declaration on Human Rights, Draft International Covenant on Human Rights and
the Question of Implementation, UN Doc. E/CN.4/85, 1948.
United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Draft Report of the Working Group on
Implementation, UN Doc. E/CN.4/53, 1947.
United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary of Meetings, UN Doc. E/HR.
9, 1946.
United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of Eighty-First Meeting,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/SR.81, 1948.
United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the Twelfth Meeting,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/SR.12, 1947.
United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the Eighth Meeting,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/SR.8, 1947.
51United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the Seventy-Second
Meeting, UN Doc. E/CN.4/SR.72, 1948.
United Nations, Commission on Human Rights, Summary Record of the Twenty-Eighth
Meeting, UN Doc. E/CN.4/SR.28, 1947.
United Nations, Commission on Status of Women, Summary Record of the Ninth Meeting,
UN Doc. E./CN.6/SR.28, 1948.
United Nations, Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries, UN
Doc. A/Res. 1514(XV), OP 7.
United Nations, Drafting Committee of the Commission on Human Rights, Summary
Record of the First Meeting, UN Doc. E/CN.4/AC.1/SR/1, 1947.
United Nations, Economic and Social Council, Summary Record of the Two Hundred and
Fifteenth Meeting, UN Doc. E/SR.215, 1948.
United Nations, General Assembly, Oﬃcial Record of the Second Session, UN Doc. A/519,
1947.
United Nations, General Assembly, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.
United Nations, General Assembly, Verbatim Record of the Hundred and Eightieth Plenary
Meeting, UN Doc. A/PV.180, 1948.
United Nations, General Assembly, Verbatim Record of the Hundred and Eighty-Third
Plenary Meeting, UN Doc. A/PV.183, 1948.
United Nations, International Conference on Human Rights, Resolution adopted on the
Report of the Third Committee, UN Doc. A/RES/2442(XXIII), 1968.
United Nations, Islamic Republic of Iran’s National Report Submitted to Human Rights
CommissioninAccordancewithParagraph15(a)ofResolution5/1,UNDoc.A/HRC/WG.6/7/IRN/1,
2010.
United Nations, Note by Representative of Canada, UN Doc. E/965, 1948.
United Nations, Proclamation of Tehran, Final Act of the International Conference on
Human Rights, UN Doc. A/CONF.32/41, 1968.
United Nations, Report of the Commission on Human Rights to the Second Session of
the Economic and Social Council, UN Doc. E/38, 1946.
United Nations, Report of the Drafting Committee to the Commission on Human Rights,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/21, 1947.
United Nations, Report of the Drafting Sub-Committee Consisting of the Represen-
tatives of Chile, China, United States of America, Union of Soviet Socialist Re-
publics, on Article 5,6,7, of the International Declaration on Human Rights, UN
Doc. E/CN.4/82/Add.11, 1948.
52United Nations, Report of the Preparatory Commission of the United Nations, 1946.
Accessed September 1, 2017, http://dag.un.org/handle/11176/248329.
United Nations, Report of the Third Session of the Commission on Human Rights, UN
Doc. E/800, 1948.
United Nations, Second Session of Drafting Committee, Summary Record of the Twentieth
Meeting, UN Doc. E/CN.4/AC.1/SR.20, 1948.
United Nations, Speech by Mr. A. N. Pavlov, Representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics in the Drafting Committee of the Commission on Human Rights,
UN Doc. E/CN.4/AC.1/29, 1948.
United Nations, The Third Committee, Summary Record of the Hundred and Sixty-Fifth
Meeting, UN Doc. A/C.3/SR.165, 1948.
United Nations, Third Committee, Summary Record of the Hundred and Seventy-Ninth
Meeting, UN Doc. A/C.3/SR.179, 1948.
United Nations, Third Committee, Summary Record of the Hundred and Sixty-Third
Meeting, UN Doc. A/C.3/SR.163, 1948.
United Nations, Treatment of People of Indian Origin in the Union of South Africa, UN
Doc. A/Res. 265(III), OP 1.
United Nations, U.N. Charter. Accessed September 1, 2017, http://www.un.org/en/
sections/un-charter/chapter-i/index.html.
United Nations, Union of Soviet Socialist Republic, Amendments to the Draft Declaration
proposed by the Third Committee, UN Doc. A/784, 1948.
United Nations, United Kingdom: Amendment to Article 3 of the Draft Declaration
proposed by the Third Committee, UN Doc. A/778/Rev.1.
United States Diplomatic and Consular Staﬀ in Tehran (United States of America v.
Iran). Judgment, ICJ Report, 1980.
Vennesson, Pascal. “War Under Transnational Surveillance: Framing Ambiguity and the
Politics of Shame.” Review of International Studies 40 (2014): 25–51.
Vyver, Johan D. van der. “A Reality Check: The Binding Force of Economic and Social
Rights Listed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” Hamline Journal of
Public Law and Policy 30 (2008): 125-174.
Wabwile, Michael Nyongesa. “Legal Protection of Social and Economic Rights of Children
in Developing Countries: Reassessing International Cooperation and Responsibility.”
PhD diss., University of Leicester, 2009.
53Wallbott, Linda and Andrea Schapper. “Negotiating by Own Standards? The Use and
Validity of Human Rights Norms in UN Climate Negotiations.” International Envi-
ronmental Agreement: Politics, Law, and Economics 17 (2017): 209.
Wang, Carol. “Rule of Law in Afghanistan: Enabling a Constitutional Framework for
Local Accountability.” Harvard International Law Journal 55, no. 1 (2014): 212-249.
Wiesel, Elie. “Voices: A Tribute to Human Rights.” In The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights Fifty Years and Beyond, edited by Yael Danieli. Amityville: Baywood,
1999.
William, Alfred and Brain Simpson. Human Rights and the End of the Empire: Britain
and the Genesis of the European Convention. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Winter, Jay and Antoine Prost. René Cassin and Human Rights: From the Great War to
the Universal Declaration. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Witte, Bruno De. “The Protection of Linguistic Diversity Through Fundamental Rights.”
European University Institute (1985): 1-675.
WorldConferenceonHumanRightsinVienna.“ViennaDeclarationandProgrammeofAc-
tion.” 1993.AccessedSeptember1,2017,http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/
Pages/Vienna.aspx.
Writte Jr., John. “Law, Religion, and Human Rights.” Columbia Human Rights Law
Review 28, no.1 (1996): 1-31.
Writte Jr., John. “Religion.” In The Oxford Handbook of International Human Rights Law,
edited by Dinah Shelton, 9-31. New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Yale University, The Avalon Project at the Yale Law School: Documents in Law, History
and Diplomacy. “The Covenant of the League of Nations.” Last modiﬁed 2008. Ac-
cessed September 1, 2017, http://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/leagcov.
asp.
Yoo, John. “Fixing Failed States.” California Law Review 99 (2011): 95-150.
Zaremby, Justin. “On the Uses and Disadvantages of History for Human Rights Law:
Reading Samuel Moyn’s The Last Utopia: Human Rights in History.” Yale Human
Rights and Development Journal 15 (2012): 155-177.
54