Written Testimony of 
Saule T. Omarova 
Professor of Law 
Cornell University  
 
Before the United States Senate  
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs 
 
 “FOSTERING ECONOMIC GROWTH: MIDSIZED, REGIONAL AND LARGE INSTITUTION 
PERSPECTIVE” 
June 15, 2017 
10:00 am 
538 Dirksen Senate Office Building 
 
Dear Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for inviting me to testify at this hearing.  My name is Saule Omarova. I am Professor of Law 
at Cornell University, where I teach subjects related to U.S. and international banking law and financial 
sector regulation. Since entering the legal academy in 2007, I have written numerous articles examining 
various aspects of U.S. financial sector regulation, with a special focus on systemic risk containment and 
structural aspects of U.S. bank regulation. For six years prior to becoming a law professor, I practiced law 
in the Financial Institutions Group of Davis Polk & Wardwell and served as a Special Advisor on 
Regulatory Policy to the U.S. Treasury’s Under Secretary for Domestic Finance.  I am here today solely 
in my academic capacity and am not testifying on behalf of any entity.  I have not received any federal 
grants or any compensation in connection with my testimony, and the views expressed here are entirely 
my own. 
The global financial crisis of 2007-09 has left a deep, crippling mark both on the American economy and 
on the lives of millions of Americans who lost their homes, their jobs, their savings, and their hopes for a 
better future. It threw the country into a prolonged economic recession, accompanied by growing levels of 
poverty, inequality, and political discord. According to an estimate by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Dallas, the crisis resulted in an economy-wide output loss of up to $14 trillion, or $120,000 per single 
U.S. household – both of which amounts will easily double if the broader economic and societal effects of 
the crisis are permanent.1 These output losses triggered a familiar vicious circle of economic stagnation 
and instability. Faced with steadily declining real incomes, Americans are forced to finance their 
consumption with an increasingly unsustainable debt, which already reached a record $13 trillion mark.2 
Debt overhang depresses consumer spending, which in turn leads to further contraction in production and 
employment.3 
Furthermore, neither economists’ estimates nor the actual statistics capture the enormous nonpecuniary – 
or human – costs of the crisis, including the lasting psychological effects of unemployment, 
underemployment, diminished job security and reduced opportunity. While difficult to quantify, these 
“hidden” costs of the financial crisis will be borne by the American people for years to come.  
1 
 Yet, the very same financial institutions whose reckless profit-seeking created the crisis in the first place 
were largely protected from the downside of their own excessive risk-taking, because the federal 
government was compelled to bail them out. Not only did the 2008-09 bailouts effectively exact “an 
unfair and nontransparent tax upon the American people” but they also significantly undermined public 
trust in the American capitalist system, thus undermining the system itself.4 
In this context, the Committee’s current efforts to evaluate the role of financial institutions in fostering 
America’s economic growth acquire particular significance. Promoting sustainable, stable long-term 
growth is an issue of enormous political as well as economic importance. It is the only way of remedying 
pervasive socially destructive consequences of the financial crisis: only by deliberately and systematically 
channeling public and private efforts toward the expansion of productive capacity and employment in the 
real (i.e., non-financial) sector of the national economy can we reverse the crippling effects of the 
extraordinary wealth transfer from the American taxpayers to the financial industry that the latest crisis 
laid bare for all to see. There is hardly a greater task facing Congress today, and the Committee’s decision 
to tackle it is a much needed act of public-minded statecraft. 
Ironically, however, the financial industry is using this opportunity to mount a massive lobbying effort to 
achieve the opposite goal: to reverse key post-crisis regulatory reforms enacted with an explicit goal of 
curbing financial institutions’ ability to generate – and then socialize – excessive levels of risk in the 
financial system. The industry explicitly targets the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act of 2010 (the “Dodd-Frank Act” or the “Act”), the centerpiece of post-crisis financial 
regulation reform.5  In effect, banks are trying to put the Dodd-Frank Act on trial under the rhetorical 
guise of “fostering economic growth.” It is, however, a dangerous misconception to equate economic 
growth with financial sector deregulation: not only are the two phenomena fundamentally different but, as 
explained below, they are often mutually exclusive.   
It is especially ironic – indeed, astounding – to watch the financial industry complain about its supposedly 
unbearable regulatory compliance costs, when the industry is doing exceptionally well for itself. All 
banks and their parent-companies, regardless of size, saw their profits increase steadily during the entire 
time after the Dodd-Frank Act was passed in 2010. In 2016 alone, banking institutions earned a total of 
$175 billion in net profits.6 This is not a sign of a struggling industry. 
Of course, it may be reasonable, and even desirable from the public policy perspective, to revisit the 
continuing efficacy of certain post-crisis laws and regulations or to recalibrate their application to certain 
small, low-risk financial institutions.  If carefully designed and thoughtfully implemented, such 
recalibration may help to increase the availability of affordable local financing to small businesses in 
some rural and small-town areas. However, even under the best of circumstances, that possibility alone is 
not sufficient to support a wide-ranging repeal or rollback of the existing financial laws and regulations. 
Any such measure would directly and disproportionately benefit large, complex, systemically risky mega-
banks by removing all meaningful constraints on their ability to destabilize the nation’s financial system 
and, once again, jeopardize American taxpayers’ long-term (and even short-term) well-being. It is against 
this background that the Committee should evaluate every proposal for regulatory reform submitted to it 
by self-interested industry players. 
 
 
2 
 I.  FINANCIAL DEREGULATION IS LIKELY TO HINDER, NOT FOSTER, REAL ECONOMIC 
GROWTH 
The starting point of all deregulatory proposals and arguments advanced by the financial industry is a 
blanket assertion to the effect that financial institutions’ core, if not sole, business purpose is to finance 
America’s economic growth. Accordingly, the argument goes, any regulatory constraint on financial 
institutions’ business activities, by definition, restricts their ability “to serve customers, grow the economy 
and create jobs.”7  Therefore, an implicit conclusion follows, removing such regulatory constraint will 
necessarily and automatically improve customers’ lives, boost the economy, and create jobs. 
It is an inherently faulty argument, insofar as these financial institutions – regardless of their size or other 
attributes – are privately-owned firms whose overarching business priority is to maximize their own 
profits and shareholder returns, not the nation’s macroeconomic goals. It becomes a deliberately 
misleading and dangerous argument, however, when used by large financial institutions the bulk of whose 
profits comes from massive secondary-market trading and dealing operations.   
The financial industry’s argument either inadvertently conflates or deliberately confounds two very 
different things: (1) actual growth in the real economy, and (2) mere speculation-driven asset price 
inflation in the secondary markets.  
It is indisputable that what America needs is real economic growth: stable and sustainable long-term 
growth of the real – i.e. non-financial – sector of the national economy. We urgently need to grow our 
nation’s industrial output and capacity, to facilitate employment- and wealth-generating technological 
advances, to rebuild and modernize the country’s physical and social infrastructure. We also need to 
ensure that the benefits of these real growth-promoting activities are distributed more equally and fairly, 
so as to restore the lost strength of America’s middle class and to enable lower-income American families 
to move up the ladder of economic and social success. It is this kind of real, sustainable, structurally 
balanced, and socially inclusive economic growth that is necessary in order to help the country recover 
from the post-crisis economic recession.  
It is also fundamentally different from the mere asset price inflation, or growth in prices at which various 
already existent assets – stocks, bonds, commodities, real estate, etc. – are traded in secondary markets. 
Because increases in market value of such tradable assets at least temporarily increase their owners’ 
individual wealth, the aggregate growth in the market value of all such assets is routinely and erroneously 
taken as a direct indicator of the aggregate economic “wealth” or national economic “growth.” Of course, 
an increase in the current market price of a particular company’s stock may reflect, at least in part, an 
increase in that company’s real-life productivity. But it may also reflect merely the generalized 
expectations of today’s stock buyers that those prices will be even higher tomorrow. In that sense, all 
asset price inflation is inherently speculative: it is not directly or necessarily linked to actual productive 
gains in the real economy.8  
Moreover, speculative asset price inflation, in fact, significantly impedes real economic growth. There are 
two reasons why that is the case. 
First, by making purely speculative investments financially attractive, asset price inflation effectively 
diverts investment flows away from the primary markets in which companies raise new capital for 
expanding their productive capacity. Put simply, investors looking to put their money to use in financial 
markets face two competing choices: asset price speculation (an easy short-term commitment of capital 
3 
 with virtually no “hard” constraints on the upside) or productive investment in the real economy (a long-
term commitment of capital with various real-life constraints on potential returns). In that sense, asset 
price inflation actively undermines the real economy’s potential for productive, employment-generating 
growth that America so desperately needs. 
Second, asset price inflation creates instability that directly threatens the economy’s ability to operate and 
grow. When speculation-induced asset price inflation reaches its peak, the inevitable market crash tends 
to be fast and furious. During these dramatic moments, markets tend to over-correct, sending asset prices 
far below the levels supported by the “fundamentals.” Thus, the ultimate bursting of an unsustainable 
speculative bubble wipes out not only the artificial, purely speculative gains in asset values but also a lot 
of real economic wealth. Massive defaults, bankruptcies, business closures, worker layoffs, and other 
familiar symptoms of a severe “market correction” extinguish both the fruits of the nation’s past and the 
foundations of its future economic growth and prosperity.   
To appreciate these dynamics, one need not go as far back as the Great Depression and the Roaring 
Twenties that led to it. More recent history provides plenty of evidence to the same effect.  
In the era of massive financial sector deregulation, throughout the 1990s and all the way until 2008, 
America’s economic boom was based largely on secondary-market asset price inflation. This trend is 
particularly visible in the period after the enactment of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 (the “GLB 
Act”), which repealed the Glass-Steagall Act’s prohibition on combining, under the same corporate roof, 
traditional banking activities and full-blown dealing and trading in securities and other financial (and even 
non-financial) markets.9  Throughout the 1990s, large financial institutions – both commercial banks and 
investment banks – lobbied for this “regulatory relief” from the supposedly outdated Glass-Steagall rules, 
using the familiar rhetoric of “facilitating economic growth” and providing “more choices” and “better 
services” to their customers. 
Once enacted, the GLB Act  unleashed an unprecedented consolidation in the financial services industry 
and the emergence of a handful of extremely large FHCs that began aggressively growing their large-
scale trading and dealing operations in securities, derivatives, short-term money-like instruments, and 
physical commodities.10 Their core banking operations, while still a critical point of access to public 
subsidy, quickly lost their status as the “core” source of profitability.11 In the short nine years between the 
enactment of the GLB Act and the near-collapse of the financial markets in the fall of 2008, these 
universal megabanks have effectively turned into universal dealers making secondary markets in 
everything and anything that could be quantified and turned into a trading asset. A result of this 
unprecedented growth of secondary market speculation was an equally unprecedented asset price inflation 
– a story aptly told by many an expert already.  
For present purposes, however, one point deserves special emphasis: As secondary market trading 
volume, stock price indices, and financial firms’ profits were all going up, domestic industrial production 
declined, manufacturing jobs were massively outsourced overseas, wages stagnated, and consumer debt 
(itself converted to a “securitized” trading asset) ballooned.  In effect, this “financialization” of the 
American economy represented an unprecedented transfer of wealth from the real economy to the 
increasingly speculation-oriented financial sector.12 The systematic redistribution of wealth from the Main 
Street makers to Wall Street takers was starkly exposed when the speculative craze – particularly, in 
mortgage-backed securities, underlying mortgage loans and houses – finally triggered the world’s first 
truly systemic financial crisis.13 To protect the economy from collapse, American taxpayers were forced 
4 
 to bail out the same megabanks that fueled – and profited from – the crisis-inducing asset price inflation. 
Today, financial institutions are doing very well, in terms of profits and returns on their shareholders’ 
equity.14 But the middle class and poor Americans, whose livelihood is tied to the real economy, continue 
to bear the full burden of the sluggish post-crisis recovery. 
The centerpiece of post-crisis regulatory reform, the Dodd-Frank Act, aims to minimize the likelihood of 
recurring speculative asset price inflation. Thus, the Dodd-Frank Act established a new systemic 
oversight body, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (“FSOC”).15 The Act mandated enhanced 
prudential supervision of so-called “systemically important financial institutions” (“SIFIs”), which 
includes large bank holding companies (“BHCs”) with at least $50 billion in assets and certain non-bank 
financial institutions designated as SIFIs by FSOC.16 As part of such enhanced prudential supervision, 
SIFIs are required to maintain higher capital and liquidity buffers, conduct regular stress tests, and 
prepare and submit to regulators comprehensive resolution plans (“living wills”).  
Among other things, these heightened requirements are designed to limit the ability of large financial 
conglomerates to create dangerous levels of risk through their massive dealing and trading operations in 
secondary markets. By restricting SIFIs’ ability to fuel destabilizing asset price inflation, the Dodd-Frank 
regime of enhanced prudential supervision also helps to channel investment away from socially 
destructive speculation (secondary markets) and toward productive investment in the real economy 
(primary markets).  While it is not commonly perceived or discussed in these terms, this potential 
“channeling” effect of the Dodd-Frank Act on real economic growth should not be underestimated. Put 
simply, if investors find fewer lucrative opportunities in speculative assets trading, they will direct more 
of their money into non-speculative investments.  
It is, therefore, no surprise that large financial conglomerates – Wall Street megabanks that dominate and 
profit from secondary market trading and dealing activities – are now asking Congress to reverse all of 
the major post-crisis regulatory reforms that threaten their ability to promote speculative asset price 
inflation. Rhetorically, these financial institutions are deliberately using the language of “fostering 
economic growth” and “creating jobs,” ostensibly through lending to “small businesses” and “American 
families.” Strategically, they are taking advantage of the fact that many smaller BHCs, regional lenders 
without meaningful trading operations, voice their own, qualitatively different, concerns about the 
unintended consequences of applying SIFI regulation to their more traditional banking-based business 
models. Neither of these clever tactics should sidetrack the Committee in its deliberations on how to 
foster sustainable, stable growth in the real economy, as opposed to mere speculation in secondary 
markets. 
II.  THE FINANCIAL INDUSTRY’S DEREGULATORY PROPOSALS WILL NOT FOSTER REAL 
ECONOMIC GROWTH 
The financial industry has submitted numerous letters and proposals for deregulatory reforms that would 
ostensibly promote economic growth. A comprehensive or detailed analysis of all such letters and 
proposals would make my testimony unwieldy. Instead, I will focus on the industry’s key deregulatory 
proposals targeting the Dodd-Frank’s regime of enhanced prudential supervision, including the process of 
SIFI designation and supervisory stress testing. While these proposals offer clear potential benefits from 
the standpoint of financial institutions’ own profitability and stock price (at least in the short run), the 
financial industry failed to establish how the proposed deregulatory measures would promote sustainable 
long-term growth of the American economy. 
5 
 A.  Rolling Back Enhanced Prudential Regulation Will Promote Speculation-Driven Asset 
Price Inflation, Not Real Economic Growth 
The financial industry’s proposals nearly uniformly try to make a case that one of the key impediments to 
creating American jobs and fostering economic growth is the Dodd-Frank Act’s explicit focus on 
systemic risk prevention. This argument targets the FSOC’s general authority to designate SIFIs, the 
process and criteria for application of enhanced prudential standards, the substance of such standards, and 
the federal regulators’ ability to exercise discretion in implementing their statutory oversight 
responsibilities. The principal justification for this sweeping attack on the core features of the post-crisis 
regulatory regime is that it increases individual financial institutions’ costs of compliance, compared to 
their pre-crisis regulatory compliance costs.   
This line of argument lacks merit. 
Every regulation, by definition, increases regulated firms’ costs of doing business: such costs may include 
both the direct expenses of complying with regulations and the foregone profits from the prohibited or 
restricted activities. Child labor laws, environmental regulations, anti-fraud rules all raise costs of doing 
business for those private firms that stand to profit from activities the society deems undesirable. The 
mere imposition, via regulation, of additional private costs is not an “unintended consequence” that must 
be avoided: it is the principal mechanism of protecting the public from potential harm caused by profit-
seeking private actors.  
The appropriateness of additional private costs of regulation, therefore, must be weighted not against pre-
regulation private costs but against potential public costs likely to accrue in the absence of regulation. 
None of the financial industry’s proposals offer any discussion, let alone quantification, of the full public 
costs of rolling back the Dodd-Frank regime of systemic oversight. In that sense, while styled as public 
policy proposals, these are merely requests for special private benefits. 
The rhetoric of “promoting economic growth” is meant to mask this fundamentally self-interested nature 
of the financial industry’s requests for deregulation. As discussed above, removing prudential restrictions 
on large financial institutions’ risk-taking will hinder, not promote, the kind of real economic growth that 
the American people so urgently need. It will spur precisely the kind of secondary market speculation and 
asset price inflation that enriches Wall Street megabanks and further decimates America’s real productive 
capacity. 
Notably, all of the financial industry’s proposals to roll back Dodd-Frank’s enhanced prudential 
regulation use the same basic rhetorical device: they frame the issue as a clear binary choice between 
“arbitrary” and “tailored” rules. They claim that existing SIFI determination criteria (in particular, the 
$50B asset size threshold for treating BHCs as SIFIs), the Federal Reserve’s supervisory stress tests, and 
even the long-standing CAMELS rating system are “arbitrary” and should be either repealed or replaced 
with something that is “appropriately tailored” to each financial institution’s “unique” business and risk 
profile.17  
It is not my goal in this testimony to engage in any technical disputes regarding any specific capital 
requirements or stress test methodologies. My comments go to the overarching misconception that the 
6 
 industry actors’ concerted (possibly coordinated?) use of the false dichotomy – “arbitrariness” vs. 
“tailoring” – engenders. 
“Tailored” SIFI Determination Is A Path to Eliminating SIFI Oversight 
Generally, setting a specific numeric threshold as a jurisdictional device – i.e., a criterion for subjecting a 
particular person to a particular set of legal rules – is not “arbitrary,” per se. We all live with a myriad of 
such fundamentally “arbitrary” but practically necessary threshold-based rules every day: the legal age for 
voting is 18, the legal age for drinking is 21, the individual income tax rates are drawn on the basis of 
specified income thresholds, and so on. What would happen if we removed all such numerical thresholds 
as “arbitrary” and replaced them with “tailored” determinations seeking to establish with complete 
precision every single person’s “unique” individual ability to exercise voting rights, consume alcohol, or 
pay income taxes?  In theory, it could make everything better. In practice, however, it would create a far 
more arbitrary, unpredictable, and chaotic world in which nobody will be able to anticipate – or assess the 
fairness of – the “uniquely tailored” treatment they receive under voting, drinking, or tax laws. It would 
also require an enormous amount of government resources to provide sufficiently individualized and 
“appropriately tailored” determination of every person’s many legal rights and obligations. The sheer cost 
to the public of giving everyone their own “tailored” law will far outweigh any private costs of having to 
live with “arbitrary” but universally applicable and clearly drawn boundaries. 
This simple common-sense logic should be applied to evaluating the financial industry’s request to 
replace the Dodd-Frank’s $50B size threshold for treating BHCs as SIFIs with an “indicator-based” 
regime of specific case-by-case designation. Midsize banks worried about approaching the $50B 
threshold in the future and regional banks that already qualify as SIFIs based on their asset size are 
especially keen to see this part of the Dodd-Frank repealed and replaced.  
Reasonable people may disagree and argue about whether the current size threshold – $50 billion in assets 
– is the right one, or whether a higher or a lower number would be more socially beneficial. On the one 
hand, as midsize and regional banks argue, their traditional lending-based business model does set them 
qualitatively apart from Wall Street megabanks with massive and systemically risky trading and dealing 
activities. The fact that the top six megabanks’ size is measured in trillions of dollars further underscores 
that difference. On the other hand, $50 billion is by no means an insignificant number. Only 38 BHCs 
currently exceed that threshold. It is also instructive to remember that, in the 1980s, savings banks and 
thrifts – small, local traditional lenders squeezed by competitors – made very similar pleas for regulatory 
relief. The resulting S&L crisis showed that hasty deregulation of small lending-oriented financial 
institutions may create significant risks to the system.18  
These complexities notwithstanding, the existing regime should not be simply replaced with an 
“indicator-based” system under which the FSOC would be forced to go through a tedious and inevitably 
contentious exercise of determining whether any particular BHC’s scope, scale, nature, and mix of 
activities warrants a SIFI designation. While this “flexible” and “individually tailored” approach may 
sound good in theory, it will significantly undermine the entire post-crisis regulatory framework for 
safeguarding systemic stability.  There are three main reasons why that is the case. 
First, mandating an individualized SIFI determination procedure for each potentially systemically 
significant BHC will impose an enormous, and completely unnecessary, financial and organizational 
7 
 burden on FSOC, Federal Reserve, and other regulators. The sheer costs of the “tailored” designation 
process – hiring and training dedicated personnel and devoting countless amounts of regulators’ time and 
energy to gathering and processing huge amounts of information, most likely over BHCs’ constant 
objections and complaints – will threaten to derail the entire regime of SIFI oversight. It is nearly a 
certainty that this costly and time-consuming process will effectively preclude both FSOC and the Federal 
Reserve from exercising their statutory responsibilities as systemic regulators. Notably, financial 
institutions advocating this measure deliberately ignore these public costs of giving them their own, 
individually “tailored” supervisory regime. Nor do they undertake to cover all of the additional regulatory 
costs of the “tailored” SIFI designation process.  
Second, individually “tailored” SIFI designation will immediately become vulnerable to the financial 
industry’s other favorite line of attack as being inherently unpredictable, unclear, and non-transparent: in 
other words, “arbitrary.” The very nature of the complex inquiry into various qualitative indicators of 
systemic riskiness of an individual financial institution is bound to open FSOC to potential allegations of 
misjudgment, misinterpretation, and misbehavior. The MetLife saga provides a vivid example of that 
tactic. Given what is at stake for large BHCs, the odds of FSOC being constantly embattled and 
ultimately incapacitated are unacceptably high. Instituting individually “tailored” SIFI designation 
process will virtually ensure the next round of industry lobbying, aiming to eradicate the very notion of 
enhanced SIFI supervision as ostensibly non-administrable in practice.  
Third, there is significant danger that loosening the SIFI designation process, primarily to accommodate 
the demands of midsize and regional banks and BHCs, will pave the way for large Wall Street megabanks 
to seek additional deregulatory measures specially “tailored” to enable them to expand their lucrative 
secondary-market trading and dealing operations. While such activities are precisely what creates 
unsustainable levels of risk in the financial system, it will be much more difficult for lawmakers and 
(already significantly weakened) regulators to resist what will likely be framed as simply “further 
tailoring” of supervisory rules.  
Attacks on “Arbitrary” Stress Testing are Attacks on Supervisory Discretion 
Ironically, even as the financial industry ostensibly wants FSOC to exercise individualized judgment 
instead of applying “arbitrary” generalized rules in the context of SIFI designation, the same industry 
vehemently attacks the exercise of individualized judgment – or supervisory discretion – by the Federal 
Reserve in the context of supervising SIFIs. The key target of this attack is the post-crisis regime of 
supervisory stress testing. 
The largest megabanks appear particularly determined to limit the Federal Reserve’s ability to conduct 
meaningful Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (“CCAR”), mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act. 
Among other things, they seek to 
-   subject the Federal Reserve’s annual stress test scenarios to a 30-day notice and comment period 
under the Administrative Procedure Act;  
-  restrict the Federal Reserve’s ability to use its own independent assumptions in constructing test 
models; 
-  mandate advance publication of the Federal Reserve’s stress test models for “peer review;” 
8 
 -  restrict the use of the Federal Reserve’s own models merely to a “supervisory assessment” of 
banks’ own models; and 
-  eliminate CCAR’s qualitative assessment for all banks.19 
If implemented, these industry-advocated changes will effectively nullify the CCAR regime. The 
principal reason for subjecting SIFIs to both internal and supervisory stress tests is to create a reliable 
early-warning mechanism for identifying potential weaknesses in the firm’s capital planning and 
management. Forcing the Federal Reserve to disclose ahead of time its stress test models will enable 
financial institutions “to manage to the test,” thus defeating the whole purpose of stress testing. Moreover, 
subjecting its test scenarios or modeling methodologies to public notice and comment will inevitably 
create unnecessary delays in the implementation of stress tests. It will impose potentially prohibitive 
additional costs on the Federal Reserve, burdened with the duty to respond to numerous industry 
comments and criticisms. Finally, relegating the Federal Reserve’s models to a mere back-up reference 
function will render the entire exercise inherently unreliable.   
In sum, what the financial industry is advocating here is not a “more robust and transparent” stress testing 
process, but a de facto sidelining of the Federal Reserve by forcing it to surrender its key supervisory 
function to SIFIs themselves.  Doing so will significantly endanger the country’s financial stability and 
increase the likelihood of another systemic crisis. Accordingly, it will hinder, not promote, America’s 
long-term economic growth. 
B.  There Is No Evidence that Financial Deregulation Is Necessary To Foster Economic Growth 
Financial institutions’ deregulatory proposals claim that the post-crisis regime of enhanced prudential 
oversight directly prevents them from extending more loans to small businesses and struggling American 
families. They routinely assert that the more stringent capital requirements and the higher costs of 
regulatory compliance are the principal, if not the sole, reason why banks cannot increase their financing 
of productive economic enterprise.  
Constant repetitions of this blanket assertion are intended to condition the audience – including the 
Members of this Committee – to associate the rollback of Dodd-Frank (something the financial industry 
wants) with the creation of domestic manufacturing jobs (something the American people need). It is 
calculated to propagate dangerous confusion about the real causes of financialization, ongoing erosion of 
America’s industrial base, rising poverty and inequality, and other social and economic ills of the last 
several decades. In essence, the industry wants us to believe that forcing Citigroup and Bank of America 
to finance just 5% of their multi-trillion-dollar high-risk assets with common shareholder equity is the 
root of all of the nation’s economic woes. 
This is an incredible claim. There are three main reasons why it is fundamentally false: 
  First, capital regulation does not reduce banks’ cash available for lending: that notion is based on 
a fundamental misunderstanding of what bank capital is.  
  Second, banks are not short of cash necessary to expand their lending: banks’ soaring profits and 
record dividend payments in recent years show there is plenty of cash they could, but choose not 
to, lend out.  
9 
   Third, there is no evidence that banks are striving to increase lending that would foster the 
economic growth: the industry offers no proof (beyond simple assertions) that individual banks’ 
asset allocation decisions are driven, in any meaningful way, by their desire to raise the rate of 
growth in the real economy. In the absence of such evidence, banks’ deregulatory demands 
should not be taken as bona fide proposals to foster America’s long-term economic growth. 
Enhanced Capital Levels Do Not Restrain Availability of Credit 
Higher capital requirements have nothing to do with reducing money available to banks for lending and 
productive investment. Capital is not cash in the vault. It is merely an accounting concept, the amount of 
shareholder equity on a bank’s balance sheet: i.e., amount contributed by the bank’s shareholders and not 
borrowed from depositors and other creditors.20 Banks do not “hold” capital in the same way as they 
“hold” cash or gold – and in the exact same way as Exxon-Mobil or Microsoft are never said to “hold” 
their shareholder equity. Capital is simply what the owners of the corporation would receive if the 
corporation liquidated all of its assets and repaid all of its debts. In that sense, capital is a critical equity 
cushion that protects corporations’ – including banks’ and BHCs’ – creditors from losses. It is only 
because financial institutions’ creditors are explicitly or implicitly protected from such losses by the 
federal government that banks and BHCs are allowed to operate with much thinner equity cushions than 
would be sustainable in our free capitalist market.21 
It is therefore nonsensical to claim that reducing this creditor-protecting, loss-absorbing equity cushion 
will somehow “free up cash” for bank lending – and, specifically, for lending to small businesses and 
credit-needy Americans. How much a bank is willing or able to lend is a complex asset allocation 
decision that is driven primarily by considerations of bank’s own profitability: “Should we extend a long-
term loan to a risky small startup, or should we use that money to increase our fee revenues from short-
term derivatives trading?” The impact of this decision on the bank’s regulatory capital ratios or stress test 
results may be an important factor in its choice between lending and trading, but only insofar as it affects 
– indirectly and in combination with many other factors – that bank’s overall profits.  
In other words, capital regulation constrains banks’ (individually rational) propensity to choose “high 
risk, high return” assets and limits their ability to maximize shareholder profits by jeopardizing creditors. 
These regulatory capital constraints, however, still leave plenty of room for banks to choose whether to 
finance productive economic enterprise or to channel money into secondary market speculation. To the 
extent the latter increases short-term shareholder returns, it remains a potentially more attractive choice. 
The largest banks’ massive shift into secondary market trading and dealing, especially after the passage of 
the GLB Act, aptly illustrates that dynamic. 
If Congress grants these largest banks’ demands to weaken existing capital requirements, supervisory 
stress testing, and other elements of enhanced prudential regulation and supervision, it will affirmatively 
sanction virtually unconstrained growth in the volume and speculative riskiness of banks’ trading and 
dealing activities, not traditional “small-business” lending. That, in turn, will spur precisely the kind of 
speculation-driven asset price inflation that threatens the stability of the American financial and economic 
system and undermines the country’s long-term economic growth.  
 
10 
 Banks Are Not “Short of Cash” for Lending 
According to the FDIC statistics, the U.S. banking industry has fully recovered from the crisis and is 
doing exceedingly well. Thus, in the first quarter of this year, nearly 96% of all U.S. insured depository 
institutions were profitable; their average return on equity stood at a healthy 9.37%; and their total 
quarterly income reached $44 billion, which is 12.5% higher than a year earlier.22 Insured banks’ total net 
income in 2016 exceeded $171 billion.23 BHCs are also turning handsome profits. For example, in the last 
quarter of 2016, the total quarterly income of just the top six BHCs – JPMorgan Chase & Co., Bank of 
America Corp., Wells Fargo & Co., Citigroup, The Goldman Sachs Group, and Morgan Stanley – 
exceeded $24 billion.24 
These profits directly increase banks’ and BHCs’ shareholder equity – the capital cushion that is a subject 
of so many of the industry’s complaints – and are easily available for use in their lending or other growth-
promoting activities. However, it appears that a big chunk of these profits is instead being distributed to 
the banking institutions’ shareholders, in the form of cash dividends and share repurchases. Thus, in 2016, 
federally-insured banks alone returned to their shareholders $103 billion in cash dividends,25 a number 
second only to the record high of $110 billion in cash dividends they paid in 2007, the last full pre-crisis 
year.26  
By any measure, $103 billion is an enormous amount of money that could be used both (1) to increase 
banks’ total loss-absorbing and risk-reducing regulatory capital cushion, and (2) to finance small family-
owned businesses, entrepreneurial startups, medium-size industrials, aspiring students, and struggling 
families. In other words, using $103 billion of banks’ profits to increase lending to productive economic 
enterprise would advance both (1) the public interest in having a safer and more efficient system of credit 
allocation, and (2) the banks’ self-professed interest in fostering economic growth and creating American 
jobs. Yet, banks chose not to go that socially beneficial route. 
It is astonishing to see that, after voluntarily sending all that money to shareholders, the banking industry 
complains that the additional cost of complying with post-crisis regulations “takes capital away from 
small business loans, home purchases and other productive uses.”27 “Every dollar spent on hiring 
compliance attorneys,” the argument goes, “is potentially $10 dollars of loans that could be made to 
improve someone’s economic opportunity.”28 As the dividend numbers cited above show, every dollar 
diverted away from banks’ regulatory compliance would most likely improve only bank shareholders’ 
and managers’ “economic opportunity.” In fact, using the same mathematical logic, it follows that, in 
2016 alone, banks have willingly deprived the real economy of a whopping $1.03 trillion in “small 
business loans, home purchases and other productive uses.”   
It is not my contention that banks should never declare shareholder dividends. The key point here is that 
bank dividend payouts expose the fundamental falsity of the industry’s claims to the effect that excessive 
regulatory costs deplete banks’ resources and prevent them from financing real economic growth. Banks 
have plenty of extra money for expanding their lending. They choose not to lend that money, instead 
“returning capital” to their shareholders. That is because stable and high dividends increase individual 
banks’ stock prices, which directly benefits not only bank shareholders but also their executives and 
managers. Higher stock price translates directly into higher bonuses. Higher volume of small-business 
lending does not. 
11 
 This basic fact about banks’ use of available capital may explain why these institutions – particularly, the 
largest Wall Street megabanks – are waging such an adamant campaign against CCAR, “living wills,” 
and other key elements of the Dodd-Frank’s systemic risk prevention regime. Under the current regime, 
SIFIs’ ability to pay shareholder dividends or repurchase their own shares is expressly conditioned on 
supervisory approval, based in part on the results of the latest stress tests. Not meeting supervisors’ 
expectations, therefore, limits their ability to pay dividends and depresses their stock price.  It is telling, 
for example, that securities analysts and investment advisers have been buzzing about Citigroup’s and 
Bank of America’s recent and expected future hikes in dividend payouts after both of these firms 
performed better in the CCAR tests.29 As one expert put it, “The ability to pay dividends is currently a 
hallmark of strength in the sector.”30 Accordingly, deregulatory rollback of the Federal Reserve’s stress 
testing and other prudential regulations is expected to enable Citigroup, Bank of America, and other SIFIs 
to raise their dividends and share repurchases, thus lifting the value of their stock.31   
Thus, it appears that market experts have no confusion about the real benefits of massive financial 
deregulation: it will increase banks’ profits, dividend payouts, and stock prices. Whether or not it will also 
promote the country’s long-term economic growth does not seem to be part of the conversation. 
There Is No Evidence That “Fostering America’s Economic Growth” Is A Meaningful Factor In Banks’ 
Business Decisions 
It is, of course, possible that, while returning massive amounts of capital to shareholders, banks and 
BHCs are nevertheless genuinely dedicated to their self-declared mission of financing America’s real 
economic growth. Rather than take their word for it, however, the Committee should require specific, 
robustly documented and empirically supported, evidence that that is indeed the case. 
For example, the Committee should ask each financial institution asking for regulatory relief to provide 
specific, quantified, and fully documented answers to the following questions: 
  What was your institution’s specific (i.e., quantified) annual contribution to the growth of your 
local, regional, and/or national economy, in the period between 2010 and 2017 (after the 
enactment of Dodd-Frank)? What was it in the pre-Dodd-Frank period between 2000 and 2009?  
  How much additional annual contribution to the growth of your local, regional, and/or national 
economy would your institution have made, but was prevented from making directly as a result of 
[insert a specific regulatory provision of the Dodd-Frank regime]? 
  In each year since 2010, what was the aggregate amount of commercial and industrial (C&I) 
loans that your institution refused to extend, solely because of [insert a specific regulatory 
provision of the Dodd-Frank regime]? 
  Does your institution have an enterprise-wide strategy for facilitating domestic job-creation and 
promoting the growth of your local, regional, and national economy? What are the core elements 
of that strategy? 
  How often does your institution’s Board of Directors and top management discuss the 
institution’s performance in implementing that strategy?  
This type of targeted inquiry would help to (1) establish the credibility of the financial industry’s claims; 
and (2) discover the real link, if any, between financial institutions’ deregulatory agenda and the country’s 
real economic growth. Presently, none of the financial industry’s numerous deregulatory proposals 
12 
 establish that link, relying instead on purely declarative rhetoric. They then demand effective removal of 
key regulatory safeguards against systemic financial crises, solely on the strength of that rhetoric. 
Assessing the public costs and benefits of any such deregulatory proposals, however, requires 
ascertaining that such steps are actually – and not just rhetorically – going to generate substantial growth 
in the country’s real economy. 
It is unlikely that any financial institution will be able to produce satisfactory answers to any of these 
questions. As private shareholder-owned firms, these institutions’ primary concern is their own 
profitability, not the overall performance of the American economy. They simply do not track, and are not 
equipped to track, the relevant macroeconomic data: measuring and worrying about such data is the 
government’s responsibility, an inherently public task. That means that determining what should be done 
to spur America’s economic growth – and whether relaxing any of the existing financial regulations 
should be a part of that endeavor – is also an inherently public responsibility. The financial industry’s 
attempts to usurp or sidetrack the process of public deliberation on such an important matter should 
therefore be subjected to intense scrutiny.  
III.  BROADER STRUCTURAL SOLUTIONS ARE NEEDED TO CHANNEL CAPITAL INTO 
PRODUCTIVE ECONOMIC ACTIVITY AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH  
The Dodd-Frank regime of systemic oversight and enhanced prudential supervision of SIFIs correctly 
aims to limit potentially destabilizing speculation and asset price inflation in secondary markets. To the 
extent it strengthens the resilience and stability of our financial system, it lays down an important 
foundation for the nation’s long-term economic growth. However, simply limiting the opportunities for 
diverting capital into speculative trading is not sufficient to spur and sustain such growth in practice. It is 
equally important to ensure that a significantly greater share of available financial capital is actively and 
consistently flowing into long-term productive investment. In other words, it entails cultivating new 
sources of, and creating new avenues for profitably deploying, truly “patient” capital.  
Abundant patient capital is what enables construction of large-scale physical and social infrastructures, 
supports transformative R&D projects, generates productivity gains, and creates sustainable well-paying 
jobs throughout the nation. By the same token, the chronic shortage of patient capital – and persistent glut 
of speculative capital – is the key reason for the sluggishness of America’s real economy today. 
Incentivizing investor “patience” on the scale needed to spur the nation’s long-term economic growth, 
however, is a difficult task that cannot be reduced simply to a few deregulatory or tax-relief measures. 
Nor can it be left to the private sector alone. Private investors’ time horizons and risk tolerance levels are 
inherently limited by the finite nature of their economic resources and their biological lifespan. It is 
fundamentally rational for private investors to prefer shorter-term investments, which entail less 
unforeseeable future risk and promise returns within such investors’ reasonable lifetime horizons. Private 
investors’ short-term bias, therefore, is not a deviation from market rationality; it is a built-in feature of 
such rationality.  
Overcoming investor short-termism and facilitating the formation of “patient” capital requires new, more 
effective forms of public-private partnership. The public component of such partnership will bring into 
the investment process a number of unique advantages that public instrumentalities enjoy when they act 
as market participants: their vast scale, high risk tolerance, lengthy investment horizons, and direct 
backing by the full faith and credit of the United States. Combining these unique capacities of a public 
13 
 investor with private investors’ informational agility, superior knowledge of local conditions, and market 
expertise will help to channel both private and public resources into the critical growth-inducing projects. 
This new, patient public-private capital will finance the building of new roads, bridges, high-speed train 
lines, clean energy networks, and next-generation industrial plants. It will also create new well-paying 
jobs, offer new educational opportunities, and unleash new entrepreneurial energy of the American 
people.  
My colleague, Professor Robert Hockett, and I have developed a specific proposal for creating this new 
kind of infrastructural growth-oriented public-private partnership. A White Paper detailing our proposal is 
attached as an Appendix to this testimony. 
It is this kind of programmatic reform – not a massive rollback of the Dodd-Frank Act – that the 
American economy and the American people need.  I urge the Committee to rise to this challenge and not 
allow banks’ self-serving deregulatory demands to distract its attention from what really matters to the 
American economy and the American public. 
CONCLUSION 
Promoting sustainable, socially inclusive long-term growth in America’s real economy is a task of 
enormous public significance. Massive financial deregulation urged by the banking industry, however, 
will not foster such real economic growth: it will merely spur speculation-driven asset price inflation in 
secondary markets. That is what generates Wall Street’s greatest short-term profits and causes wealth- 
and growth-destroying systemic crises. Weakening regulatory standards and effectively incapacitating 
FSOC, the Federal Reserve, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and other federal regulators will 
put us much closer to another financial disaster.  
Contrary to the financial industry’s assertions, massive dismantling of the Dodd-Frank regime of systemic 
regulation will not benefit small businesses and struggling families across America. There is no evidence 
that the additional cost of banks’ regulatory compliance with post-crisis regulations actually depletes 
banks’ resources and/or diverts them away from productive uses. Despite their complaints about 
regulatory costs, American banking institutions are highly profitable and awash in cash, which they could 
use for lending to small businesses but instead choose to return to their shareholders in the form of 
dividends and share repurchases. Against that background, it is impossible to take the industry’s attacks 
on Dodd-Frank seriously. 
The Committee should, therefore, reject the financial industry’s unsubstantiated claims and requests for 
massive deregulation and demolition of the Dodd-Frank Act. The Committee should focus its attention on 
finding real solutions to the real problems associated with speculative short-termism and persistent 
misallocation of capital, which impede economic growth. Devising such solutions is challenging but 
necessary in order to make finance serve the nation’s long-term economic goals. 
 
 
14 
                                                             
1 David Luttrell, Tyler Atkinson, Harvey Rosenblum, Accessing the Costs and Consequences of the 2007-
09 Financial Crisis and Its Aftermath, DALLASFED ECONOMIC LETTER, Vol. 8, No. 7 (Sept. 2013), 
available at https://www.dallasfed.org/research/eclett/2013/el1307.cfm, at 1-2. 
2 See, Matt Scully, Trumps’ America Is Facing a $13 Trillion Consumer Debt Hangover, 
BLOOMBERG.COM (6 June 2017), available at https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-06-
06/trump-s-america-is-facing-a-13-trillion-consumer-debt-hangover?srnd=157391092. 
3 See, Robert Hockett & Richard Vague, Debt, Deflation, and Debacle: Of Private Debt Write-Down and 
Public Recovery (2013), available at https://www.interdependence.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/04/Debt-Deflation-and-Debacle-RV-and-RH1.pdf.  
4 Luttrell et al., supra note 1, at 3. 
5 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 
1376 (2010) (codified at 12 U.S.C. § 5301 et seq. (2012)). 
6 The total number for 2016 is the sum of the revenant quarterly numbers. See, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, Quarterly Trends for Consolidated U.S. Banking Organizations, available at 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/banking_research/quarterlytrends2016q4.pdf?l
a=en, 
7 Letter to The Honorable Michael D. Crapo and The Honorable Sherrod Brown from Francis Creighton, 
Executive Vice President of Government Affairs of Financial Services Roundtable (Apr. 14, 2017) [the 
“FSR Letter”], at 1. 
8 The fundamental logic of speculative manias and crashes has been explained and documented many 
times. See, CHARLES P. KINDLEBERGER & ROBERT ALIBER, MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES: A HISTORY 
OF FINANCIAL CRISES (2005); ERIK GERDING, LAW, BUBBLES, AND FINANCIAL REGULATION (2013). 
9 Financial Services Modernization Act (Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act), Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338 
(1999).  .  
10 See, Arthur E. Wilmarth, Jr., The Dark Side of Universal Banking: Financial Conglomerates and the 
Origins of the Subprime Financial Crisis, 41 CONN. L. REV. 963, 1002-46 (2009). 
11 See, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Quarterly Trends for Consolidated U.S. Banking 
Organizations, Fourth Quarter 2016, available at 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/banking_research/quarterlytrends2016q4.pdf?l
a=en, at 13. 
12 See, Thomas Philippon, Finance versus Wal-Mart: Why Are Financial Services So Expensive? 
RETHINKING THE FINANCIAL CRISIS 235 (ALAN BLINDER ET AL., EDS. 2012). 
13 See, Saule T. Omarova, The New Crisis for the New Century: Some Observations on the “Big-Picture” 
Lessons of the Global Financial Crisis of 2008, 13 N.C. BANKING INST. 157 (2009). 
14 According to official statistics, the top 50 largest BHCs’ total net income for the last quarter of 2016 
was over $32B, while their average annualized return on equity was above 7%. Tellingly, the total 
quarterly income of just the top six BHCs – JPMorgan Chase & Co., Bank of America Corp., Wells Fargo 
& Co., Citigroup, The Goldman Sachs Group, and Morgan Stanley – was over $24B. Three of these 
largest institutions had annualized return on equity of almost 11%. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
Quarterly Trends for Consolidated U.S. Banking Organizations, Fourth Quarter 2016, available at 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/banking_research/quarterlytrends2016q4.pdf?l
a=en, at 36. 
15 12 U.S.C. § 5321. 
16 12 U.S.C. § 5323; 5325. 
17 See, e.g., Letter to The Honorable Michael D. Crapo and The Honorable Sherrod Brown from The 
Clearing House (Apr. 14, 2017) [the “TCH Letter”]. 
18 See, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, The S&L Crisis: A Chrono-Bibliography, available at 
https://www.fdic.gov/bank/historical/sandl/.  
19 See, TCH Letter, supra note 17. 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
20 For a discussion of bank capital and a compelling argument that capital requirements should be much 
higher than they are presently, see ANAT ADMATI & MARTIN HELLWIG, THE BANKER’S NEW CLOTHES 
(2013). 
21 See id. 
22 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Statistics At A Glance, As of March 31, 2017, available at 
https://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/stats/.  
23 FDIC Quarterly Banking Profile, Fourth Quarter 2016, available at 
https://www.fdic.gov/bank/analytical/qbp/2016dec/qbp.pdf, at 7. 
24 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Quarterly Trends for Consolidated U.S. Banking Organizations, 
Fourth Quarter 2016, available at 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/banking_research/quarterlytrends2016q4.pdf?l
a=en, at 36. 
25 FDIC Quarterly Banking Profile, Fourth Quarter 2016, available at 
https://www.fdic.gov/bank/analytical/qbp/2016dec/qbp.pdf, at 7. 
26 FDIC Quarterly Banking Profile, Fourth Quarter 2007, available at 
https://www5.fdic.gov/qbp/2007dec/qbp.pdf, at 5. 
27 FSR Letter, supra note 7, at 2.  
28 Id. 
29 See, Gemma Acton, These Three US Bank Stocks Are My Top Sector Picks, CNBC.COM (22 Mar. 
2017), available at http://www.cnbc.com/2017/03/22/these-three-us-bank-stocks-are-my-top-sector-
picks-analyst.html; Rebecca Keats, Bank of America Declares a Quarterly Dividend, 
MARKETREALIST.COM (31 Jan. 2017), available at http://marketrealist.com/2017/01/bank-of-america-
declares-a-quarterly-dividend/; Stone Fox Capital, Citigroup: Expect Another Big Dividend Hike To Move 
Stock, SEEKING ALPHA (4 Jan. 2017), available at https://seekingalpha.com/article/4078558-citigroup-
expect-another-big-dividend-hike-move-stock.  
30 Stone Fox Capital, supra note 29. 
31 Id.; Keats, supra note 29. 
16 
 