Dream Palaces  of Law:
Western Constructions of the
Muslim Legal Worldt
By HAIDER ALA HAMOUDI*
When I was first called by Professors Reimann and Mattei and
given the honor of an opportunity to speak before you on the subject
of "How  the  West  Views  the  Rest,"  my  immediate  concern  was
definitional.  To  some extent, this revolved  around the mysterious
term "Rest."  What could  I say, in only a few minutes, about the
entire non-Western world that would not either be wildly inaccurate
in  any  number  of  contexts,  or  so  general  as  to  be  effectively
meaningless?  I did not ponder the matter long.  Having no hope of
providing any  useful  insights  on  how  the  West  might  view  the
entire  rest  of  the  world,  and  condemned  with  insufficient
knowledge  on important  parts  of  that world  to  even render  an
opinion  on it,  I  decided  to  confine  most  of my  remarks  to  that
portion of the earth on which I have some knowledge,  the Muslim
world, with a particular but by no means exclusive focus on that one
country in the Muslim world whose fate is, in these perilous times,
deeply intertwined with American interests and influences,  Iraq.  I
hope that this examination might shed some light, however meager,
t  Remarks from The  West and the Rest in Comparative Law, 2008  Annual
Meeting of the American Society of Comparative Law, University of California,
Hastings College of the Law (Oct. 2-4, 2008).
*  Assistant Professor of Law, University of Pittsburgh School  of Law.  J.D.,
J.S.D.  Columbia  Law  School.  Professor  Hamoudi's  scholarship  focuses  on
commercial  law, Middle Eastern law,  Islamic law,  and the intersection  of these
various bodies of law and legal doctrines in the contemporary era.  He has written
for numerous  law reviews, spoken at conferences  sponsored  by  the MacMillan
Center at Yale University, the American Association of Law Schools and the New
York  City Bar Association, and given  interviews  to various news organizations
including the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, the McNeil-Lehrer News Hour Online and the
New York Law Journal. Professor Hamoudi is also the author of a blog on Islamic
Law entitled Islamic Law in Our Times.Hastings Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. [Vol. 32:2
on  the broader  question  of  the West  and its  constructions  of the
Rest.
But in addition to what might perhaps be common confusion
concerning  precisely  who  the "Rest"  are, how  does one  go  about
determining the "West?"  This is a particularly acute problem when
one has chosen the focal point of the "Rest"  that I have.  The West,
when it comes to the Muslim world, especially Iraq, is no monolith;
there are divisions everywhere.  Chasms separate France from  the
United States, England  from Germany, conservatives from liberals,
academics  from  journalists,  faithful  from  nonbelievers,  in  their
projections  of  the  Muslim  East.  Our  region  of  the  world  is,
depending on which Western constituency you might be speaking
to, a  dark and  violent place  governed by  a false religion and the
traditions  of  an  evil prophet,'  a  backwards  and  silly part  of the
world  that  cannot  seem  to  come  to  terms  with  economic
development  and  modernity,2  a  tragic  story  of  good  people  of
ordinarily  moderate  beliefs  whose  religion  has  been hijacked  by
forces  of  extremism, 3   or  any  number  of  permutations  or
1. This  seems  to be  a rather  popular  position  among certain  elements  of
America's religious right in particular.  Rev. Rod Parsley, for example, of the World
Harvest Church of Columbus, Ohio, whose endorsement of John McCain had been
sought for some number of months, described the Prophet Muhammad  as "the
mouthpiece  of a conspiracy  of spiritual  evil" and Islam as an "anti-Christ,"  the
destruction of which was a reason for the founding of the United States.  See Brian
Ross, Avni Patel and Rehab Al-Buri, McCain Pastor:I slam is a 'Conspiracy of Spiritual
Evil', ABC NEWS, May 22, 2008, http://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/Story?id=4905624
&page=l  (last visited  March  20,  2009).  A  United  States  Lieutenant  General
expressed similar sentiments. Brian Knowlton, General Compares Militants to 'Satan':
Comments on Islam Irk the White House, INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE (October 20,
2003), available at http:/ / ww.iht.com/articles/2003/10/20/policy-ed3-.php.
2.  This  appears  to  be  a  prevailing  sentiment  within  particular  European
circles.  The  late Pim  Fortuyn, for  example, referred  to  Islam  as  fostering  a
"backwards culture."  Obituary: Pim Fortuyn, BBC NEWS (May 6, 2002), available at
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/1971462.stm.
3.  This of course is the politically correct rendition of Islam and the Muslim
world repeated by countless statesmen in Western democracies.  See, e.g., George
W. Bush, United States President, Address at the Islamic Center  of Washington,
D.C.  (Sept.  17,  2001),  available  at  http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/legalinfo/
bushremarks.php ("The face of terror is not the true faith of Islam. That's not what
Islam is all about.  Islam  is peace. These  terrorists  don't represent peace. They
represent evil and war. When we think  of Islam  we think of a faith that brings
comfort to a billion people around the world.  Billions of people find comfort and
solace and peace. And that's made brothers and sisters out of every race - out of
every race."); Sarkozy Lauds Islam at Louvre Ceremony with Saudi Prince, AFP (July 16,
2008)  (quoting Sarkozy  as  indicating  that  'Islam  is  progress,  science,  finesse,
modernity, and that fanaticism in the name of Islam is a corruption of Islam.');2009] Dream Palaces of Law
combinations of these.
Finally,  I  believed  it  important  to  avoid  the  perils  of  self-
congratulation.  That is, I did not want to lead an exercise in scoffing
at the ignorant hordes who did not know an Arab from a Muslim, a
Turk from an Egyptian, a Shi'ite from a Sunni, and bemoan the fact
that such hordes  controlled our political  and civic  discourse,  and
how  much better  all  would be  if only  we academics  were heard.
There is much that is wrong with our understandings of the Muslim
Rest,  as  the story of  Iraq I  hope will demonstrate,  that pervades
every community, from the most learned to the least enlightened.
In fact, in many ways Western  distortions of the Muslim East
nearly always take the same form, irrespective of who in the West is
doing the distorting.  One common theme can be generally gleaned
from any projections of the Muslim East in the West, in any Western
country, among  nearly  every  community,  including, and perhaps
especially, our own academic  community.  This is the perception of
the near ubiquitous role of Islam and, more germane to my remarks,
Islamic  law,  of  a  historic,  medieval  kind,  in  governing the  legal
order  of  Muslim  states, including  Iraq,  in a  manner  that  can be
entirely distorting.  In these brief remarks, I hope first to expose this
bias,  and then to provide  at least rudimentary  ideas on how law,
both  Islamic  and  secular,  in  the  Muslim  world  might  better  be
studied and understood, particularly by comparatists.
The general, conventional story of Iraq, told countless times in
the media, is that  Saddam Hussein, as  an archsecularist,  albeit  a
brutal one, was adept at holding back the rising waters of political
Islam  within  his  own  nation,  even  as  the  movement's  tentacles
spread  elsewhere  across  the broader Muslim world.4  As a result,
women were liberated and educated in Saddamist Iraq, the "envy of
women across the Middle East,"5 alcohol was available, and Islamic
Matthew Tempest, Blair Launches Fund to Improve Teaching of Islam, THE GUARDIAN
(June  4,  2007),  available at http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/jun/04/
immigrationpolicy.religion (describing similar views of Islam from Tony Blair).
4.  See,  e.g.,  Teri Judd, For the Women  of Iraq, the War is Just Beginning, THE
INDEPENDENT  (June  8,  2006),  available at http://www.independent.co.uk/news/
world/middle-east/for-the-women-of-iraq-the-war-is-just-beginning-481497.html;
Maureen  Dowd,  My  Private Idaho,  N.Y.  TIMES  (Aug.  24,  2005),  available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/24/opinion/24dowd.html  (describing the US
as "caving on women's rights" in Iraq).
5.  Judd, supra note 4.Hastings Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. [Vol. 32:2
law,  whether  as  the  law  of the  family  or  otherwise,  irrelevant.6
Depending on the constituency, this may be phrased as a defense of
Saddam himself or merely a  salutary aspect of an otherwise  bleak
period  of  rule,  but  the  notion  that  Saddam  was  a  beacon  of
secularism in a broader Islamist polity is not seriously  questioned.
All  of  this  changed  when  Saddam  was  deposed.  Pro-Iranian
Islamist  parties  quickly  seized  control  of  the  government,  and
secular  rule  has  generally  deteriorated,  as  the tale  is told by  our
7
cognoscenti.
In essence, what we learn from this story, in a way a template
for  the broader  misunderstanding  of  the  Muslim  world,  is  that
secular law in the region is illegitimate and viewed with suspicion,
sustained  only  by  brutal  suppression  of  alternatives.  Once
alternatives are made  available, Islam inserts itself, and a form of
classical shari'a, that body of rules and norms derived from sacred
text by the medieval jurists of the four schools of thought, becomes
the law of the land.  A similar story is told, for example, in Turkey,
where the ruling party in the Muslim world's most secular state is
repeatedly  referred  to  in media  outlets  as a  "moderate  Islamist"
party.8
What then might be able to vindicate some form of secular rule
in the Muslim world?  This is where our scholars insert themselves
where  the media  leaves  off,  and  provide,  as their  answer  to  the
conundrum,  that  same  shari'a. If  the  Constitution,  it  is  argued,
declares that laws may not be passed that violate the core tenets, or
unambiguous  rulings,  or certain provisions, of the shari'a, (the so-
called repugnancy  clauses) then the legislature becomes in essence
an administrative  authority, enacting secular codes but at the same
time  in doing  so  not only  avoiding  contravening  God's  rule, but
6.  Dowd, supra note 4;  Vivian Stromberg, Protecting Women's Rights in Iraq,
DET.  FREE PRESS  (Aug. 10,  2005);  Brooke  D.  Rodgers-Miller,  Seminar Papers On
Women  And Islamic Law:  Out Of Jahiliyya: Historic And  Modern Incarnations Of
Polygamy In The Islamic World, 11 WM. & M. J. WOM.  & L. 541, 561 (2005) (suggesting
that the abolishment of the Personal Status Law would reintroduce shari'a);P amela
Constable, Iraqi Women  Fear Push For Sharia Law, C-n. TRIB.  A2 (Jan. 21,  2004);
Charles  Clover and  Nicolas Pelham, Iraqi Plan for Shari'a Law a 'Sop'  to Clerics,
Women Say, FIN. TIM. All Uan. 15, 2004).
7.  Judd, supra note 4; Dowd, supra note 4, Stromberg, supra note 6; Rodgers-
Miller, supra note 6; Clover and Pelham, supra note 6.
8.  See, e.g., Patrick Cockburn, Turks Mull Invasion of Iraq After PKK Ambush, THE
INDEPENDENT,  October 22, 2007 at 20, available at http://www.independent.co.uk/
news/world/europe/turks-mull-invasion-of-iraq-after-pkk-ambush-397553.html.2009] Dream Palaces of Law
indeed  acting  in furtherance  of  the  goals  of God's  Law.  As  to
whether this is  good  or bad, the  learned  will differ, but it is the
story.  The  religion,  above  all,  from  a  legal  perspective,  is
fundamentally about the discovery  of God's Law from sacred text,
and all else must be justified on the basis of that.
Scholarly  books  are  thus  written  about  Egypt's  repugnancy
clause,9 and  tremendous  focus  is also placed  on Iraq's.10  Articles
appear in respected law  reviews decrying this phenomenon  as the
advent of a pernicious form of "theocratic  constitutionalism,""  or in
the alternative describing it hopefully, either as the initiation of rule
of law reform in the benighted  Abode of Islam12 or as a means to
balance  juristic  influence  with  popular  sentiment  in  the
determination  of  Islamic  law.'3   Reading  elite  constitutional
scholarship  on  countries  such  as  Egypt  or  Iraq,  one  might  be
forgiven for thinking that the entire document consisted of a single
provision - the repugnancy clause.
From this notion that shari'a justifies the enactment of secular
codes through  Islamic constitutionalism,  much apparently  follows
in the Western mind, as fruit from a poisonous tree.  How to justify
the trial and capture  of Osama Bin Laden?  Try him according  to
classical  Islamic  criminal  rules!14  How  about  the  difficulty  of
reforming, in Iraq, the means by which security may be obtained for
a loan, so that it operates in the manner that our own UCC Article 9
does?  Simply  create  the  rules  in  the  manner  that  comply  with
Islamic finance!15
9.  CLARK  B.  LOMBARDI,  STATE  LAW As IsLAMIc  LAW IN MODERN EGYPT: THE
INCORPORATION  OF  THE  SHARfA  INTO  EGYPTIAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW  123  et seq.
(2006)
10.  See, e.g., Intisar Rabb, "We the Jurists", Islamic Constitutionalism in Iraq, 10 U.
PENN.  J. CONST.  L.  527  (2008);  Larry  Cata  Backer,  God(s)  Over  Constitutions:
Internationala nd Religious TransnationalC  onstitutionalismi n the 21st Century, 27 MISS.
C. L. REV. 11  (2007-2008); Noah Feldman, Constitutional Politics and Text in the New
Iraq: An  Experiment in Islamic Democracy, 75  FORDHAM  L.  REV.  883 (2006);  Ran
Hirschl, The  Theocratic Challenge to Constitution Drafting in Post-Conflict States, 49
WILLIAM & MARY L. REV. 1179 (2008).
11.  Backer, supra note 10 at 13.
12.  NOAH FELDMAN, THE FALL AND RISE OF THE ISLAMIC STATE 10-13 (2008).
13.  Rabb, supra note 10 at 527.
14.  Frank E. Vogel,  The Trial of Terrorists under Classical Islamic Law, 43 HARV.
INTL. L.J. 53 (2002).
15.  Mark J. Sundahl, Iraq, Secured Transactions, and the Promise of Islamic Law, 40
VAND. J. TRANS. L. 1301 (2007).Hastings Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. [Vol. 32:2
In the context of Iraq, where much of this discussion is focused,
all of this might be interesting, if it sustained even casual interest
within  Iraq's  legal  community.  I  have  been  making  a  valiant,
though  at times  unsuccessful,  attempt  to  read  through  all  of the
decisions of the Supreme Federal Court of Iraq concerning  matters
of constitutionality, and I have yet to come upon a case that even
cites Article  2 of the Constitution at all.  Certainly there have been
no  reports  of any  serious  engagement  with  its  terms.  There  is  a
reason for this - the judges of Baghdad hardly wish to pronounce on
shari'a in a manner  that might vex the jurists of Najaf, particularly
because  the  Constitution  envisages  judge  and  jurist  working
together  on  the  Court,  and  no  Iraqi judge  I  have  met  has  the
slightest proclivity toward working on a court with people that have
no legal training and whose professional culture is entirely different.
So long as the court stays out of shari'a, one judge told  me, then
Najaf will probably stay out of the court.
Whether or not this prognostication is true, we shall see, but on
the notion that the Constitution's Article 2 at this point is hardly a
matter of great concern  to Iraqi  lawyers and judges, there  can be
little doubt.  Iraqi legal professionals  routinely point to other legal
disputes  - concerning  provincial  elections,  the  fate  of  Kirkuk,
restorations  of  property  expropriated  by  the  former  regime,  de-
Ba'athification and the like.  The mind-numbingly tedious sessions
of Parliament,  and  the  refreshingly  brief  opinions  of the  Federal
Court do not, based on my own studied observations of the same,
dwell excessively, if at all, on Article 2 of the Constitution even as
they engage any number of other, important legal issues.
While  other  states,  such  as  Egypt,  might  well  have  more
developed  jurisprudence  concerning  the  repugnancy  clause,  the
attention  nevertheless  tends to  become much ado about relatively
little.  This is particularly because the Supreme Constitutional Court
has taken enormous strides to limit the influence of the repugnancy
clause, declaring it, for example, injusticable inasmuch as it concerns
claims respecting prior enacted legislation.16  This makes the interest
provision  of the  Civil Code  valid until  the  legislature  decides  to
"Islamicize"  it.  More  than  two  decades  have  passed,  and  the
16.  Rector of the Azhar University v. President of the Republic, Case No. 20 of
Judicial  Year  No.  1  (Sup.  Constitutional  Ct.)  (Egypt),  reprinted in  Supreme
ConstitutionalC  ourt (Egypt) - Shari'a and Riba: Decision in Case No. 20 of Judicial Year
No. 1, reported in 1 ARAB L. Q. 101 (1985).20091 Dream Palaces of Law
legislature  has  done  nothing  of the  sort.  And  so  the  taking  of
interest remains as legal today as it has ever been, notwithstanding
the repugnancy clause.
This notion that the shari'a must be used to justify the laws of
the Muslim world is even more misguided when we leave the world
of constitutionalism.  No  Islamist  party  in Iraq  suggested  using
Islamic criminal rules to try Saddam Hussein, and the divisions over
his trial and execution divide neatly along sectarian lines, not levels
of religiosity.  In fact, no Iraqi legal professional I know, no matter
how  devout,  no  matter  how  Islamist,  would  find  navigating
medieval criminal  shari'a any  more comprehensible  than Attorney
General  Mukasey  would.  The  notion  of  Article  9  and  Islamic
finance seems even more bewildering  in a state in which there are
no significant Islamic banks, there have been no moves by any major
Islamist  party  to  ban  the  taking  of  interest  on  a  loan,  and  the
Minister  of Finance, from the country's  largest Islamist party, has
agreed  to reductions  of state  debt in a  manner  that recognizes  a
reduced, but very real, obligation to pay down debt, with interest.'7
In  other contexts,  much the  same conclusions  can be  drawn.
During my last trip to Iraq, this past August, it remained as easy to
get a beer in Baghdad as it is in Pennsylvania  (which, by the way, is
not  very  easy),  and  far  easier  in Suleymania  than  in New  York
(meaning the liquor stores were open well into the night, and seven
days a week).  Unveiled women were still the norm in Suleymania,
still  the  significant  minority  in  Baghdad.  Secular  law  seems  as
firmly embedded as ever, in this state governed by Islamist parties.
Even  jurists  tend  to  recognize  these  central  tenets  of  the  post-
colonial social and legal order.  When they get involved in affairs of
the state, and they often do through the issuance of religious rulings
or in the context of Friday sermons, they invariably address matters
that hardly  appear to  be Islamic  law  in  any  classical  sense  - the
insistence that the constitution be drafted,18 or that Parliament pass
an Elections  Law  immediately.19  Inasmuch  as the jurists address
more  religious  matters  (such  as  the  sinful  material  people  are
17.  William Neikirk, Debt Deal is a Boon for Iraq, CHI. TRIB. C19 (Dec. 17, 2004).
18.  Mohamad Bazzi,  The Al-Sistani Factor in Iraq Election, L.A. TIMES, Jan. 30,
2005,  available at http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/wire/ny-woshia-
0130,0,5017706.story (relating to Grand Ayatollah Sistani).
19.  Islamic Law in Our Times, http://muslimlawprof.org  (last visited March
20, 2009).Hastings Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. [Vol. 32:2
watching  on  television),  these  rulings  and  sermons  almost
invariably  do not call for state intervention.20  If this is the case in
Iraq, it is dramatically  the more so in a state like Turkey, where the
supposed  Islamist  party  has  proclaimed  loudly,  repeatedly  and
emphatically that the shari'ah as no place in the law of the state.21
None of this is to suggest that Islamic law, of a modem sort, is
irrelevant in Muslim polities such as Iraq.  In Iraq, Islamist parties
have sought  to amend the  Personal Status Code in a manner that
would  have  some  effect  on  rulemaking  in  that  particular  legal
field.22  Islamic commerce can be important  in private transactions
among  smaller  merchants.23  When  the  state  was  absent  during
particularly  troublesome  times  in  both  Shi'a  and  Sunni  areas,
militias  took control  of  areas  and  enforced  their  own  version  of
Islamic law.24  The  fear of nonstate  elements  being able to do the
same now, or in the future, remains acute.25
Thus,  shari'a is  extremely  important  in  non-state  capacities,
from  private  commerce  to  unregistered  marriages  to  private
enforcement of dress codes, all of which deserve greater study.  It is
important in family law.  It can at times result in the alteration of
particular state rules in the Muslim world (though not Iraq), such as
the  criminalization  of  nonmarital  sex  or  the  rendering  of
homosexuality  a capital crime,  which, if implemented, would have
profound effects on the individuals so affected.26
20.  See id. for English commentary on a Friday sermon by an influential cleric
on such matters.
21.  AKP Strives to Shrug off Islamist Image, Turkish Daily News, availablea t
http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/vote2007/article.php?enewsid=7;  Susanna
Dokupil, The Separation of Mosque and State: Islam and Democracy in Modern Turkey,
105 W. VA. L. REV. 53, 127 (2002); AKP Official Website, http://eng.akparti.org.tr/
english/partyprogramme.html#2.1  (last visited Mart 20, 2009) ("Our Party refuses
to take advantage of sacred religious  values and ethnicity  and to use them for
political purposes.").
22.  Haider Ala Hamoudi, Money Laundering Amidst Mortars: Legislative Process
and State Authority in Post-Invasion Iraq, 16 J. TRANSNAT'L.  L. & CONTEM. PROBS. 523,
543 (2007).
23.  See  generally  Haider  Ala  Hamoudi,  Baghdad  Booksellers,  Basra  Carpet
Merchants, and the Law of God and Man: Legal Pluralisma nd the Contemporary Muslim
Experience, 1 BERK. J. MIDDLE E. & ISLAMIc L. 83 (2008).
24.  See, e.g., Judd, supra note 4.
25.  Steven Farrell, Divining a Lesson in Basra, N.Y. TIMES, Week in Review (May
25, 2008)
26.  RUUD  PETERS,  CRIME  AND  PUNISHMENT  IN  IsLAMIc  LAW  156-58  (2005)
(describing Pakistan).2009] Dream Palaces of Law
However, the basic, secular legal foundation on which the state
is founded - its training of legal professionals, its secular codes, its
rulemaking  authorities - are not under threat, not in Egypt, not in
Pakistan, not even in Iraq, where Islamists rule.  Inasmuch as shari'a
plays a role in any Muslim state, it is because it is legitimized through
state  processes,  that is, it is enacted by the state in a manner  that
complies with Hart's rule of recognition, and is then interpreted by
secular lawyers with secular legal training.
That Shi'a jurists and their Shi'a constituencies would, as noted
above,  prefer  shari'a to  be  developed  in a  different  professional
culture, that of the Najaf seminaries, goes a long way to explaining
why  so  little  has  been  enacted  by  way  of  Islamic  statutes  in
contemporary Iraq and shari'a'sp rimary force in Iraq lies in nonstate
capacities.  More Islamization  might take place  in Sunni countries
such  as  Pakistan  or  Egypt,  where  there  are  weaker  juristic
influences, but the process is the same.  Either the shari'a is a rule of
the social order divorced from state law and using entirely  private
means of enforcement such as shaming and the like, or it is enacted
according to secular state processes and applied by secular officials
with secular training. The West, then, has the Muslim Rest precisely
backwards.  Shari'a does not justify secular law, but secular law can
recognize and employ shari'a as part of the law.  It is the state that
grants  legitimacy and  authority to  the shari'a as  law,  and not the
reverse.
Moreover, not only are the notions of state supremacy over law
are as firm as ever, but the substantive role of shari'a is also not very
much different  than it was prior to  the invasion.  The notion that
creeping Islamism was somehow foreign to Saddamist rule is a false
one.  It was a Saddam era regulation that prevented women from
obtaining  a  passport  without  the  permission  of  a  father  or
husband.27  Saddam  era  rules  added  particularly  harsh  criminal
punishments  reminiscent  of  shari'a such  as  amputations,  though
hardly in a manner consistent with shari'a. All of these punishments
have now been suspended.  The Personal Status Code was always
deeply  influenced  by shari'a, and  amendments  that made  it even
more so (unequal rights to inheritance, and a broader right for men
to engage in polygamy) were enacted decades before the American
27.  Sara Hamoudi, Women's Rights and the Iraqi Constitution in Practice, August
7,  2008,  JURIST,  available  at  http://jurist.law.pitt.edu/dateline/
#2333391928047846327.Hastings Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. [Vol. 32:2
invasion, and years before even Saddam assumed control.28  These
are  often  described  as  secular  accommodations  to  the  shari'a to
appease Islamist forces.29  But in Iraq the Islamists have taken over,
and in Pakistan they certainly had a friend in power in the person of
General Zia ul Haqq.  Yet beyond  nonstate applications  of shari'a,
the only possible changes being discussed (or in the case of Pakistan,
enacted)  would  easily  fall  within  the  rubric  of  similar
"accommodations."  As  we  all  saw  from  the  dramatic  lawyers'
demonstrations  throughout Pakistan not long ago, the notion  that
the secular legal system carries no internal legitimacy absent some
sort of  authority from  the shari'a is difficult  to  support.  There  is
precious little to support the  notion that we have been witnessing
"the fall and rise of the Islamic state" in the Muslim world.
Unfortunately,  however, the West is slow to catch on to these
trends.  The  manifestations  of this are evident  everywhere.  I  am
asked at academic conferences how it can be that shari'a prohibits the
taking of interest, yet Prince  Talal invests in Citibank,  as if every
Muslim is bound first and foremost to the shari'a. A Bahraini female
sprinter who  wears a headscarf is described  in television coverage
as a Muslim, her female teammate, dressed more conventionally, yet
as  Muslim  as  the  first,  is  not  so  described.  The  preferred
prerequisite  for  teaching  an  increasingly  popular  course  on  law
school campuses, Islamic law, is not familiarity  with contemporary
Muslim legal systems, or a foreign law degree from a Muslim state,
or even an advanced law degree of any kind, but rather a doctorate
in Islamic studies, leaving most able to discuss at length thirteenth
century  theories  on contract,  yet  less  comfortable  talking  about
Sanhuri's  Civil  Code,  the  template  of  Arab  private  law  in  the
modem world.  One might well ask precisely what is so legal about
such a course, as far removed  as it is from the law  of the Muslim
polities.
As to what can be done to deal with this rather dispiriting state
of affairs, I have no panacea, and even if I did, I do not pretend to
have the influence  necessary  to bring  about the realization  of  my
vision.  Nevertheless,  I  can  provide,  I  believe,  at  least  some
rudimentary  ideas  on the manner  in which  I believe  the Muslim
East  might  well  be  conceived  and  studied,  at  least  among  us
28.  Kristen Stilt, Islamic Law and the Making and Remaking of the Iraqi Legal System,
36 GEO. WASH. INT'L. L. REV. 695, 750-54 (2004).
29.  Id. at 753; Lombardi, supra note 9.20091 Dream Palaces of Law
comparatists,  that  would  be,  at  once,  less  exoticizing,  less
condescending and less distorting.  I provide them in brief below.
First, it seems  to me fundamental that if one is  to understand
law in the Muslim world, the state's legal system must come first,
and Islamic law, while important, understood within the context of
that system.  It is, after all, within the rubric of the state, either in
gaps left in the  state's legal machinery  or in state  law  enactment,
that Islamic law even exists.  There are scholars who do this: Mark
Cammack has given us excellent work on Islamic law in Indonesia;30
Donald Horowitz  has written a  series of extraordinary  articles  on
the importation  of Islamic  law  into  Malaysia  in a  largely  similar
manner;31  and  Dan  Stigall  has  discussed  Islamic  law  in  Iraq  to
admirable  effect.32   Unfortunately,  however,  such  material  is
dwarfed by the amount of work that simply wishes away the state
in  favor  of  the  construction  of  medieval  rules,  many  entirely
obsolete, in some sort of political, social and economic vacuum.  It is
not  entirely  clear  by  what  conception  this material  can even  be
considered  "law"  when  so  engaged.  Certainly  it  is  not  any
conception of law  that lawyers  in the Muslim world who  I know
would be familiar with.
Second, far more work needs to be done on matters concerning
the Muslim East that are not directly related to shari'a. I find it quite
ironic that in our quest to exoticize the Muslim East, so much focus
is placed  on the role  of  Islam, where  most comparatists are  least
equipped to deal, to the derogation of matters in which many would
be able to shed more light.  How does de-Ba'athification compare to
earlier efforts at de-Nazification?  What model of property dispute
resolution does the Iraq Property Claims Commission employ, and
how does it relate to earlier efforts elsewhere in the world  to deal
with  seemingly  intractable  disputes  of  this  sort?  Rather  than
unnatural  and  misguided  focus  on "theocratic  constitutionalism,"
more work  might be  done as  to  the  extremely  broad  federalism
embodied in the Iraq constitution, as a model for state organization,
or how precisely  Iraq's extremely  generous economic rights might
30.  See,  e.g.,  Mark  Cammack,  Islam,  Nationalism and  the  State  in  Suharto's
Indonesia, 17 Wisc. INT. L.J. 27 (1999).
31.  Donald Horowitz, The Qur'an And The Common Law: Islamic Law Reform And
The Theory Of Legal Change, 42 AM. J. CoMP. L. 233 (1994).
32.  See generally, e.g., Dan E. Stigall, Iraqi Civil Law: Its Sources, Substance, And
Sundering, 16 J. TRANSNAT'L L. & POL. 1 (2006).Hastings Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. [Vol. 32:2
well be given constitutional meaning.  Rather than disquisitions on
UCC Article 9 and Islamic finance, analysis of differing local models
on obtaining security on a loan might well suggest different means
through which polities balance the interests of debtors and various
classes of creditors.  There appears to me, at first glance, tremendous
opportunity  to explore  issues greatly understudied  in the Muslim
world, to balance the near exclusive  focus on shari'a concerns  that
are, in many though not all contexts, marginal.
Finally, I think all of our law schools would do well with a few
more Muslim lawyers and legal professionals, and a few less experts
on medieval  jurisprudence.  I commend  Cornell  Law  School  for
offering my friend, Judge Raad Juhi, an opportunity to work there
for a year, and have no doubt that the perspective he brings to Iraqi
criminal law  will be fresh and exciting.  As the chief investigative
judge during the trial of Saddam Hussein, he will, I am absolutely
sure, have comparatively little to say that relates to the shari'a. More
interactions  of this sort are invaluable, so that law schools, among
the Rest, might exchange ideas with their counterparts in the West,
and distortions  and confusions concerning the true state of law  in
the Muslim world thereby lessened, at least within our ivory tower.