SAVING FACE: UNFOLDING THE SCREEN OF CHINESE 
PRIVACY LAW 
 
Tiffany Li, Zhou Zhou, Jill Bronfman* 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Traditional  Peking  Opera  is  one  of  the  most  well-known  and 
characteristic art forms of historical and modern-day China- one that is as 
emblematic of Chinese culture as baseball is of the United States. During 
each  performance,  Beijing  Opera  actors  cycle  through  a  variety  of 
dramatically painted masks, with each mask using color and style of face to 
elaborately symbolize particular traits. Experienced opera-goers are expected 
to recognize that a yellow or white face is a “malicious character,”1 and the 
degree or amount of makeup applied represents the degree of each character’s 
malevolence. With the faces of the actors covered, the operas become a 
performance of inner thoughts and emotions expressed behind a very literal 
mask.  
While it may be overly simplistic to sum up six thousand years of Chinese 
history in one metaphor, the sustaining influence of Beijing Opera is a 
metaphor to allow Western audiences to easily understand the cultural value 
of “face.” The concept of face in Chinese culture (and other Asian cultures) 
refers to a complex cultural valuation of protecting personal privacy in order 
to present a respectable identity to the community at large. In traditional 
Beijing Opera, actors use masks to shield their identities on stage, and the 
masks allow the actors to present carefully calculated “faces” to the public. 
Similarly,  Chinese  privacy  laws  can  be  understood  through  the  lens  of 
“saving face”2 as these laws protect Chinese citizens from having their 
                                                 
* The Authors would like to express our appreciation for the advice and support of the 
International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP), IP Scholars Asia, the Privacy Law 
Scholars' Conference (PLSC), the Asian Privacy Law Scholars' Network (APSN), The 
University of Washington School of Law, The University of Geneva, and the University of 
California Hastings College of the Law. 
1
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao to 
Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p. 206. 
2
 There is a literal meaning of face as well as a figurative meaning of face in the Chinese 
language, “Besides its original meaning, this term [face] is a literal translation of the Chinese 
‘mian-zi’ and ‘lian’.” “Mian-zi” is reputation such as success and ostentation, whereas “lian” 
is moral character or standing in the community. To lose face is to fail to achieve the 
community’s approval, to be dishonored, to be humiliated in public. Wang, Hao, Protecting 
Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy .Standards and the Possibility of 2  DRAFT  2017 
personal information exposed, thus allowing individuals to present their 
identity (or personal information) to the community in ways that they choose.  
This Article seeks to elucidate the connection between Chinese cultural 
values  and  China’s  privacy  laws,  with  the  ultimate  goal  of  offering 
predictions and recommendations for future Chinese privacy law and policy. 
This research comes at a crucial time in history. Changes in economic 
systems and technology, along with the forces of the Internet, Western 
entertainment and education, have transformed and uprooted Chinese life. 
Urbanization has increased the disconnection of the individual from the 
family and collective units of the past. Economic changes favor the individual 
and individual rights in the private sphere, but in the public sphere, the 
government still plays a large role.  
While analyzing the cultural foundations of Chinese privacy law is an 
intellectually interesting exercise, it is also one that is critical to the future 
economic interests of the world. Considering its economic influence and  
immense consumer base, any international company seeking to operate in 
China should expend resources on understanding how best to succeed in the 
Chinese  market,  taking  into  account  the  current  privacy  landscape.  In 
addition,  technical  developments  in  information  transmission,  including 
Internet, mobile apps, cloud storage, and data analytics, require a global 
perspective on data protection.   
China has moved forward in a nimble fashion to take advantage of 
advances in technology. For example, “China has emerged as a leader in 
genomic research...the Beijing Genomic Institute (since renamed BGI) is now 
the largest genomic research center in the world, with more sequencing 
machines than the entire United States. Some of its researchers are in early 
discussions about eventually sequencing the genomes of almost every child 
in China.”3 The privacy and data protection obligations of such a database 
are potentially enormous. This means that privacy scholars and practitioners 
everywhere must pay close attention to how privacy law is developing in 
China, both to keep up with current developments and to stay ahead of the 
curve  by  proactively  implementing  strategic  privacy  and  data  security 
policies. 
This article will address some of those unique historical and cultural 
                                                 
Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy Protection Legislation in 
Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.38-39. As another commentator 
noted, “social face [“mian-zi”], [is] based on one’s achievements and dignity, and moral face 
[“lian”], based on a person’s feelings of shame. The former works as a type of prestige and 
is subject to the evaluation of others, while the latter functions as a moral self-constraint.” 
Yan, Yunxiang, Making Room for Intimacy, House Home Family: Living and Being 
Chinese, ed. By Knapp, Ronald G. and Lo, Kai-Yin (2005) Spatial Habitus, p. 395, fn. 4. 
3
 Ross, Alec, The Industries of the Future, Simon & Schuster (2016), p. 65. 2017  DRAFT  3 
factors  that  might  provide  clues  to  the  future  of  the  development  and 
application of privacy laws in China. First, we look at cultural factors that 
may influence the unique Chinese conception of privacy. Second, we analyze 
current relevant Chinese privacy laws and regulations. Finally, we look to the 
future and offer some practical recommendations for the future of Chinese 
privacy law. 
 
I. CULTURAL FACTORS INFLUENCING THE PERCEPTION OF PRIVACY 
 
As is the case for legal systems in all countries, Chinese culture affects 
Chinese views and application of laws - including privacy laws.  However, 
we  cannot  study  Chinese  privacy  law  in  a  vacuum.  The  modern  legal 
conception of privacy, and its applicable laws, arose from Western culture. 
Thus, to understand Chinese privacy law, we must juxtapose Western notions 
of privacy against thousands of years of Confucian teaching and the historical 
background  of  communism  that  still  influences  present-day  Chinese 
society.4   In fact, such cultural considerations have such a strong influence 
on  Chinese  privacy  laws  precisely  because  the  importation  of  Western 
privacy laws prevented China from developing its own sui generis privacy 
legal culture.  
 
A.  Western culture based on individual values and individual privacy  
 
The concept of privacy in the Western tradition is said to arise out of an 
1890 article by Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis titled “The Right to 
Privacy.”5  In it, Warren and Brandeis described a right to privacy as the right 
of an individual to be left alone.  The authors frame the right as a continuation 
of common law traditions protecting rights of the individual, their rights in 
their home ‘castle’, and their innate rights to be left to themselves. Thus, the 
idea of privacy as we know it today is a relatively recent phenomenon that 
was developed out of a Western moral and legal framework that presupposes 
the primacy of individual rights against collective values, except in the most 
extreme circumstances. 
 
B.  Chinese cultural values and history produce community-oriented 
privacy systems 
 
                                                 
4 For further discussion on Chinese privacy law, and Asian privacy law in general, see, 
Asian Data Privacy Laws: Trade and Human Rights Perspectives, by University of New 
South Wales Law Professor Graham Greenleaf.  
5
Samuel D. Warren & Louis D. Brandeis, The Right to Privacy, 4 HARV. L REV. 193 
 
(1890). 4  DRAFT  2017 
  It is, of course, impossible to definitively state which cultural and 
historical factors have created the current Chinese perception of privacy. 
Here, we look at a selection of issues that may be most relevant to today’s 
Chinese privacy norms. With the goal of understanding Chinese conceptions 
of privacy, as viewed from the lens of traditional Western scholarship, we 
will pay particular attention to cultural and historical factors that are unique 
to China or that diverge significantly from traditional Western factors. 
 
1.  Confucian System of Values 
 
Historically,  Chinese  laws  arose  out  of  Confucian  ideas6  about 
government and have always been underpinned by Confucian ethics and 
morality about daily civil conduct, known as Li in Chinese.  These Confucian 
ideas are a product of a time in Chinese history, the Spring and Autumn and 
the Warring States periods,7 when the country was undergoing an extended 
and tumultuous civil war. During that turbulent time, prominent scholars like 
Confucius sought ways to end the turmoil. This turmoil was only ended, by 
the unification of China under the first emperor of China, Qin Shi Shuang. 
Thus, under Confucianism, and the Chinese legal systems based on it, priority 
is placed on ensuring order and good governance.  In such a system, the rights 
of  the  individual  are  subordinate  to  the  rights  of  the  family  unit,  the 
community, and the country.  As a result, “The protection of privacy (yin-si) 
was first stated by the famous Analects of Confucius in the early days of the 
Warring States periods…[however] It should be noted that the main aims of 
these [Confucian] doctrines and provisions were not to protect individual’s 
personal privacy. The protection of privacy (yin-si) was only the by-product 
of implementing these doctrines and provisions.” 8 
 
2.  Communist Rule and Collectivism 
 
                                                 
6
 Confucianism is based on  a set of ethical and philosophical teachings  stressing the 
love for humanity and family, loyalty to government, and harmony in thought and conduct 
with one’s defined role in society.  See, e.g., Judith A. Berling, “Confucianism,” Focus on 
Asian Studies, Vol. II, No. 1: Asian Religions, 5-7 (1982).   
7
 Spring and Autumn Period (770 - c.480 BCE) and the Warring States Period (c.480 
BCE-221 BCE), “The Zhou Dynasty, Confucius, and China’s Philosophic Traditions,” Asia 
for Educators, available at http://afe.easia.columbia.edu/main_pop/kpct/kp_zhou.htm. 
8
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China in A RESEARCH ON CHINA’S PRIVACY 
STANDARDS  AND  THE  POSSIBILITY  OF  ESTABLISHING  THE  RIGHT  TO 
PRIVACY AND THE INFORMATION PRIVACY PROTECTION LEGISLATION IN 
MODERN CHINA, 36 (2011). For a further discussion of the Chinese word for privacy, yin-
si, see also infra p. 16.. 2017  DRAFT  5 
More recently in history, for many decades the Communist9 authorities 
strove to build a country focused on collectivism rather than individual 
pursuits.  In an environment where private property was collectivized by the 
state and where communes consisting of thousands of households led to 
communal living, individuals rarely have control of their own tangible goods, 
including even a personal physical space. The idea of an individual having  
the right to an intangible concept like privacy, protecting them against the 
intrusion of the state and the community, was also relatively unheard of. Only 
since the modernization and opening up of the Chinese economy in the past 
twenty-five years10 have individuals been able to pursue their own career and 
life paths. 
 
C.  Setting Privacy Boundaries Using Traditional Chinese Concepts of 
Deference and Respect  
 
  Beyond  the  bigger  picture  themes,  differing  conceptions  of 
individualism and community can be seen even in the small details of how 
greetings are made in Chinese and Western cultures. When Chinese people 
greet each other, it is common to comment directly on the status of the greeted 
individual. In Western culture, it is common to mention the weather, the time 
of day, or another neutral expression.  In Chinese, the greetings and level of 
inquiry  could  be  considered  significantly  more  intrusive  by  Western 
standards, as they seek to ascertain the condition of the other individual, and 
establish  the  relationship  between  the  two  individuals.  For  example,  A 
conversation in China often begins with the congenial and intimate, “Have 
you eaten?” This concern with the other individual’s welfare highlights the 
basic assumption that no reasonable discourse can occur while someone is 
lacking in the essentials of life.  
Differences between Chinese and Western cultures can also be found in 
what is considered polite avenues of inquiry in conversation with friends and 
acquaintances. To show consideration, and also to know exactly who one is 
dealing with, Chinese people are liable to ask one another questions that 
might seem off limits to Westerners, including, “How much money do you 
make?” and “How old are you?,” and the ever-popular, “Are you married?” 
While Westerners may ask such probative questions to close friends and 
                                                 
9
 The Communist Party of China (CPC) established the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC) in 1949. 
10
 Chinese economic reform by Deng Xiaoping. Naughton, Barry et al. (2008), "A 
Political Economy of China’s Economic Transition in China's Great Transformation", in 
Brandt, Loren; Rawski, G. Thomas, China's Great Transformation, Cambridge: Cambridge 
university press 
 6  DRAFT  2017 
family, the key difference is that these questions would seem out of place or 
rude if asked of anyone without that close relationship. These questions go 
well beyond first encounter conversations between Westerners, and perhaps 
beyond first date conversations. 
  At first, these topics of speech may seem incredibly detailed for 
greetings and initial conversations, but they help Chinese individuals root and 
establish each other’s place in the carefully constructed culture of their own 
design.  The  design  of  this  world  orients  the  individual  and  establishes 
boundaries that, in many cases, substitute for Western notions of privacy and 
individualism. The language of deference, modesty, and humility helps create 
a hierarchy that establishes a level of comfort and stability for each individual 
within that structure. Patterns of body language, official titles, and family 
relationship designations build on this structure.  
 
1.  Physical Boundaries and Deference 
 
  In historical Chinese tradition, greeting another person by bowing 
showed  deference,  and  deeper  bowing  indicated  additional  levels  of 
deference. The borrowed English word “kowtow” refers to the Chinese 
phrase  for  genuflecting  in  front  of  another  as  a  show  of  humility  and 
subservience. The modern English meaning stems from this tradition.  It is 
worth noting that “kowtow” and “saving face” are both borrowed phrases 
from the Chinese language; there were literally no Western equivalents in 
English. 
In modern times, the performative tradition of bowing to another is 
generally  only used in formal contexts and is instead now generally reduced 
to  a  nod  or  other  form  of  acknowledgment,11  However,  the  historical 
reference  still  exists.  Bowing  may  still  occur  in  formal  situations  with 
greetings between heads of state or religious leaders. 
The tradition of bowing may also be reflective of Chinese norms for 
personal  space.  Personal  space  is  significant  in  establishing  privacy 
boundaries, and in a crowded, populous country, necessary. Kissing and 
hugging  among  acquaintances  in  traditional  Chinese  culture  would  be 
unusual and rare. However, actual physical space understandings in modern 
China are different. Modern Chinese actually have very low expectations for 
physical space – given the crowdedness of the cities. People are willing to 
stand or walk right next to strangers without leaving too much space. In 
contrast, sparsely populated countries like Finland are known to have great 
personal space expectations – a Finn would likely find that Americans stand 
                                                 
11
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao 
to Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p 14. 2017  DRAFT  7 
much  too  close  to  strangers  and  make  far  too  much  eye  contact.  This 
conception  of  physical  space  also  has  implications  for  conceptions  of 
personal physical privacy that may be different from those in the Western 
world. In China, what is considered polite personal space in public among 
strangers (very close, touching) is different from personal space between 
acquaintances and friends (not touching).12 
 
2.  Official Titles 
 
  In addition to the Western name structures of place and occupation, 
historically Chinese surnames had often used to include pre-Qin unification 
feudal titles and rank. Some people took on names of ancestors’ titles of 
nobility and political official status.13 If the “core of propriety is using proper 
titles,”14 then the failure to use correct titles is the failure to understand one’s 
place in society, and thereby fail as an individual, and as a member of the 
family unit. This structure is attributed to Confucius, but may have roots in 
Chinese family structure that predated The Analects of Confucius. 
 
3.  Family Relationship Structure 
 
  Included in a Chinese person’s name may be their actual place in their 
family. Part of the traditional naming convention of a Chinese given name 
may incorporate seniority or relationship of an elder in the family, and there 
were very strict rules against naming a child after a parent,15 in order to avoid 
the rather disastrous confusion of the young and old, as well as confusion 
among the lower and higher ranked individuals. 
  In fact, there are more than 230 words in Chinese that designate 
family relationship status,16 just to be absolutely clear where each individual 
                                                 
12
 Susan Krauss Whitbourne, Polish Off Your Personal Space, Psychology Today (Nov. 
3, 2012), https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/fulfillment-any-age/201211/polish-your-
personal-space. 
13
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao 
to Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p. 12. 
14
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao 
to Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p. 95. 
15
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao 
to Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p. 13. 
16
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao 
to Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p. 15. 8  DRAFT  2017 
stands. For example, no one is just “brother,” but must be called “older 
brother,” or “younger brother,” as the name suggests, and so on, beyond 
directly lineal relatives to in-laws, cousins, and even signifying on which side 
of the family (mother’s or father’s) the relative is placed in the family tree. In 
this context, “individual privacy in traditional Chinese culture existed in a 
hierarchical context- a person could enjoy privacy in relation to those who 
were ranked lower socially and economically, but not vice versa. This is 
because privacy was not a legal right but a flexible privilege, the boundary of 
which varied depending on one’s social status in a situation-specific context. 
For instance, a landlord in a rural community could enter a poor tenant’s 
home without any concern for the latter’s privacy, but the opposite was 
unthinkable. This is like the operation of ‘social face’ in everyday [Chinese] 
life: an actor normally knows how ‘big’ the other party’s face is.”17 
  Though there still is a legacy of association with secrecy, privacy in 
modern China has begun to incorporate private space and private concepts. 
One Chinese scholar noted that, “Though many common Chinese still line 
privacy with Yinsi (shameful secret) – to a large extent, at least in the relevant 
discussion of many contemporary Chinese scholars, the concept of privacy is 
no longer limited to the earlier, narrower sense of [Yinsi], but now includes 
all personal information (i.e., whether shameful or not) that people do not 
want others to know…This expanding scope of ‘privacy’ is apparently based, 
at least in part, on the expansion of physical personal space in China…”18 To 
address this connection between privacy and community/space, we must look 
at the evolution of personal space, both in the literal and metaphorical sense, 
in context in China. 
 
4.  Community in Chinese Culture 
 
  Chinese  communities  are  built  upon  the  family  and  hierarchical 
relationships established by these linguistic and behavioral traditions. In fact, 
“privacy as a social practice is itself not alien to Chinese culture. On the 
contrary, a certain degree of privacy has always been carefully protected for 
some people through Chinese history. Suffice it to note that the elite and the 
rich in Chinese society have always enjoyed some degree of privacy in family 
life. As far as spatial privacy is concerned, the houses of elite and well-to-do 
families all drew a clear line between the exteriority of the community and 
the interiority of the home…” 19Chinese cities were built to encapsulate the 
                                                 
17
 Yan, Yunxiang, Making Room for Intimacy, House Home Family: Living and Being 
Chinese, ed. By Knapp, Ronald G. and Lo, Kai-Yin (2005) Spatial Habitus, p. 392. 
18 Solove and Schwartz, Information Privacy Law, 5th ed., quoting Lu Yao-Huai, 
Privacy and Data Privacy Issues in Contemporary China, 7 Ethics & Ino. Tech. 15 (2005). 
19
 Yan, Yunxiang, Making Room for Intimacy, House Home Family: Living and Being 2017  DRAFT  9 
family unit in courtyard-style residences.20 The family’s outdoor activities 
would be in this private space rather than the front or back yard of the home. 
The family would close the windows facing the street and the outside, 
keeping  the  courtyards  “closed  and  secluded.21  This  architectural 
phenomenon would serve the family-centered need for privacy.  
  Even the burial tomb of the Mausoleum of Emperor Qin Shi Huang 
is composed of “an inside square wall with  perimeter of 1.6 miles and a 
surrounding outside enclosure with a perimeter of 3.9 miles.”22 Given vast 
resources,  this  powerful  Emperor  built  himself  a  perpetual  courtyard 
residence devoted to private space. 
  Generational changes with younger married couples wanting their 
own space has changed the reception of guests into the home. Now they are 
expected to meet in the living room and are not invited into the bedroom or 
private spaces.23  New houses are now built in China to accommodate 
increasing demands for privacy. “Where once several conjugal units shared 
one large sleeping space, houses are now generally built with separate rooms 
for each couple.” 24  
 
D.  Saving Face by Protecting One’s Status in the Community --- A privacy 
screen protects the individual from public shame. 
 
           These historical and cultural considerations inform a distinctly 
Chinese  view  of  privacy.    In  the  Judeo-Christian  Western  culture,  it’s 
arguable that punishment is based on the personal and inward-facing ideas of 
individual wrongdoing and individual guilt.25  However, in Chinese culture, 
                                                 
Chinese, ed. By Knapp, Ronald G. and Lo, Kai-Yin (2005) Spatial Habitus, p. 390-391. 
20
 This is historically true for the upper class and property rights and values were 
actually fairly similar to what you’d find in, say, feudal England. Large estates, importance 
of family ownership, were quite common. As is discussed supra, this structure was not as 
applicable to the “lower classes” in history and changed in the transition to modern-day 
China. 
21
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao 
to Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p. 194. 
22
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao 
to Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p. 198. 
23
 Yan, Yunxiang, Making Room for Intimacy, House Home Family: Living and Being 
Chinese, ed. By Knapp, Ronald G. and Lo, Kai-Yin (2005) Spatial Habitus, p. 386-389. 
24
 Jervis, Nancy, The Meaning of Jia, House Home Family: Living and Being Chinese, 
ed. By Knapp, Ronald G. and Lo, Kai-Yin (2005) Spatial Habitus, p. 225-226. 
25  Beginning with the biblical reference to the Ten Commandments, notions of 
individual responsibility for behavior are ingrained in Western culture. Each commandment 10  DRAFT  2017 
punishment often derives from community-infused concepts based on the 
Confucian ideas of shame and deference to the community hierarchy. This 
concern with public shame has shaped the regulation of privacy in Chinese 
society.  
  Individuals  are  conditioned  to  at  all  costs  avoid  actions  such  a 
disclosure of sensitive facts that would lead to a loss of face and cause them 
shame.  Further, the concept of “saving face” extends beyond any single 
individual  to  that  person’s  family  reputation.26As  if  keeping  one’s  own 
reputation clean and clear was not enough of an effort, in traditional Chinese 
culture the individual’s actions reflect upon their family name and standing 
in the community. “If the house is disgraced, one should not scatter gossip to 
the wind,”27 is an expression that connotes that the concept that a house, or 
an entire family, can be disgraced by one person associated with that family. 
The expression also conveys that this shame must be kept within the family 
house, not to be shared with the village or the outside community.  
“The traditional Chinese word for “privacy” is “yin-si”. “Yin-si” consists 
of two Chinese words, which are “yin” and “si”. “Yin” means “hidden from 
view. Usually, this is a word [that] possesses [a] derogatory sense and means 
illegitimate sexual in Chinese. “Si” means “private” or “do not want to 
disclose in public. This word covers both “private” and “privacy.” “Yin-si” 
has been defined as an individual’s shameful secret that the individual does 
not want to tell others or be disclosed to the public.” 28 
  As seen through the traditional meaning of yin-si reflecting the desire 
to avoid further lost of face or humiliation, parties to a dispute over privacy 
might just let it pass or seek a resolution outside of a public forum. “…for the 
sake of ‘face’ even if the invasion of their privacy was inevitable, they 
                                                 
begins with, “Thou…” implying that an individual reader must follow the instructions 
regardless of the behavior of others or the situation in the community. Similarly, legal 
codification of these principles locate blame on individual actions. 
26
 “The significance of ‘face’ in Chinese society is widely known by now, so much so 
that the term has entered the English-speaking world. In general, scholars distinguish two 
kinds of face: social face, based on one’s achievements and dignity, and moral face, based 
on a person’s feelings of shame. The former works as a type of prestige and is subject to the 
evaluation of others, while the latter functions as a moral self-constraint.” Yan, Yunxiang, 
Making Room for Intimacy, House Home Family: Living and Being Chinese, ed. By Knapp, 
Ronald G. and Lo, Kai-Yin (2005) Spatial Habitus, p. 395, fn. 4. 
27
 Fayuan, Zhu, Qixing, Wu, Hanning, Xia, and Han, Gao, From Moon Cakes to Mao 
to Modern China: An Introduction to Chinese Civilization, (2015) by CN Times Books, Inc., 
p. 58. 
28
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.34. 2017  DRAFT  11 
preferred to ignore the invasion rather than go to court.” 29 
This community-oriented idea of shame also has other practical privacy 
implications.    Whereas  in  Western  countries  the  disclosure  of  certain 
information  such  as  financial  data  and  age  may  cause  particular 
consternation, the disclosure of such information may not be as problematic 
in Chinese culture where’s one’s financial standing can serve as a point of 
pride, one’s seniority engenders respect, and disclosure of certain information 
is  an  accepted  part  of  establishing  externally  one’s  place  within  the 
community hierarchy.  On the other hand in Chinese culture, individuals are 
particularly  sensitive  to  the  disclosure  of  information  that  may  bring 
unwanted scrutiny on the traditional familial unit and the community such as 
the disclosure of information about mental illnesses, sexual orientation, and 
adoption of family members.      
Perhaps paradoxically on the other hand, as one Chinese commentator 
notes,30 in a shame-based culture, purported wrongdoers can only be properly 
punished if their faults are exposed to the community and the punished are 
forced by society to correct their behavior. This correction must be based on 
what society thinks is morally important to do rather than based any guilt that 
a wrongdoer internally harbors.  Under this exposure to the criticism of the 
community, an individual’s privacy rights are often disregarded.  In other 
words, because of the heightened importance Chinese culture places on face 
and shame, invasions of privacy became a useful method for Chinese society 
to regulate individual behavior.  In such an environment, privacy laws are 
more likely to be seen as unwanted shields used to protect morally repugnant 
behavior than useful societal mechanisms.  This cultural artifact is likely to 
have contributed to the privacy-invasive phenomena of ‘human-flesh’ search 
engines31 that commonly engulf online communities in mainland China. 
These searches are used to expose individuals convicted in the public court 
of wrongdoing, and subject them to humiliation, usually via social media.32  
                                                 
29
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.65. 
30  Tian Weimin, Shame Culture and Privacy Protection, Zhongnan University of 
Economics  and  Law,  2010,  retrieved  from 
http://shlx.pkulaw.cn/fulltext_form.aspx?Db=qikan&Gid=1510094600&keyword=&Encod
ingName=gb2312&Search_Mode=. 
31
 ‘Human-flesh’ search engines are campaigns by online users to search and expose the 
identity and personal details of other Chinese citizens of interest and subject them to public 
humiliation.  See Tao, “Internet Mass Hunting: A Balanced Protection of Privacy and Free 
Speech,”  Jurisprudence,  Guangdong  Business  School,  2008,  retrieved  from 
http://shlx.pkulaw.cn/fulltext_form.aspx?Db=qikan&Gid=1510068708&keyword=&Encod
ingName=&Search_Mode=. 
32
 F. Y. Wang et al., "A Study of the Human Flesh Search Engine: Crowd-Powered 12  DRAFT  2017 
 
E.  Privacy law and regulation in Chinese culture supports the individual’s 
role in the community rather than protecting the individual against the 
community as in the West. 
 
If  the  entire  foundation  for  privacy  law  in  China  presupposes  that 
supporting the stability of the community should take precedence over the 
needs of any one individual, there will be some difficult conflicts between 
the laws of West and East. Thus, tensions between Western theories of 
privacy and the reality in the Chinese legal system can be particularly 
problematic for the implementation of privacy laws since both forces are 
based  on  strong,  and  sometimes  conflicting,  value  systems.  Companies 
charged  with  implementing  both  regimes  within  a  single  compliance 
framework will be stretched to their limits to do so. 
The  aforementioned  mix  of  cultural  factors  has  produced  a  unique 
Chinese view towards privacy - a view that is strict in certain respects33 but 
lax in others.  Understanding these cultural and historical factors can offer 
clues to how Chinese privacy law may develop in the future. It is also helpful 
to keep these considerations in mind when creating privacy practices that deal 
with Chinese consumers or Chinese corporations.  
In many recent privacy-related disputes in China, the legal system has 
often sided with protecting the rights, values, and morals of the community 
over protecting the privacy rights of the individual.34 In such cases, national 
interests prevail over personal interests, and the difficult balance of privacy 
and security has a heavy weight on the side of security and community.35  As 
                                                 
Expansion of Online Knowledge," in Computer, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 45-53, Aug. 2010. 
doi: 10.1109/MC.2010.216. 
33
 This is illustrated in a "classical case", one about a letter recipient making the letters 
public. The Higher Court ruled it violates the privacy right of the one who wrote the letter.  
See “One of the top ten civil cases of the People's Court in 2014: Qian Zhongshu's copyright 
and  privacy  dispute  arising  from  the  auction  of  manuscripts”,  available  at 
http://www.pkulaw.cn/case/pfnl_1970324840818622.html. 
34
 Zhang Lihong, Analysis of jurisprudence and legal culture - Privacy fate of China, 
East  China  University  of  Political  Science  and  Law,  available  at 
http://www.cnki.com.cn/Article/CJFDTotal-SDFX201401002.htm. 
35
 For example, in a case related to a Shanghai high school’s publication of two students’ 
romantic tryst that was caught on the school’s cameras, the trial and appeals courts both 
found that the school’s publication of such information did not violate the privacy interests 
of the affected students since the overriding interest of the school in its actions was to provide 
guidance to its underaged students, in line with a school’s important traditional role in the 
community  to help shape the morals and behavior young people.  See Shanghai No. 2 
Intermediate Court, Decision No. 2106 (2004).  In another example of the prevalence of 
community considerations over an individual’s privacy rights , a prominent newspaper had 
reported on the circumstances behind the suicide of a man whose daughter gained renowned 2017  DRAFT  13 
Lang Ping, CASS China, China on Global Governance explained in a recent 
video presentation, the problem is not whether to have the government 
involved, but how to have the government involved.36  
Furthermore, as a result of both cultural assumptions and legal decisions, 
shame-based Chinese citizens are very protective of their public image and 
any disclosure of private wrongdoing, whether legal or moral, that could lead 
to a loss of ‘face.’ Generally, individuals in the United States are given a wide 
berth until they violate the law. Then they “fall off the cliff” and are punished, 
whereas Chinese culture provides more support along the way, conforming 
behavior to social norms and preventing this fall. Hence the need for fewer 
lawyers, less law, fewer courts, less implementation.37 Saving face rather than 
airing grievances is the impetus behind the privacy and confidentiality laws 
that do exist in China today, and could point to the direction that Chinese 
privacy laws might further develop in the future.  
 
II. CURRENT STATE OF PRIVACY LAWS IN CHINA 
 
Privacy law in China is still a relatively new field, and the definition of 
privacy in the legal context is still in its formative stages. To begin, a 
“working definition of privacy should also meet the following two criteria in 
China. First, individuals should understand all (or at least most) of the aspects 
of their personal information, which are being addressed. In other words, 
individuals should know when privacy is, or is not, gained or lost. Otherwise, 
the definition of privacy will be inaccurate. Second, the definition of privacy 
must be applicable to Chinese social and legal practices. Social and legal 
practices include the use and testing of the definition by Chinese courts, 
lawyers,  and  other  governmental  agencies.  Particularly,  a  definition  of 
privacy should be adequate for use in the legal process.” 38 
While this is properly the subject of another fascinating law review 
article, it is worth mentioning here that China is still working out whether 
corporations and other legal entities should have any privacy rights beyond 
                                                 
for chasing after a famous Hong Kong singer.  The man’s family sued for a violation of their 
privacy rights and on appeal, a Chinese court found that there was no violation of anyone’s 
privacy rights  because the newspaper had a public interest to the community to expose the 
harms caused by such star-chasing ways.  See Guangzhou Intermediate Court, Decision No. 
3871 (2008).   
36
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lh-S3Bu9Qec&app=desktop Raisina Dialogue 
2016 | Securing Digital Asia: Threats and Opportunities for a Smart Realm. 
37
 Law Without Lawyers: A Comprehensive View of Law in China and the United 
States, by Victor H. Li. 1978, p. 38-47. 
38
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp.7-8. 14  DRAFT  2017 
trade secrets and other intellectual property rights, i.e., “…similar to an 
individual [who] hopes to keep his or her personal information out of public 
view, an organization also need[s] internal privacy to conduct its affairs 
without having to keep up a ‘public face.’ That is to say enterprise legal 
persons  also  need  the  right  to  decide  when  and  to  what  extent  their 
information should be made public.” 39 
 To understand the current state of Chinese privacy laws, it is best to first 
distinguish the concepts of privacy from government actors and privacy from 
corporate actors. China’s current legal system does not afford significant 
privacy protections against government intrusion.40 Looking first at the basics 
of the Constitution of the People’s Republic of China published in 1982, we 
can see that the text imposes privacy obligations on people and corporations, 
and protects basic citizens’ rights and their personal dignity against private 
actions.  It does not necessarily restrict government actions. 41 According to 
Wang, “In fact, in the domain of Chinese jurisdiction, ‘personal dignity’ is a 
specialized phrase. “Personal dignity’ can be understood as the right to name, 
right to portrait, right to privacy and so on.” 42 
While China still lacks a comprehensive national privacy law, privacy 
laws and regulatory guides focused on specific concerns have been passed. 
Chinese privacy law has a sectorial focus (laws governing specific industries 
or areas), similar to the U.S. sectorial approach to privacy.  These sectors vary 
from telecommunications, Internet users, and consumer protection regulation 
as well as tort rights of action. Traditionally, like the Chinese Constitution, 
these laws have protected individuals against private corporations, but are not 
equivalent to a U.S. Bill of Rights protecting individuals against their own 
government’s power. 
In the past few years, China has been increasingly willing to create and 
enforce privacy laws aimed at regulating corporations and private actors.  
Furthermore while these new laws codified privacy protection, they still 
offered a worldview that superimposed the general Chinese cultural values 
                                                 
39
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.47, 
quoted expression from Westin (1967) Privacy and Freedom, Atheneum New York. 
40
 See, e.g., detailed descriptions and lists of permitted and unpermitted activities and 
speech in the media Chinese Cultural Laws Regulations and Institutions, ed. by Gao Shuxun, 
2009, at pp. 38, 105-106 and 111-112. 
41
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.51. 
42
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.52. 2017  DRAFT  15 
of the community interests and morality into the privacy discussion. 
 
A.  Consumer Protection Privacy Laws. 
 
One of the first of these new laws, in 2012, the SC-NPC Decision on 
Internet Information Protection (“SC-NPC 2012”)43 created the highest level 
law in China dealing with data protection. The provisions from SC-NPC 2012 
were largely included in the 2013 amendments to China’s Law on the 
Protection of Consumer Rights and Interests (“Consumer Law”).44  The 
amended Consumer Law includes the general principle that all operators must 
“follow legal, legitimate, and necessary principles,” incorporating principles 
stated in the SC-NPC 2012.  
The Consumer Law, Art. 29 lists these rules that are widely accepted in 
the privacy space: 
“Proprietors collecting and using consumers' personal information shall 
abide by principles of legality, propriety and necessity, explicitly stating the 
purposes, means and scope for collecting or using information, and obtaining 
the consumers' consent. Proprietors collecting or using consumers' personal 
information  shall  disclose  their  rules  for  their  collection  or  use  of  this 
information, and must not collect or use information in violation of laws, 
regulations or agreements between the parties. 
Proprietors  and  their  employees  must  keep  consumers'  personal 
information they collect strictly confidential and must not disclose, sell, or 
illegally provide it to others. Proprietors shall employ technical measures and 
other necessary measures to ensure information security, and to prevent 
consumers' personal information from being disclosed or lost. In situations 
where information has been or might be disclosed or lost, proprietors shall 
immediately adopt remedial measures. 
Proprietors must not send commercial information to consumers without 
their consent or upon their request of consumers, or where they have clearly 
refused it.” 
A more recent regulation from 2015, the Measures for Punishment of 
                                                 
43 National People’s Congress Standing Committee Decision concerning Strengthening 
Network Information Protection, December 29, 2012, edited by Rogier Creemers, Retrieved 
from  https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2012/12/28/national-peoples-
congress-standing-committee-decision-concerning-strengthening-network-information-
protection/. 
44
 The Decision on Amending the PRC Law on the Protection of Consumer Rights and 
Interests was adopted at the 5th Session of the Standing Committee of the Twelfth National 
People's Congress on October 25, 2013, was released to take effect on March 15, 2014. 
Consumer  Protection  Law  (Including  2013  Amendments),  Retrieved  from 
http://chinalawtranslate.com/consumer-protection-law-including-2013-
amendments/?lang=en. 16  DRAFT  2017 
Infringements of Consumer Rights and Interest by the State Administration 
for Industry and Commerce, is applicable to consumer personal information 
and contains similar prohibitions as the Consumer Law.  Perhaps most 
importantly, this regulation defines consumer personal information, one of 
the first instances of this definition in Chinese regulations, as the following 
(Art. 11): “information collected by an enterprise operator during the sale of 
products or provision of services, that can, singly or in combination with 
other information, identify a consumer.” Examples include “name, gender, 
occupation, birth date, identification card number, residential address, contact 
information, income and financial status, health status, and consumption 
habits.” 
 
B.  The Telecommunications Privacy Regulations 
 
Various recent telecommunications regulations on privacy include the 
2011  Ministry  of  Industry  and  Information  Technology45    Internet 
Information Services Regulations (“MIIT 2011 Regulation”)46 the 2013 MIIT 
Telecommunications  and  Internet  Personal  User  Data  Protection 
Regulations  (“MIIT  2013  Regulation”);47  the  2013  MIIT  Information 
Security Technology - Guidelines for Personal Information Within Public 
and Commercial Services Systems (“MIIT 2013 Guide”).48 
The general principles of MIIT 2011 Regulation states that ISPs “shall 
provide services in accordance with the principles of equality, free will, 
fairness and good faith.” 
In the  MIIT’s 2013 Guide, the MIIT released a voluntary guide for 
industry  best  practices,  elucidates  eight  principles,  which  are  all  fairly 
standard  for  international  privacy  norms49  and  similar  to  other  nations’ 
                                                 
45
 China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (“MIIT”) is one of the 
country’s main Internet and telecommunications regulators.  
46  Specification  of  Internet  information  service  market  order  and  a  number  of 
provisions,  by  Minister  Miao  Wei,  retrieved  from 
http://www.miit.gov.cn/n11293472/n11293832/n12771663/14417081.html. 
47  Telecommunications  and  Internet  Personal  User  Data  Protection  Regulations, 
December 29, 2013, People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology  Decree,  edited  by  Rogier  Creemers,  retrieved  from 
https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2013/07/16/telecommunications-and-
internet-user-individual-information-protection-regulations/ 
48 Information Security Technology-Guideline for Personal Information Protection 
Within Information System for Public and Commercial Services, 2013, retrieved from 
http://www.pipa.gov.cn/manage/UploadFile/2015518133720563.pdf. 
49 See generally Regulation on the protection of natural persons with regard to the 
processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 
95/46/EC  (General  Data  Protection  Regulation)  (“GDPR”),  available  at  http://eur-2017  DRAFT  17 
privacy principles:50   
1.  Clear Purpose Principle: Data should only be used for a clear 
purpose and should not be used outside of that purpose. 
2.  Minimum and Sufficiency Principle: Companies should only 
handle  the  minimum  amount  of  information  sufficient  for  their 
purpose. Personal information should be deleted after the purpose has 
been achieved. 
3.  Public Notification Principle: Companies should give notice 
to  data  subjects  of  the  purpose,  scope,  use,  security,  and  other 
information related to the data collection. 
4.  Personal Consent Principle: Companies should obtain consent 
before using data. 
5.  Quality  Assurance  Principle:  Companies  should  take 
measures to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data. 
6.  Safety Guarantee Principle: Companies should take measures 
to ensure security of data. 
7.  Good Faith Fulfilling Principle: Companies should act in good 
faith in compliance with legal requirements. 
8.  Clear  Responsibility  Principle:  Companies  should  clearly 
define  responsibilities,  take  appropriate  measures,  and  maintain 
records (for use in potential future investigations).51  
These principles should seem thematically familiar to any international 
privacy  practitioner.52Additionally,  the  MIIT  2013  Guide  includes  the 
following:  special  safeguards  for  sensitive  information,  restrictions  for 
overseas data exports, data breach notification obligations, and information 
on  rights  of  data  subjects.  The  MIIT  2013  Guide  is  the  only  current 
international  state’s  policy  that  mentions  limits  on  transnational  data 
exportation, explicitly prohibiting overseas transfer of data without express 
consent of data subjects or explicit legal or regulatory permission. However, 
                                                 
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=en. 
50
 See generally Fair Information Practice Principles. National Strategy for Trusted 
Identities in Cyberspace. Appendix A. National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
http://www.nist.gov/nstic/NISTIC-FIPPs.pdf. 
51
 Similar guidance requiring that online entities only collect, process, and use of user 
personal information only for legitimate and necessary purposes and with user consent can 
also be found in more recent laws and regulations such as the the Cybersecurity Law 
(National People’s Congress) (2016), State Administration for Industry and Commerce Draft 
Implementation of the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Protection of Consumer 
Rights and Interests (2016), and the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress 
of China’s Draft of the E-commerce Law (2017).  
52  The  profession  of  privacy  practitioner  has  developed  with  the  aid  of  trade 
organizations such as the International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP) at 
https://iapp.org/about. Such organizations offer training and certifications. 18  DRAFT  2017 
the MIIT 2013 Guide is voluntary and does not impose legal obligations upon 
corporations.  
 
C.  Internet Access Privacy Regulations 
 
  A government agency heavily involved in this space is the relatively 
recently formed Cybersecurity Administration of China (CAC), the main 
Chinese Internet content regulator.  
  In 2016, after several drafts, China’s new Cybersecurity Law, a wide 
encompassing law governing online activities, was passed, effective June 1, 
2017. The CAC was the main government body tasked with administering 
the law. Of interest to this paper, under the law, websites must require users 
to disclose their real life identity when registering for website services, a 
strengthening of prior laws in the same vein.53 
  The  Cybersecurity  Law  also  represents  one  of  the  first  national 
legislation in China to establish legal principles for the protection of personal 
data online (as opposed to other past practices which were governed by 
administrative rules, judicial interpretations, government policies and non-
binding industry guidelines). Among other things, the law requires websites 
to protect their users’ personal data and not share it with others, notify users 
of  the  purposes,  means,  and  scope  of  their  data  collection,  obtain  user 
consent, and notify the authorities and users of any data breaches. Websites 
that violate these data protection laws may face fines up to ten times the 
amount of unlawful gains from the improper use of user data or a fine of up 
to 1,000,000 RMB ($140,500), have their employees face fines, and in 
serious cases, have their websites’ operations be terminated. 
In line with some of the cultural elements of Chinese privacy discussed 
previously, the law also asks all persons and organizations online “observe 
public order and respect social morality” and to “provide technical support 
and assistance to public security organs' and state security organs.”54 Online 
service providers themselves are similarly asked to “to obey social morals 
                                                 
53
 The Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China (National People’s 
Congress),    November  7,  2016,  retrieved  from 
http://www.chinalawtranslate.com/cybersecuritylaw/?lang=en.  An  earlier  regulation 
covering this issue was CAC’s Administrative Regulation on Internet Users’ Account Names 
(2015). The regulation also required online users to register accounts on websites with their 
real name, through provision of identification materials. One commentator noted that the real 
name registration requirements “came after a series of corruption scandals among lower-
level officials exposed by internet users,” and seems to apply not only to individuals but also 
to  service  providers.    See  Scaife,  Laura,  Handbook  of  Social  Media  and  the  Law, 
InformaLaw from Routledge, (2015), pp. 117-118. 
54
 The Cybersecurity Law, Articles 12 and 28. 2017  DRAFT  19 
and commercial ethics.”55 Nevertheless, like with most other privacy-related 
regulations in China, these protections under the Cybersecurity Law do not 
appear to extend to governmental actions.  
In 2016, the CAC also published the Draft Administrative Rules on 
Internet  News  Information  Service,  which  imposes  a  number  of  legal 
requirements on “internet news information services” (Internet news content 
providers). Of relevance to privacy, these requirements include the following: 
●  Internet content providers can collect users’ personal identity 
information if the providers have already published their collection 
rules and record retention policies. 
●  User information, other than identity information, may be 
collected only with consent from users. 
●  Internet news providers will be required to retain within China 
for at least 60 days a record of the Internet news published or reposted 
by themselves or any users. Such information must be provided to 
government agencies upon their request. 
●  Internet news providers and users may not copy, publish or 
distribute  the  identifiable  information  or  privacy  information  of 
others, unless otherwise provided by laws or agreed by the relevant 
persons. 
These new regulations, like most new Chinese privacy laws, serve to 
protect individuals’ personal information.  At the same time, in allowing the 
Chinese government to better track online user’s personal information, they 
highlight government exemptions inherent in Chinese theories of privacy 
protection. 
The unique name regulation also enforces a form of transparency in user 
account names. Analyzing this new development through the lens of saving 
face, we can view this regulation as a form of protection of the community – 
enforcing  honesty  in  online  community  relationships.  This  regulation 
arguably does not invade privacy interests because personal information is 
still protected from unwanted disclosure. Thus, though this regulation may at 
first seem at odds with the other privacy-centric, community-focused Chinese 
privacy  laws,  this  is  actually  a  particularly  cogent  example  of  Chinese 
legislation perhaps being formed with the influence of Chinese cultural 
history. 
 
D.  Criminal and Civil Law Privacy Protections 
 
  Chinese citizens also have privacy protection under Chinese Civil and 
Criminal Laws. 
                                                 
55
 The Cybersecurity Law, Articles 9. 20  DRAFT  2017 
  Chinese citizens can protect their privacy rights under the country’s 
tort  law.  China’s  General  Principles  of  Civil  Law  (“GPCL”)56  includes 
protection of the “right of personal name” (GPCL, art. 99), “right of portrait” 
(GPCL, art. 100), “right of reputation” (GPCL, art. 101), 57while the Tort 
Liability Law (“TTL”)58 protects the “right of privacy” (TTL, art. 2).59 Both 
the GPCL and TTL tort rights of privacy have been used in litigation between 
individuals and corporations. It is important to note that, under the TTL, 
“network service providers” (likely to be interpreted as similar to “Internet 
Service Providers” in the West) have special obligations to prevent tortious 
actions committed by users of their services. 
  Three opinions interpreted the GPCL law shortly after enactment: 
(a) Chinese People’s Supreme Court, Opinions on Several Questions 
concerning the Implementation of the GPCL (1988), held that “If anyone 
propagates the privacy of any other person in writing or orally, or fakes acts 
to vilify the personality of other person overtly, or damages other person’s 
reputation by ways of insulting and slandering, which result in a certain 
influence, such act shall be determined as an act infringing the citizen’s right 
of reputation.” 60 
(b) A literary work can damage a person’s reputation by “insulting, 
libeling, or disclosing the privacy of the certain person…in spite of not 
identifying the real name or address…”61; and  
(c)  Infringing  on  another  person’s  “privacy  or  other  personality 
interests…taking tort as the cause to get compensation for spiritual damages,” 
                                                 
56 General Principles of the Civil Law of the People's Republic of China, available at 
http://www.npc.gov.cn/englishnpc/Law/2007-12/12/content_1383941.htm 
57 Under Article 99, citizens enjoy the right to use their personal names as they desire. 
Under Article 100, the use of a citizen's protrain without their consent is prohibited. Under 
Article 101, citizens and legal persons shall enjoy the right of reputation. The personality of 
citizens shall be protected by law, and the use of insults, libel or other means to damage the 
reputation of citizens or legal persons shall be prohibited. 
58  Tort  Liability  Law,    http://www.npc.gov.cn/englishnpc/Law/2007-
12/12/content_1383941.htm. 
59
 Article 2 notes  “Those who infringe upon civil rights and interests shall be subject to 
the tort liability according to this Law. Civil rights and interests used in this Law shall include 
the right to life, the right to health, the right to name, the right to reputation, the right to 
honor, right to self image, right of privacy, marital autonomy, guardianship, ownership, 
usufruct, security interest, copyright, patent right, exclusive right to use a trademark, right to 
discovery, equities, right of succession, and other personal and property rights and interests.” 
 
60
 Chinese People’s Supreme Court, Opinions of the Supreme People’s Court on Several 
Issues concerning the General Principles of the Civil Law of the People’s Republic of China 
(for Trial Implementation) answer 140(1). 
61
 Reply to Several Questions on Adjudicating the Cases of the Rights of Reputation 
(1993) answer 7. 2017  DRAFT  21 
will also be actionable. 62 
  In terms of applications of these laws, cases, like those elsewhere, 
often turn on the facts, but in China the courts are quite explicit about the 
moral underpinnings of the decisions. For example, a court noted in a divorce 
case that “People involved in bigamy or cohabits [cohabitation] with a 
married person can claim their right to privacy to defend any third party, but 
they cannot use right to privacy as the excuse of their immoral act or to 
prohibit their spouse’s right to know. 63  
However, in a more recent case from 2008, we saw a transition from the 
traditional notions of privacy. In the case, Wang Fei v. Zhang Leyi, Daqi.com, 
and Tianya.cn, the Plaintiff Wang Fei sued Zhang Leyi, a friend of his wife 
who had committed suicide supposedly due to Wang’s infidelity, and two 
web  portals  for  Zhang’s  posting  on  those  platforms  information  about 
Wang’s actions, his address, and other personal details.64  Thus, the Wang 
Fei case went to the heart of what most societies see as the core privacy 
values, including identifying an individual and spreading information about 
their most personal history. The definition of privacy the court found in this 
case is relatively close to a Western ideal of privacy, a concept of privacy that 
meant private life, information, space, and peace of private life related to a 
person’s interests and personality that he does not intend to share with others. 
Based on this, and despite Wang’s supposedly immoral acts, the court found 
the right to privacy is infringed by the disclosure or publication of private 
information that a person does not want to disclose to others concerning his 
private life, private areas, or domestic tranquility and connected with his 
interests or his body. 65  
Subsequently, a new version of the Tort law in China was promulgated 
in 2009, which referred at least obliquely to the right of privacy. The Tort 
Law is a broad sweep of a document, including twelve chapters and ninety-
two provisions, and it delves into tort principles and lays out the parameters 
of tort liability. Specifically, “Article 2 of the Tort Law provides that tortious 
liability arises when there is an infringement of ‘civil rights and interests’ a 
                                                 
62
 Interpretation of the Supreme People’s Court Regarding issues of Ascertaining the 
Liability of Compensation for Spiritual Damage for Tort (2001) art. 1. 
63
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.49, 
quoting  Jia  M(2006)  Red  book  of  Divorce  (Wang  Hao  trans) 
http://www.iamlawyer/redbook/redbook.doc, p.48 discussion of Luo Ling v. Wu case.  
64
 Wang Fei v Zhang Leyi, Daqi.com and Tianya.cn, Beijing Chaoyang District Court, 
No. 10930 of 2008. 
65
 Wang Fei v Zhang Leyi, Daqi.com and Tianya.cn, Beijing Chaoyang District Court, 
No. 10930 of 2008. 22  DRAFT  2017 
broad term that refers to personal and property rights, including the right to 
life, the right to health, rights associated with names, reputation rights, the 
right of honor, and the right to one’s image. Also included in Article 2 are the 
rights to privacy.”66 
The most recent guidance on tort liability for privacy can be found in the 
Supreme Court’s publication of Provisions on Several Issues Concerning the 
Application of Law to Adjudicate Civil Disputes Involving Infringement of 
Personal Rights Via Information Networks from 2014. The provisions direct 
courts to support tort claims associated with disclosure by network users and 
network  service  providers  of  private  information  and  other  personal 
information,  such  as  genetic  information,  medical  records,  health 
examination materials, criminal records, home addresses and information 
regarding private activities. Under these provisions, the following are not 
basis for tort claims for disclosure of personal information (emphasis added 
to indicate the exemption again for the amorphous idea of “public interest”): 
○  disclosure with the written consent of the relevant individual 
and within the agreed scope; 
○  disclosure for the public interest to the extent necessary; 
and 
○  disclosure by an educational or scientific entity for public 
interest in connection with academic research or statistical analysis, 
provided that the relevant individual information has been sufficiently 
de-anonymized and the subjects have given written consent. 
The provision also includes a couple of additional “safe harbors” for 
disclosure of personal information: 1) disclosure where the relevant personal 
information has already been publicly disclosed by the relevant individual 
himself or herself online; or 2) has already become public via other lawful 
means. However, in the last two situations, network users and network 
service providers may still be liable if the method of disclosure “violates the 
public interest or social morals” or if the disclosure harms a material interest 
of the individual whose personal information is publicly disclosed. 
  The Ninth Amendments to the PRC Criminal Law (2015) revised the 
former prohibition on selling personal information to a broader prohibition 
(Art. 253): Anyone who sells or provides personal information, in violation 
                                                 
66
 The Legal System of the People's Republic of China, by Daniel C.K. Chou. 3rd ed. 
(2015), pp. 363-364. 2017  DRAFT  23 
of national provisions, to third parties is subject to punishment.6768 There are 
also now increased punishments for such violations. Additionally, this law 
now includes a new provision (Art. 286): network service providers (both 
ISPs and content providers) are subject to criminal fines and punishment for 
leaks of user information that leads to serious consequences. 
An individual action to invade another person’s privacy may not be 
permissible but a corporate action to invade a person’s privacy might well be 
permissible. In Zhang Desheng, Zhong Guifang, and Zhang Zhong v. Yang 
Hongyan, Lu Ying and Yang Jun, (Shanghai 2nd Intermediate People’s Court, 
Order Number 335 (2014)), the intermediate court upheld a decision finding 
a right to privacy violation where an upstairs neighbour had installed a 
camera monitoring the entrance to the downstairs neighbour’s apartment. On 
the other hand, in Yang v. a Property Management Company, (Shanghai 1st 
Intermediate People’s Court, Order Number 798 (2013), the court dismissed 
a  complaint  alleging  a  “right  to  privacy”  violation  where  a  building’s 
management had installed a camera monitoring a common area that included 
views of the plaintiff’s doorway.” 69Individuals can now request information 
about other individuals from their online service providers in China. “Article 
4 [of the China’s Supreme People’s Court (SPC)’s SPC Regulation on 23 
June, 2014] was therefore added to ensure that online tortfeasors could not 
take refuge behind a mask of Internet anonymity to violate the rights of 
others… To our knowledge, this is the first provision in Chinese law that 
permits a private citizen to request another’s private information from a 
                                                 
67
 Note, not mentioned in this article, but in 2013, the Supreme People's Court, Supreme 
People's Procuratorate, and Ministry of Public Security jointly issued Gong Tong Zi [2013], 
No. 12 (Criminal Data Privacy Notice), which defined personal information to include 
“"information and data that could identify a citizens' personal identity or were related to the 
privacy of a citizen, such as their name, age, identification number, marital status, work unit, 
education background, curriculum vitae, home address, and telephone number." 
68
 Note, a prominent prosecution under the previous variant of Article 253 is the case of 
Peter Humphrey, a private investigator hired by the drug giant GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) to 
investigate charges of bribery in its Chinese operations by Chinese authorities. During the 
investigation, Mr. Humphrey collected information on relevant individuals to the case. Mr. 
Humphrey and his wife were later arrested and imprisoned for his illegal collection and sale 
of personal information under Article 253. Although one can see this case as the increase 
scrutiny paid by authorities to Chinese privacy regulations, the case can also be interpreted 
as an example of power of the State to selectively enforce laws against actors seen to be 
detrimental to itself.  
69
 Scott and Greenleaf, Graham, The Emergence of Tort Liability for Online Privacy 
Violations in China (June 1, 2015). (2015) 135 Privacy Laws & Business International 
Report  22-24;  UNSW  Law  Research  Paper  No.  2015-54.  Available  at  SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2636129 p. 22-24, footnotes 21-22. 
 24  DRAFT  2017 
network service provider.70 
What’s the consequence of this suggested liability? Search engines and 
other online service providers may need to consider the development of a 
similar right to be forgotten in China. “it is worth noting that Article 5 of the 
SPC Regulation has the potential to allow a Chinese equivalent of the 
European Union’s so-called ‘right to be forgotten’ to develop, if it is used in 
relation to TLL Article 2. This bears watching over time.” 71 
   When you have a new statute allowing civil liability, you presumably 
generate more case law, as “[o]ther than in the Philippines, no other common 
law jurisdiction has created such statutory rights, or developed a tort of 
invasion of privacy (or its approximation via extending the law of breach of 
confidence).  With  the  additional  clarifications  offered  by  the  SPC 
Regulation, we can expect to see a rise in privacy-related civil actions in 
China that should provide important future guidance for defining the contours 
of China’s “right to privacy” in the online era.” 72 
  Even so, Chinese privacy law has not changed as rapidly as one might 
have expected. There have been a number of new laws, but no (or few) new 
cases. There are some theories positing why the cases have arisen slowly in 
the  privacy  context.  “According  to  legal  scholars,  one  reason  for  the 
discrepancy  may  be  that  Chinese  practitioners  and  courts  have  lacked 
understanding on how to apply Article 36 (the provision permitting civil suits 
against network service providers or network users for online infringement 
of personal rights) in practice, with the result that few actions have been 
initiated by practitioners or accepted by courts since the passage of the TLL 
in 2009.” 73 
                                                 
70
 Livingston, Scott and Greenleaf, Graham, Tort Liability for Online Privacy Violations 
in China: The 2014 SPC Regulation (July 1, 2015). (2015) 136 Privacy Laws & Business 
International Report, 24-27; UNSW Law Research Paper No. 2015-65. Available at SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2677533 
71
 Livingston, Scott and Greenleaf, Graham, Tort Liability for Online Privacy Violations 
in China: The 2014 SPC Regulation (July 1, 2015). (2015) 136 Privacy Laws & Business 
International Report, 24-27; UNSW Law Research Paper No. 2015-65. Available at SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2677533. In 2016, the passage of the new Cybersecurity law also 
introduced a similar “right to be forgotten” provision aimed at network providers, requiring 
them to delete a user’s personal information on their request. See The Cybersecurity Law, 
Article 43 (National People’s Congress) (2016) 
72
 Livingston, Scott and Greenleaf, Graham, The Emergence of Tort Liability for Online 
Privacy  Violations  in  China  (June  1,  2015).  (2015)  135  Privacy  Laws  &  Business 
International Report 22-24; UNSW Law Research Paper No. 2015-54. Available at SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2636129 p. 22-24. 
73
 Livingston, Scott and Greenleaf, Graham, The Emergence of Tort Liability for Online 
Privacy  Violations  in  China  (June  1,  2015).  (2015)  135  Privacy  Laws  &  Business 
International Report 22-24; UNSW Law Research Paper No. 2015-54. Available at SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2636129  p.  22-24,  citing  Rogier  Creemers,  Parsing  the  New 2017  DRAFT  25 
 
E.  Chinese Legislation and Regulations on Privacy, Going Forward 
 
  The aforementioned regulations and laws represent the main slate 
promulgated in recent years.  China’s other sectoral laws include the Basic 
Norms for Electronic Medical Records (Ministry of Health, 2010),74 Social 
Insurance Law (2010),75 Regulations and Administrative Measures for Credit 
Reference  Agencies  (2013).76  There  are  also  securities  regulations  that 
provide assurances of correct information, and allow individuals to correct 
errors, meeting some of the fundamental conditions for the establishment of 
protecting personal information. Insurance regulations requiring confidential 
information be kept secure may also help protect personal privacy.77 In 
medical regulation, there is the Law on Practicing Doctors of the PRC (1988) 
that requires doctors to keep patient confidences. Law on Practicing Doctors 
of  the  PRC  (1988),  art.  37  (10).  Finally,  a  number  of  provinces  and 
municipalities have enacted their own privacy laws.  
In addition to increasing privacy legislation, one critical trend to watch is 
China’s increase in data localization requirements – a trend, which could 
indicate, increased willingness by the government to regulate the privacy 
activities of foreign businesses and  the data of Chinese citizens. A number 
of recent laws, in drafts and implementation in China have included data 
localization requirements.78  Although these are most likely efforts to provide 
                                                 
Internet Rules of China’s Supreme Court, China Copyright and Media, October 11, 2014, 
retrieved from https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2014/10/11/3701/. See also 
the statutory rights found in Japan, South Korea, Macau SAR, Taiwan and Vietnam: see 
‘Civil Code or tort actions’, in Graham Greenleaf Asian Data Privacy Laws: Trade and 
Human Rights Perspectives (OUP, 2014), p474, with details in the respective chapters on 
each country. 
74
 Basic Norms for Electronic Medical Records (Ministry of Health, 2010), available at 
http://www.lawinfochina.com/display.aspx?lib=law&id=8006&CGid= 
75
  Social  Insurance  Law  (2010),  available  at  
http://www.mohrss.gov.cn/gjhzs/GJHZzhengcewenjian/201506/t20150625_212401.htm. 
76
 Asian Data Privacy Laws: Trade & Human Rights Perspectives, p. 224, footnote 184.  
77
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.55-56. 
78
 See, e.g., The Cybersecurity Law (National People’s Congress) (2016) (requiring 
personal information of and important data collected and generated by an operator of critical 
information infrastructure to be stored in China); Draft Counterterrorism Law (National 
People’s Congress) (2014) (requiring all Chinese websites and ISPs to hold data related to 
Chinese business in China; this data localization requirement was later removed due to 
protests in the 2016 promulgated version); Administrative Measures on Management of 
Population  Health  Information,  Trial  Rules  (National  Health  and  Family  Planning 
Commission) (2014) (requiring health institutions must store all medical information in 26  DRAFT  2017 
the Chinese government with greater control of the Internet in China, these 
requirements also affect how much private data is subject to Chinese laws.  It 
remains to be seen whether China will adopt an omnibus data localization 
law, perhaps similar to Russia’s 2015 Data Localization Law.79 
  With all of these burgeoning regulations, perhaps the most pertinent 
question for foreign entities may now be:  Do we even want to do business in 
China given these additional burdens? “As China’s network service providers 
are already tasked with scanning their networks for content harmful to the 
State, the addition of a requirement to monitor content potentially infringing 
another’s civil rights is likely to further increase their operational costs and 
burden.” 80 Civil suit remedies seem minor by U.S. litigation and especially 
by U.S. class action standards, but may have some impact. “Articles 16-18 
[of the SPC] deal with the remedies available against both network users and 
network service providers. They included requirements to make apologies 
and  restore  reputation,  with  the  Court  able  to  publish  its  own  ‘online 
declaration’ concerning a matter, or publish court documents, if this becomes 
necessary (Art. 16). Where infringements result in “asset losses or grave 
spiritual harm”, compensation may be required (Art. 17), and may include 
reasonable expenses and lawyer’s fees of victims (Art. 18). Where it is not 
possible to assess asset losses or an account of profits, the Court may make 
its assessment up to 500,000 yuan (US$80,000).” 81 
  While Chinese privacy law is still fairly undeveloped, China has made 
significant strides in recent years to create new laws governing data privacy 
and confidentiality of personal information. As outlined, some of the major 
                                                 
China). 
79 Russia’s Data Localization Law, which went into effect September 2015, instituted a 
number of requirements for foreign companies processing data of Russian citizens. Many of 
these requirements were seen as invasive or difficult to comply with, according to statements 
by technology companies. The most important requirement in the Russian Data Localization 
Law was a requirement that foreign companies processing data of Russian citizens physically 
process such data within Russia. This effectively required foreign companies to either create 
physical offices in Russia or to hire a Russian data processing company as an intermediary. 
The law has not yet been enforced against any major foreign companies. However, if China 
were to follow Russia’s example and incorporate more data localization requirements, this 
could create numerous new privacy concerns for international businesses seeking to tap the 
Chinese market. 
80
 Livingston, Scott and Greenleaf, Graham, Tort Liability for Online Privacy Violations 
in China: The 2014 SPC Regulation (July 1, 2015). (2015) 136 Privacy Laws & Business 
International Report, 24-27; UNSW Law Research Paper No. 2015-65. Available at SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2677533. 
81
 Livingston, Scott and Greenleaf, Graham, Tort Liability for Online Privacy Violations 
in China: The 2014 SPC Regulation (July 1, 2015). (2015) 136 Privacy Laws & Business 
International Report, 24-27; UNSW Law Research Paper No. 2015-65. Available at SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2677533 2017  DRAFT  27 
principles inherent in the highest level Chinese privacy laws are similar to 
international  privacy  norms  (E.U.  Directive,  APEC  Principles,  etc.). 
Nevertheless,  their  implementation  and  application  must  be  seen  in  the 
Chinese cultural context. 
With the various legal regimes are still unclear, the best way forward for 
privacy  practitioners  is  to  ensure  compliance  with  current  laws  and 
proactively adapt practices that are in touch with Chinese consumer culture 
and its acceptance of community and governmental interest in private affairs. 
 
III. PRACTICAL LESSONS 
 
It is difficult to predict with great certainty how privacy law in China will 
develop.  Chinese  privacy  laws  are  still  in  their  early  stages  of 
implementation. There is no comprehensive national privacy law, and the 
regulations  and  governmental  guidance  that  exist  contain  elements  
nominally similar to  international norms (e.g. notice, choice, security, etc.) 
in  many  respects  even  if  they  include,  as  applied,  various  Chinese 
characteristics (e.g. exemptions for the government and the public interest). 
As described above, examining the unique historical and cultural factors will 
provide some clues to how privacy law will develop and be applied in China.  
Looking at the collective, even in 21st century China, will have some 
positive benefits, “…if privacy encourages public participation in political 
decisions by enabling citizens to form judgments and express preferences on 
social  issues,  establishing  adequate  privacy  protection  will  provide  a 
harmonious environment for China to achieve greater democracy pursuant to 
the Chinese Constitution.” 82 
Balancing is the key factor in creating a structure to support privacy rights 
in China going forward, as well as the participation and consideration of 
several stakeholders. When considering privacy in the balance, certain values 
emerge. Who is more important, collective or individual? Shall we consider 
an elite or upper class rule or society as a whole? To create this balance,  it is 
“wrong  to  put  privacy  against  other  public  interests.  Privacy  involves 
establishing  a  balance  between  individual  and  public…Therefore,  when 
China defines different privacy interests, it is important to bear in mind that 
privacy interests will inevitably compete, collide, and coexist with other 
existing values in China, such as freedom of expression, freedom of the press, 
law enforcement, protection of the revenue, and the effective operation of 
                                                 
82 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy 
Standards and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information 
Privacy Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, 
pp.9-10. 
 28  DRAFT  2017 
government. Privacy is significant, but it is not everything. Absolute privacy 
would mean a total withdrawal of an individual from our society. This will 
be undesirable for most Chinese people.” 83 
Privacy might have been considered in China as a way for the upper 
classes to keep themselves separate and to keep the lower classes out. In 
modern China, however, privacy has changed to allow individuals to control 
the flow of information about themselves on the internet- a more democratic, 
populist  value.  84  Further,  there  are  gender  and  generational  issues  to 
consider. As women and children become more financially independent 
(move to the cities, into data rather than farm-based economies) they will 
demand more privacy as part of their individuality.85 
Following is a list of practical suggestions to help privacy practitioners 
proactively protect their companies and their clients from legal privacy risks 
in China.  
 
A.  Designing the Best China-Centric Privacy Policies 
 
1.  Focus on community values 
 
Given the Chinese emphasis on community values, it is advisable to 
design privacy policies and practices in context of an understanding of 
Chinese community values. For example, in framing a discussion of privacy 
policies, include a discussion of the values of the company’s particular online 
community and explain how the draft privacy practices protect those values. 
 
2.  Look to ethics, not just law 
 
Look to ethics first, not just the law. China does not yet have strong 
privacy laws, so the best basis for any privacy-related policy is to couch the 
program in ethical precepts.86 Chinese consumers may also be particularly 
swayed by ethical arguments for privacy practices, given historical focus on 
                                                 
83
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.7. 
84
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.68. 
85
 Wang, Hao, Protecting Privacy in China, A Research on China’s Privacy Standards 
and the Possibility of Establishing the Right to Privacy and the Information Privacy 
Protection Legislation in Modern China, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, p.71. 
86
 As discussed earlier, Article 9 of new the Cybersecurity Law even asks online service 
providers to “obey social mores and commercial ethics.”   2017  DRAFT  29 
ethical bases for laws. To put this in practice, include an ethical basis when 
justifying the proposed privacy policies, in addition to providing the legal 
basis for the policies.  
 
3.  Use culture for context 
 
In each country or region, it is wise to expect that different cultural values 
of privacy affect what the company’s users want from corporations. In the 
U.S., users may view privacy almost as a property right (protecting private 
information a user owns). In China, users may instead view privacy as a 
shield, protecting their private lives from community exposure or the shame 
that comes from losing face. Recognize this distinction in privacy policies by 
emphasizing how the company will protect the confidences of customers, 
employees, and users and prevent information exposure. 
 
B.  Understanding Chinese consumer expectations 
 
1.  Chinese consumers may have fewer privacy expectations 
 
Chinese consumers may place less value on privacy, when compared to 
other competing values or obligations. This may be reflected in what a 
company’s  user  community  and  consumers  value.  For  example,  the 
company’s  users  may  care  more  or  be  affected  more  by  corporate 
transparency efforts than privacy protection efforts. Thus, shareholders may 
receive a better return on investment for putting resources into creating and 
publishing transparency reports rather than spending resources on creating 
additional protections for personal data. 
 
2.  Chinese consumers do care about privacy 
 
At the same time, privacy practitioners should not assume that Chinese 
consumers do not care at all about privacy. Cultural expectations of privacy 
may be different, but privacy is still valued in China, especially privacy 
concerning confidentiality of personal information. Keep in mind the notions 
of “shame” and “saving face,” and the impact on the individual of the release 
of confidential information that may shame them in front of their community. 
It is important to remember that, while Chinese consumers may have a 
different conception of privacy rights, this is no excuse for not protecting the 
privacy  of  your  consumers  or  failing  to  follow  the  law.  Minimal  data 
protection protocols are a worthwhile investment on an international, cross-
cultural basis.  
 30  DRAFT  2017 
3.  Chinese consumers may be more open to data collection/use 
 
Chinese consumers may be more pragmatic about companies using or 
buying their private information. If the data collector can make a strong case 
for why users should give their data (e.g., in exchange for tailored features), 
it is likely that Chinese consumers will be more swayed by these arguments 
than European consumers, for many of whom privacy is an almost inalienable 
right. Privacy, in the European sense of the concept, is not a fundamental 
Chinese value, so Chinese consumers may be less constrained by adherence 
to pre-existing notions of strict privacy rights, when compared to Western 
consumers.  
 
Understanding the cultural and historical factors behind China's privacy 
laws today provides a path forward in creating policies and programs that will 
best engage Chinese consumers and likely minimize future legal compliance 
risks. These practical privacy lessons can be used when conducting due 
diligence  on  new  Chinese  business  interests,  creating  new  policies  for 
overseas corporate expansion, or interacting with Chinese user communities. 
Corporations  wary  of  changing  privacy  laws  can  follow  the  model  of 
technology companies working together to influence upcoming legislation, 
though it is uncertain if this model is as effective in China as it can be in the 
U.S. Another alternative could be to gather together in an industry forum to 
set standards for privacy. This solution not only resolves inter-company 
conflicts, but also may function like an insurance pool to reduce risks. 87 
As noted, Chinese privacy law is still fairly underdeveloped, and it is 
difficult  to  predict  how  the  laws  will  change  in  the  future.  However, 
understanding the current state of Chinese privacy law, as well as the cultural 
and historical factors that might influence its development and application, 
will help organizations to succeed in the growing Chinese market.  
 
IV. POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
A.  China - National and International Policy 
 
  On a national scale, China has a fair distance to go before privacy 
laws become a cohesive body of law. As we’ve seen, the lack of strong 
privacy laws has made it difficult for some persons and companies to litigate, 
which may give rise to some unfair results if not remedied. Specifically, we 
recommend strengthening provisions protecting personal information so that 
                                                 
87
 Tim Hume, “Chinese Web Giants Join Forces in Crackdown on Online Rumors,” 
CNN, August 2, 2013 , available at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/08/02/world/asia/china-
online-rumor-crackdown/. 2017  DRAFT  31 
corporations are held to a consistent standard that is understandable by 
consumers.  
  On an international scale, there is great potential for China to set the 
next generation’s standards for privacy. With China’s market power and 
increasing  relevance  in  geopolitical  discussions  of  technology,  China’s 
influence cannot be underestimated. Currently, the E.U. is by far the world’s 
leader in pushing privacy norms for the international community. This is 
mostly achieved through the use of long arm jurisdiction, as recent EU 
privacy laws have succeeded in regulating even foreign companies with very 
weak ties to the E.U. Other countries, notably Russia with its latest Data 
Localization  Law,  have  also  attempted  to  regulate  foreign  corporations 
through similarly weak ties. The efficacy of these efforts has generally 
depended on the economic and political power of the nations proposing said 
regulation.  
China, then, has the choice of approaching privacy law in an aggressive 
manner, similar to that of the EU, in order to enforce actions from foreign 
corporations, which would likely sway the legislation of other nations. Given 
the  importance  of  privacy  laws  for  information  technology  companies, 
extraterritorial  jurisdiction  for  Chinese  privacy  laws  could  create  key 
advantages for China in international negotiations.  
Alternatively, China could choose to specifically refrain from pursuing 
stricter privacy laws, as but do so in a manner that contradicts EU privacy 
laws. This could lead to intriguing trade results as corporations choose to do 
business (and choose to lobby their governments) based on nation’s laws. 
Simply put, China can use privacy laws to cement its place as a global leader, 
not only in privacy, but also technology as a whole.  
One overlooked piece in this international privacy puzzle may be the 
future role of APEC in determining privacy standards. Currently, the United 
States is very active in APEC privacy discussions. However, this could 
change, if China were to choose to put more pressure on its neighbors in this 
realm. A united pan-Asian bloc could definitely create some interesting 
international privacy norms, and the clearest choice for leading that kind of 
endeavor would be China. 
 
B.  Foreign Companies 
 
  There are two ways to view the impact of a stronger Chinese privacy 
law system on the U.S. and the Western world at large. First, one could argue 
that a complicated, piecemeal system (as we have now in China) is confusing 
and easily manipulated by Chinese regulators against foreign companies. If 
so,  it  would  make  sense  for  foreign  companies  to  lobby  the  Chinese 
government or their own governments to put pressure on China to clarify 32  DRAFT  2017 
these laws.  
  However, it is more likely that a loosely connected body of privacy 
law  acts  in  the  favor  of  foreign  companies.  More  regulations  or  more 
enforcement of regulations would necessarily create greater requirements for 
foreign  corporations  to  comply  with  Chinese  privacy  laws.  Thus,  it  is 
probably more advantageous for technology companies to not advocate for 
stronger laws or a more unified national body of  privacy law.  
 
C.  Foreign Governments 
 
  Foreign governments may have incentive to attempt to influence the 
direction of Chinese privacy laws, both to protect their own technology 
industries as well as their own influence on international privacy norms. For 
example, if China were to strengthen privacy laws, in a manner more similar 
to EU privacy regulations, then the U.S. could be seen as falling behind on 
privacy rights. If China were to attempt increased extraterritorial jurisdiction 
over foreign companies dealing with Chinese consumers, then this would 
clearly affect international geopolitical considerations. Finally, international 
collaboration  with  China  on  the  direction  of  privacy  norms  could  be 
advantageous or disadvantageous for different nations, depending on goals.  
 
CONCLUSION 
 
  In this paper, we’ve discussed the current state of Chinese privacy 
laws, in light of a selection of cultural factors that may have influenced and 
may  continue  to  influence  the  future  direction  of  such  laws.  With  this 
understanding, we then offered recommendations for privacy practitioners 
and technology companies in general. Finally, we looked at some policy 
options for China, foreign companies, and foreign nations, giving the various 
interests of each particular type of party.  
As mentioned, it is impossible to perfectly predict how China’s privacy 
laws will develop. It is also impossible to completely accurately pinpoint how 
Chinese cultural values have directly influenced current laws. However, it is 
the Authors’ hope that this Article will advance scholarly discussions around 
Chinese privacy laws, as well as the study of privacy and law, in general, in 
context of cultural considerations. After all, all nations are a product of 
unique cultural factors, and studying cultural factors is imperative for the true 
understanding  of  any  legal  system.  In  other  words,  while  this  Article 
specifically attempted to unmask the true face of Chinese privacy law, there 
are still many questions left to answer - not only about Chinese laws, but 
about laws in general, and about our national and international values of 
privacy. 2017  DRAFT  33 
 
* * * 
 