Unintended  Consequences:  The  Impact of the Court's
Recent Cases on  Structural  Ineffective  Assistance  of
Counsel  Claims
Advocates seeking indigent defense reform have often any indigent defendant subject to that system is likely to
relied on civil litigation to prospectively enforce the Sixth receive ineffective assistance, regardless of the other factors
LAUREN
Amendment right to counsel and to attack structural present in his or her individual criminal case.
SUDEALL
deficiencies of indigent defense systems-such as under- Given the difference in posture and nature between
LUCAS*
funding-that are likely to lead to system-wide ineffective these claims and postconviction ineffective assistance
Assistant Professor assistance. Although the United States Supreme Court has claims raised in the criminal context, courts faced with such
of Law, Georgia addressed myriad aspects of postconviction ineffective claims have had to decide what standard to apply. In the
State University assistance of counsel claims made in the criminal context, criminal context, courts have typically analyzed ineffective
College of Law particularly in the last decade or so,' many of these cases assistance of counsel claims by applying the standard set
have had little direct bearing on the way in which advocates forth in Strickland v.W ashington,2 asking whether counsel's
have attempted to enforce the Sixth Amendment in the civil conduct was deficient (i.e., was it reasonable under pre-
context. The Supreme Court has never directly addressed vailing professional norms) and whether the defendant was
structural ineffective assistance of counsel claims or the prejudiced by such conduct (i.e, but for counsel's deficient
standard that should be applied to such claims. conduct, is there a reasonable probability that the outcome
The Court's most recentcases in its right to counsel line of the proceeding would have been different).3
of jurisprudence are no different in that they address In contrast, many of the courts analyzing prospective
neither civil right to counsel claims nor prospective claims of ineffective assistance in the civil context have
enforcement of the Sixth Amendment. However, the way in eschewed that standard in favor of a different standard. The
which they redefine the Sixth Amendment's relevance dominant approach to such claims is set forth in Luckey v.
pretrial and their pragmatic approach to criminal justice Harris4, a case decided by the Eleventh Circuit Court of
issues may have the unintended effect of paving an easier Appeals.  Because the plaintiffs in Luckey were seeking
road to the vindication of structural claims in the civil prospective enforcement of their Sixth Amendment right to
context. counsel, the Luckey court applied the standard used to
assess claims for injunctive relief, requiring plaintiffs to
demonstrate "the likelihood of substantial and immediate
I. Treatment of Structural Ineffective Assistance Claims irreparable injury, and the inadequacy of remedies at law."6
in the Civil Context
The Luckey court and others following in its stead have
The theory underlying civil claims alleging structural
expressly rejected the application of the Strickland standard
violations of the right to counsel is typically that systemic
deficiencies present throughout a public defense system- to this context, reasoning that the factors favoring defer-
which may include inadequate resources, delays in the ential analysis of counsel's performance in the postconvic-
appointment of counsel, inadequate attorney supervision, tion context-"concerns  for finality, concern that extensive
post-trial burdens would discourage counsel from accept-
or crushing public defender caseloads-deny indigent
ing cases, and concern for the independence. of counsel"-
defendants their right to counsel (or to the effective assis-
tance of counsel) in violation of the Sixth Amendment. do not apply where prospective relief is being sought.7
Such claims are often brought as class action lawsuits,
banding together all indigent defendants who have been II. The Court's Broader Conception of the Right to
charged or who will be charged in the future with criminal Counsel and Its Implications for Structural Claims
offenses that make them eligible for incarceration (but who The Court's recent Sixth Amendment cases do not address
have not yet been convicted or sentenced), thus subjecting either systemic or prospective claims, but their approach to
them to the indigent defense system at issue now or the Sixth Amendment's right to counsel does indirectly
sometime in the future. The aim in such cases is to show that provide some encouragement for civil plaintiffs litigating
the indigent defense system is so inherently dysfunctional- structural ineffectiveness claims. In particular, the Court's
and the flaws of that system so universally apparent-that recognition that the right to counsel is not equated with the
Federal Sentencing Reporter, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 1o6-io9, ISSN 1053-9867, electronic ISSN 1533-8363.
© 2012 Vera Institute of Justice. All rights reserved. Please direct requests for permission to photocopy
or reproduce article content through the University of California Press's Rights and Permissions website,
http://www.ucpressjournals.com/reprintlnfo.asp.  DOI: Io.I525/fsr.2o12.5.2.Io6.
FEDERAL  SENTENCING  REPORTER  • VOL.  25,  NO.  2  • DECEMBER  2012right to a fair trial (and, as a result, we can conceive of Sixth a reasonable probability that he would have been tried by
Amendment harm or injury that may not relate to the trial a different jury.'7 By broadening the right to counsel's scope
or trial outcomes), the Court's willingness to recognize of applicability and the means by which ineffective assis-
specific pretrial duties that counsel must fulfill, and the tance can be demonstrated, these decisions provide civil
Court's pragmatic approach to the functioning of the plaintiffs with a broader definition of potential injury,
criminal justice system, are all helpful to plaintiffs expanding both when and how it might occur and thus the
attempting to show that structural deficiencies are likely to number of ways in which structural deficiencies might lead
lead to Sixth Amendment violations in the future. to its potential infliction.
In Missouri v. Frye,8 the Court held that counsel's failure In making this leap, the Lafler-Frye Court did not go so
to inform his client of a favorable plea offer constituted far as to eliminate  Strickland's prejudice requirement; the
ineffective assistance of counsel.9 In doing so, the Court Court was very clear in confining itself to Strickland's two-
made the important holding-necessary to its analysis in prong inquiry. In that respect, it cannot provide any clear
Lafler v.C ooper,0' decided the same day-that the right to support for the inapplicability of that standard in the pro-
counsel extends to the negotiation and consideration of plea spective enforcement context, nor can it provide anything
offers that lapse or are rejected."  In Lafler, the Court held but very indirect support for the idea that Strickland's
that the petitioner had been prejudiced by counsel's defi- prejudice requirement should not apply at all to prospective
cient performance in erroneously advising the petitioner to claims for relief.8 The Court was very clear, however, that it
reject a pending plea offer and proceed to trial (following values not only that conduct of counsel which bears on the
trial, the petitioner had been convicted and sentenced outcome of the trial itself or on the specific question of
accordingly).'2 Ultimately, the Lafler Court rejected the guilt, but also that conduct which "undermine[s] the proper
government's position that "[a]  fair trial wipes clean any functioning of the adversarial process" and that "which
deficient performance by defense counsel during plea cause[s] the defendant to lose benefits he would have
bargaining."'3 received in the ordinary course but for counsel's ineffective
First and foremost, these recent Court holdings assistance.' 9 So, the definition of possible injury resulting
establish that the right to counsel guarantees more than just from counsel's deficient conduct is no longer limited solely
the right to a fair trial.'4 Perhaps the most significant con- to conviction or a harsher sentence; instead, it may take
tribution of Lafler and Frye to Sixth Amendment jurispru- a variety of forms, including the missed opportunity to
dence is that they have redefined the Sixth Amendment as accept a plea offer. Translated to the civil context, where an
focused not solely on the reliability of the ultimate verdict indigent defendant-plaintiff must demonstrate "the likeli-
and the fairness of the trial itself, but instead on the hood of substantial and immediate irreparable injury" to
procedural fairness of the adversarial process preceding the prove a prospective claim for relief, a plaintiff need no
trial.'5 This key aspect of their holdings is relevant to longer demonstrate that systemic deficiencies would make
structural ineffective assistance claims in two ways. First, it conviction more likely than not, but instead has a broader
emphasizes the importance of enforcing the right to range of outcomes on which to measure the effect of
counsel not only in relation to the trial, but in relation to all counsel's potential shortcomings. Whereas it may be diffi-
of the "critical stages" preceding it.'6 In other words, the cult for civil claimants to draw a direct connection between
Court is concerned not just with counsel's ability to systemic deficiencies and trial outcomes, given the myriad
effectively perform aspects of representation that will bear factors that may intervene in the interim, it will be a less
directly on issues of guilt or innocence or that will have daunting task for those same claimants to demonstrate how
a direct bearing on the trial, but further requires effective systemic deficiencies will inevitably result in missed
assistance with regard to any pretrial duty performed dur- opportunities or "los[t] benefits"-such as missed filing
ing a "critical stage." Second, it reconceives the range of deadlines or the failure to file specific pretrial motions-
"outcomes" that may be relevant under the Strickland resulting from a lack of time or resources.
standard, making it possible for a defendant to demonstrate Additionally, in these and other recent cases, the Court
ineffective assistance not only by demonstrating that has demonstrated a willingness to indirectly impose pro-
counsel's deficient conduct made his conviction more likely spective duties on counsel during pretrial proceedings. At
than not, but also by demonstrating that had counsel pro- the very least, the Court has recognized that a fair trial
vided effective assistance at an earlier critical stage, there is cannot substitute for duties that go unfulfilled pretrial, and
a reasonable probability that the outcome of that stage itself that when specific duties are not fulfilled, the Court will
would have been different. For example, although errors make a de facto finding of deficient performance. Although
committed by counsel during voir dire allowing biased not a severe departure from past precedent, this does cut
jurors on the jury or the failure to challenge racially moti- back some on the view expressed in Strickland that "the
vated strikes by the prosecution may not undermine the proper measure of attorney performance remains simply
ultimate reliability of the trial, under the Lafler and Frye reasonableness under prevailing professional norms" and
approach, the defendant need not demonstrate an effect on that "[m]ore specific guidelines are not appropriate ..  .20
the ultimate finding of guilt, but may instead demonstrate For example, in Padilla v. Kentucky,"' the Court held that
that but for counsel's deficient conduct, there is counsel has a duty to advise her client of the collateral
FEDERAL  SENTENCING  REPORTER  •  VOL.  25,  NO.  2  - DECEMBER  2012consequences of a guilty plea,22 and in Missouri v. Frye2,3 pragmatic view in giving meaning to the Sixth Amend-
the Court held that defense counsel has a duty to commu- ment-for example, by recognizing that counsel cannot
nicate to her client the terms of a plea offer made by the fulfill certain duties without access to adequate resources-
prosecution.24 In earlier cases, like Wiggins v. Smith25 and it will benefit indigent defendants litigating civil right to
Rompilla v. Beard,26 the Court made clear defense counsel's counsel claims.
responsibility to conduct pretrial mitigation investigation in
capital cases. Thus, the Court has provided some recogni- Ill. Conclusion: An Easier Road Ahead for Civil
tion, albeit in limited circumstances, that the effective Claimants?
assistance of counsel can in some respects be boiled down In the wake of the Supreme Court's last term, it is likely that
to discrete duties that counsel must fulfill in every case. many will focus on Lafler and Frye's capability to expand the
These duties-some of which the Court has already universe of possible criminal ineffective assistance of
imposed and others that it easily could in future cases-are counsel claims. Their lesser considered impact may be on
often made impossible by structural deficiencies, such as structural right to counsel claims and the way in which the
severe underfunding or public defenders carrying crushing Court's reasoning provides civil claimants with additional
caseloads. The further the Court continues down this path ways in which to establish their entitlement to prospective
of identifying specific pretrial duties-by finding the failure relief based on systemic deficiencies.
to fulfill the duty adequate grounds for deficient perfor- The Court is unlikely to chime in about the appropriate
mance-and to the extent systemic deficiencies make any standard to be applied in these cases, and its blind adher-
of these duties all but impossible to fulfill, it will be a much ence to the Strickland framework may make it difficult to
clearer path toward arguing that those deficiencies lead to conceive of it endorsing Strickland's total abandonment,
an increased "likelihood of substantial and immediate even in the civil context. But, its evolved understanding of
irreparable injury." the Sixth Amendment-its reach, its applicability to the
Last, the Court's recent opinions in this area have taken pretrial context, and its ability to articulate specific pretrial
a pragmatic rather than formalist approach to enforcing the duties of counsel-will be helpful nonetheless to civil
right to counsel. In Frye, the Court recognized that, given claimants needing to show a link between system-wide
the centrality of plea bargaining, "ijn  today's criminal deficiencies and the likelihood that counsel will not be in
justice system.., the negotiation of a plea bargain, rather a position to provide effective assistance in the future.
than the unfolding of a trial, is almost always the critical The right to counsel that exists in the wake of Lafler and
point for a defendant."27 Similarly, in Lafler, the Court Frye is a more robust version of the pretrial right to counsel,
acknowledged the "reality" that most criminal cases are broadening the range of opportunities for defendants to
resolved by pleas, and that for the right to effective assis- enforce that right and the means by which counsel's pretrial
tance to have any force, it would have to have real meaning effectiveness may be assessed. The Court's demonstrated
in the plea bargaining context.28 In Maples v. Thomas,'9 the willingness to depart from a purely trial-centered definition
Court reasoned that a capital defendant who is represented of Sixth Amendment injury, to expect a certain level of
by counsel in name only may, as a practical matter, have conduct from counsel even when that conduct does not
been abandoned by counsel for purposes of overcoming bear on the trial itself, and to take a more pragmatic
procedural default.30 That same pragmatism would be approach to effectuate the Sixth Amendment right suggests
welcomed in the civil context where courts may be making an easier path for indigent defendants hoping to vindicate
decisions about whether, in practice, a lawyer who is paid their right to counsel through structural challenges made in
a nominal sum to handle a criminal case or appeal would be the civil context.
in any position to offer effective assistance, or whether
Notes
a system that drastically undercompensates attorneys will
be able to attract competent counsel or counsel who can *  I am grateful to Courtney Anderson, Russell Covey, Caren
Myers Morrison, and Nirej Sekhon for their thoughtful
afford to spend the requisite amount of time on their
comments.
appointed (vs. private) cases. For example, in Simmons v.
See, e.g., Missouri v. Frye, 132 S. Ct. 1399 (2012); Lafler v.
State Public Defender,3' the Iowa Supreme Court held that Cooper, 132 S. Ct. 1376 (2012); Padilla v. Kentucky, 130 S. Ct.
a $1500 fee cap on court-appointed appeals "would in many 1473 (2010); Rompilla v. Beard, 545 U.S. 374 (2005); Wiggins
cases substantially undermine the right of indigents to the v. Smith, 539 U.S. 510 (2003); Williams v. Taylor, 529 U.S. 362
effective assistance of counsel."32  In reaching this conclu- (2000).
2  Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984).
sion, the court reasoned that a lawyer working under such 3  Id. at 687-88, 694.
a fee system would find it difficult to make a living, that the 4  Luckey v. Harris, 860 F.2d 1012 (11th Cir. 1988).
fee cap would have a chilling effect on qualified lawyers 5  The Constitution Project, Nat'l Right to Counsel Comm., Jus-
accepting such appointed cases, and that paying such a low tice Denied: America's Continuing Neglect of Our
fee for appointed cases would pit a lawyer's economic Constitutional Right to Counsel at 112 (2009), available at
http://www.constitutionproject.org/manage/file/139.pdf;  see
interests against the dient's interest in effective represen-
also, e.g., Lavallee v. Justices in Hampden Superior Court, 812
tation.33 To the extent the Court's reasoning in its more N.E.2d 895, 905 (Mass.  2004); New York County Lawyers'
recent cases encourages other courts to adopt a similarly Association v. State of New York, 294 A.D.2d 69, 74 (N.Y.A.D. 1
FEDERAL  SENTENCING  REPORTER  • VOL.  25,  NO.  2  • DECEMBER  2012Dept. 2002); Rivera v. Rowland, 1996 WL 636475, at *5 (Conn. right to counsel as the right to the effective assistance of
Super. Oct. 22, 1996) (all applying Luckey standard). counsel were based on the Due Process Clause's entitlements
6  Luckey, 860 F.2d at 1017-18. to a fair trial and just results).
7  Id. at 1017; see also, e.g., Simmons v. State Public Defender, 19 Lafler, 132 S.C t. at 1388.
20  Strickland, 466 U.S. at 688.
791 N.W.2d 69 (Iowa 2010).
8  Frye, 132 S. Ct. 1399 (2012). 21  Padilla v. Kentucky, 130 S. Ct. 1473 (2010).
22  Id. at 1483.
9  Id. at 1408.
10 Lafer, 132 S. Ct. 1376 (2012). 23  Frye, 132 S. Ct. 1399 (2012).
"  Frye, 132 S. Ct. at 1406-08. 24  Id. at 1408 ("This Court now holds that, as a general rule,
12 Lafter, 132 S. Ct. at 1388-91. defense counsel has a duty to communicate formal offers from
13 Id. at 1388. the prosecution to accept a plea on terms and conditions that
14 Id.; see also Justin F. Marceau, Embracing a New Era of Ineffec- may be favorable to the accused.").
tive Assistance of Counsel, 14 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 1161,  1182 25 Wiggins v. Smith, 539 U.S. 510 (2003).
(2012) (noting that an "established line of cases and scholar- 26  Rompilla v. Beard, 545 U.S. 374 (2005).
ship that supports the view that the right to counsel serves 27  Frye, 132 S. Ct. at 1407.
goals beyond safeguarding against trial unfairness or verdict 28  Lafler, 132 S. Ct. at 1388 ("Afair trial wipes clean any deficient
reliability"). performance by defense counsel during plea bargaining. That
15  Id. ("[H]ere the question is not the fairness or reliability of the position ignores the reality that criminal justice today is for the
trial, but the fairness and regularity of the processes that most part a system of pleas, not a system of trials.") (citing
preceded it."). Frye, 132 S. Ct. at 1386); see also Lafler, id. ("[Tihe right to
16 Id. at 1385 (reiterating that that all criminal defendants have adequate assistance of counsel cannot be defined or enforced
the right to the effective assistance of counsel at every without taking account of the central role plea bargaining plays
"critical stage"  of the proceedings, including those that in securing convictions and determining sentences.") (citing
occur pre-trial). Frye, 132 S. Ct. at 1386).
17  Marceau, supra note 14, at 1194-1200. 29  Maples v. Thomas, 132 S. Ct. 912 (2012).
18  Given that the prejudice requirement in Strickland stems largely 30  Id. at 924-27.
from due process, it would seem that as the focus on fair results 31  Simmons v. State Public Defender, 791 N.W.2d 69 (Iowa
decreases, so too would the need for a prejudice requirement. 2010).
Cf. United States v. Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. 140, 147 (2006) 32  Id. at 87.
(Scalia, J., dissenting) (explaining that early cases defining the 33 Id. at 87-88.
FEDERAL  SENTENCING  REPORTER  - VOL.  25,  NO.  2  - DECEMBER  2012 109