DRAFT 
COMPUTER AS CONFIDANT:  
DIGITAL INVESTMENT ADVICE AND THE FIDUCIARY STANDARD 
 
Nicole G. Iannarone1 
 
Automated  investment  advisers  permeate  the  investment  industry.2    Digital  investment 
advisers are the fastest growing segment of financial technology (fintech) and are disrupting 
traditional investment advisory delivery models.3 Proponents of digital investment advice, a 
platform also known as “robo-advisers,” claim that they can provide fiduciary level investment 
advisory services at a fraction of the cost of traditional human investment advisers.  Critics 
disagree.  Nevertheless, by 2020, robo-advisers will digitally manage $2 trillion in assets, growing 
over 3,000% from 2015.4  One industry observer predicts that in five years, “[r]obo-advisory 
services will become mainstream.”5  Robo-advisers are becoming so ubiquitous that the Chartered 
Financial Analyst (CFA) examination will, beginning in 2019, expand the examination areas to 
include  questions  on  “artificial  intelligence,  automated  investment  services  and  mining 
unconventional sources of data.”6  U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulators 
began examining digital investment advisers in 2017.7 
The computer-led investment advisory service model may be growing particularly quickly due 
to a confluence of social and political factors including an increased regulatory focus on the 
different standards applicable to investment advice providers, a so-called retirement gap with a 
                                                 
1 Assistant Clinical Professor and Director, Investor Advocacy Clinic, Georgia State University College of Law.   
2  Mary  Jo  White,  OPENING  REMARKS  AT  THE  FINTECH  FORUM  (Nov.  14,  2016), 
https://www.sec.gov/news/statement/white-opening-remarks-fintech-forum.html ("The last few years have seen rapid 
growth in the availability and popularity of automated investment advisory programs."). 
3  PWC,  BLURRED  LINES:  HOW  FINTECH  IS  SHAPING  FINANCIAL  SERVICES  at  3  (2016), 
https://www.pwc.com/il/en/home/assets/pwc_fintech_global_report.pdf  ("FinTech  is  a  dynamic  segment  at  the 
intersection of the financial services and technology sectors where technology-focused start-ups and new market 
entrants innovate the products and services currently provided by the traditional financial services industry."); CFA 
INSTITUTE, FINTECH SURVEY REPORT at 16 (2016), https://www.cfainstitute.org/Survey/fintech_survey.PDF ("robo-
advisers are still considered to be the technology that will have the greatest impact on financial services industry both 
1 year and 5 years from now.").  
4 Accenture, THE RISE OF ROBO-ADVICE at 2 (2015), https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/PDF-2/Accenture-
Wealth-Management-Rise-of-Robo-Advice.pdf (projecting robo-advisers at end of 2015 to manage "between $55 
billion and $60 billion”); A.T. KEARNEY, HYPE VS. REALITY: THE COMING WAVES OF “ROBO” ADOPTION at 26 (2015), 
https://www.atkearney.com/documents/10192/7132014/Hype+vs.+Reality_The+Coming+Waves+of+Robo+Adopti
on.pdf/9667a470-7ce9-4659-a104-375e4144421d (predicting $2 trillion under robo-adviser management by 2020); 
U.S.  SECURITIES  &  EXCHANGE  COMMISSION,  TRANSCRIPT  OF  FINTECH  FORUM:  THE  EVOLVING  FINANCIAL 
MARKETPLACE (hereinafter SEC FinTech Forum) at 21 (2016), www.sec.gov/spotlight/fintech/transcript-111416.pdf 
(robo-adviser industry "could grow to as large as 2.2 trillion dollars in assets under management by the year 2020."). 
5 A.T. Kearney, supra note 4 at 10. 
6 Trevor Hunnicutt, CFA Exam to Add Artificial Intelligence, “Big Data” Questions, REUTERS NEWS, (May 23, 
2017). 
7  SEC  Office  of  Compliance  Inspections  and  Examinations,  EXAM  PRIORITIES  FOR  2017,  at  2, 
https://www.sec.gov/about/offices/ocie/national-examination-program-priorities-2017.pdf  (describing  examination 
of robo-advisers as priority); Mary Jo White, KEYNOTE ADDRESS AT THE SEC-ROCK CENTER ON CORPORATE 
GOVERNANCE  SILICON  VALLEY  INITIATIVE  (2016),  https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/chair-white-silicon-valley-
initiative-3-31-16.html ("As part of our effort to monitor emerging automated investment models, staff from our 
National Exam Program are examining robo-advisors."). 2  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
lack of affordable investment advice, and an increasing comfort with digital platforms.8 This short 
article begins by describing those factors in Part I before discussing, in Part II, the wide-ranging 
definitions of robo-advisers and categories of distinction between them.  Part III shifts the focus 
to the regulatory framework and standard of care owed by robo-advisers operating under the 
Investment Advisers Act.  The essay concludes with a two-pronged recommendation for the 
regulation of robo-advisers in the near term.  First, regulators should deploy existing regulatory 
tools such as examination, enforcement, and disclosure to explore the sufficiency and malleability 
of  their  current  parameters  before  constructing  any  new  regulatory  schemes.    Second,  the 
disclosure  device  should  be  studied  to  determine  whether  the  intended  beneficiary  of  the 
disclosure, retail consumers, comprehends the information being disclosed to them and whether 
changes to the format, delivery, and/or content of disclosures would better protect consumer 
investors. 
 
I.  INVESTMENT ADVICE GOES ONLINE: THE BIRTH AND GROWTH OF ROBO-ADVISERS 
The majority of the 140 robo-adviser platforms created since 2008 started in the past three 
years.9  At the same time, Americans are not saving for retirement and exhibit overall low levels 
of financial readiness.  The robo-advice industry’s growth tracks societal changes encouraging 
investment in and use of increasingly better technological tools and seizes upon opportunities 
presented by digital native investors who may be financially inexperienced and wary of high fees.  
Moreover, increased governmental focus on advice standards has fueled robo-advisers’ growth. 
   
A.  American Investing Confidence, Competence, and Retirement Readiness 
 
America may be in the midst of a retirement “crisis.”10  Americans lack a foundation in basic 
financial and investing concepts and have “relatively low levels of financial literacy.”11  Over half 
of Americans have made no attempt to determine their future retirement needs.12  Most American 
workers are now responsible for their own retirement, with a precipitous drop in access to defined 
benefit plans.13  Reviewing recent studies, the SEC’s Office of the Investor Advocate reported that 
                                                 
8 SIFMA, DIGITAL INVESTMENT ADVICE RESOURCE CENTER OVERVIEW, http://www.sifma.org/issues/legal,-
compliance-and-administration/digitial-investment-advice/overview/ (listing factors tied to robo-advisers’ rapid rise). 
9  BLACKROCK,  DIGITAL  INVESTMENT  ADVICE:  ROBO  ADVISORS  COME  OF  AGE  at  5  (2016), 
https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/en-at/literature/whitepaper/viewpoint-digital-investment-advice-september-
2016.pdf  ("Nearly 140 digital advisory companies have been founded since 2008, with over 80 of those founded in 
the past two years."). 
10 FINRA INVESTOR EDUCATION FOUNDATION, FINANCIAL CAPABILITY IN THE UNITED STATES 2016 at 16 (2016), 
http://www.usfinancialcapability.org/downloads/NFCS_2015_Report_Natl_Findings.pdf (“studies have warned that 
the U.S. faces a retirement savings crisis.”). 
11 Id. at 28. 
12 Id. at 15 (“Thirty-nine percent of respondents have tried to figure out how much they need to save for retirement, 
while 56% have not.”). 
13 Roberta S. Karmel, The Challenge of Fiduciary Regulation: The Investment Advisers Act After Seventy-Five 
Years, 10 Brook. J. Corp. Fin. & Com. L. 405, 419-420 (2016) (describing steep decline in access to defined benefit 
pension plans and increase of Americans participating in defined contribution plans); SEC FINTECH FORUM, supra 
note 4 at 25 (“we have a generation of people who won’t have access to defined benefits quite the same way that past 16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  3  DRAFT 
 
most households over the age of 55 “have no retirement savings in a defined contribution plan or 
individual retirement account, and nearly 30 percent of households age 55-and-older have no 
retirement savings and no defined benefit (e.g. pension) plan.”14 For those who do have retirement 
savings, the median amount saved is $20,000 and most between the ages of 50 and 75 have 
retirement savings below $25,000.15  In addition, the use of professional advisers to assist investors 
in managing their assets is the exception rather than the rule, with less than one third of Americans 
receiving investment advice.16  Yet professional advice may benefit investors.17   
 
B.  Consumers’ Comfort with Computers Increases 
 
FinTech, including robo-advisers, appeals most to younger investors.18  Experts predicted that 
millennials  would  be  the  prototypical  robo-advisory  client  because  they  are  digital  natives 
comfortable with online service delivery.19  While that initial predication was correct,20 later 
studies showed that digital investment advisory services appeal to all generations.21 Robo-adviser 
Betterment reports “the average age [of an investor customer] is around 35, which is on the cusp 
                                                 
generations have, where maybe Social Security Administration has told people not to depend on the full benefit 
today”); Barbara Black, Are Retail Investors Better Off Today, 2 Brook. J. Corp. Fin. & Com. L. 303, 305 (2008) 
(“Today’s reality is that investing is no more an optional activity for most American adults than is working.  American 
workers are increasingly expected to assume responsibility for their financial security in retirement, and thus have no 
choice but to invest in the markets.”). 
14 SEC OFFICE OF THE INVESTOR ADVOCATE, PERSPECTIVES ON RETIREMENT READINESS IN THE UNITED STATES: 
A  WHITE  PAPER  (2016),  https://www.sec.gov/advocate/staff-papers/white-papers/retirement-readiness-white-
paper.pdf. 
15 Id at 4. 
16 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 3 ( "only 28% of individuals surveyed use a professional financial advisor."). 
17 Bo Lu, CEO of FutureAdvisor, believes “many more people in the U.S. would benefit from advice than receive 
it today or have ready access to it today.”  SEC FinTech Forum, supra note 4 at 24. 
18  FINRA  INVESTOR  EDUCATION  FOUNDATION,  INVESTORS  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  2016  at  8  (2016), 
http://www.usfinancialcapability.org/downloads/NFCS_2015_Inv_Survey_Full_Report.pdf  ("Usage  of  'robo-
advisors' is higher among younger investors and those who do not otherwise work with a financial advisor."); id. at 
20 ("Younger investors are less likely to use professional advisors, more likely to use 'robo-advisors'"); Survey Finds 
Affluent Millennials & Gen Xers Will Move More Assets to Advisors Over Next Decade, INVESTMENT WEEKLY 
NEWS, May 27, 2017 (detailing survey finding that Gen X and Millennials expect financial advisers to leverage 
technology while providing financial advisory services). 
19 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 7 (“Digital advice can increase the likelihood that people will engage on financial 
advice, particularly because younger generations may be more accustomed to electronic forms of communication.”). 
20 Matt Egan, Robo Advisors: The Next Big Thing in Investing, CNN MONEY, June 18, 2015, 
http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/18/investing/robo-advisor-millennials-wealthfront/index.html. (“Millennials, who 
often don’t have enough money to qualify for traditional advisors, are big users for robo advisors.”); ACCENTURE, 
supra note 3 at 7 ("Robo-advice fills a void for millennials"); PWC, supra note 2.   
21 The Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, UPDATE ON THE REPORT ON THE 
IOSCO AUTOMATED ADVICE TOOLS SURVEY at 9 (Dec. 2016) (“the primary market for automated advice is 
millennials (born between 1980 and 2000), but that other age groups such as Generation X (born between 1965 and 
1980), as well as subsequent generations are making use of these tools.”); Capital One Investing, RETIREMENT 
CONFIDENCE  DIPS  IN  2017  (2017), 
https://content.capitaloneinvesting.com/mgdcon/core/aboutus/press/20170310_Financial-Freedom-Survey.pdf 
("Millennials also most value robo-advice, with 65 percent saying it can enhance financial peace of mind, compared 
to 53 percent of Generation X and 31 percent of Baby Boomers."). 4  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
of millennial, but around 30 percent of our business comes from people over 50 years old.”22  
Investors may prefer the lack of direct human-adviser control as well as the flexibility of accessing 
information on their own and by themselves coupled with the learning opportunities that digital 
investment services provide.23  A digital platform offered over a desktop or mobile device is not 
constrained  by  a  human  adviser’s  office  hours,  allowing  investors  to  access  their  account 
information at any time.24  Robo-advisers’ separation of investments, account information, and 
investor education from a person, set hours, and an office also affords investors a measure of 
privacy and control not necessarily available in a traditional advisory relationship.25  It is this 
instant access to information that makes some robo-advisers believe that their services appeal to 
both smaller investors and more sophisticated investors with higher account balances.26 
 
C.  Legislation and Regulatory Activity Focuses Attention on Investment Advice 
 
Recent legislative and regulatory activity have focused attention on robo-advisors.27  Although 
beyond the scope of this essay to fully articulate the differences between investment advice 
providers,  in  general,  only  investment  advisers,  those  required  to  register  under  the  1940 
Investment Advisers Act (1940 Act) or a state equivalent, uniformly owe their clients a fiduciary 
duty while other providers of investment advice, which can include broker-dealers, financial 
planners, and insurance agents, do not uniformly owe fiduciary duties to their clients.28  The 
disparate standards applicable to professionals nearly indistinguishable to the investing public has 
                                                 
22 SEC FinTech Forum, supra note 4 at __. 
23 ACCENTURE, supra note 4 at 5 (“There are also elements of the robo-advice experience that clients prefer over 
traditional models.  They like the privacy offered by a digital solution and the ability to learn, and to chart their own 
path.”). 
24 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 4 (benefits of robo-advisors include "the ability to interact with the tools 24/7."). 
25  Falguni  Desai,  The  Great  FinTech  Robo  Advisor  Race,  FORBES,  July  31,  2016, 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/falgunidesai/2016/07/31/the-great-fintech-robo-adviser-race/#57f979a94a6f. 
26 U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 5. 
27 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 3 8 (“recent changes to regulation…have resulted in a greater focus on digital 
advice as a potential solution to provide low-cost investment advice with appropriately tailored outcomes to individual 
investors at scale.”). 
28 Only one category of individuals providing investment advice are uniformly fiduciaries: individuals who 
qualified as investment advisers under the 1940 Investment Advisers Act or a similar state regulation.  Others who 
may provide investment advice, including broker-dealers, insurance agents, and financial planners, were not, absent 
some exceptions, required to provide fiduciary-level advice and are regulated, if at all, under different standards of 
care.  Scholars have extensively detailed the differences between the standards governing investment advisers and 
broker-dealers, with some recommending harmonization of those standards to a unitary fiduciary duty for all providers 
of investment advice to eliminate consumer confusion.  See, generally, Arthur B. Laby, Fiduciary Obligations of 
Broker-Dealers and Investment Advisers, 55 VILL. L. REV. 701 (2010) (describing differences between broker-dealer 
and investment adviser regulation and application of fiduciary standard); Steven D. Irwin, et al., Wasn’t My Broker 
Always Looking Out for my Best Interests? The Road to Become a Fiduciary, 12 DUQ. BUS. L. J. 41, 61 (2009) (“A 
consistent fiduciary duty standard would likely help to increase investor trust.”); Barbara Black, How to Improve 
Retail Investor Protection After the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, 13 U. PA. J. BUS. 
L. 59 (2010) (describing differences in regulation between broker-dealers and investment advisers and arguing for 
professionalism as opposed to fiduciary standard).  C.f. Arthur B. Laby, SEC v. Capital Gains Research Bureau and 
the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, 91 B.U. L. REV. 1051 (2011) (arguing that fiduciary duty now recognized as 
arising out of the 1940 Act may be a faulty premise). 16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  5  DRAFT 
 
led to calls to harmonize the treatment of all providers of investment advice.29 
Significant attention to investment advice regulation began following the 2008 economic 
crisis.  The 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act directed the SEC 
to study the differing standards of care that broker-dealers and investment advisers owe their 
clients and to identify any regulatory gaps that should be closed to better protect retail consumers.30 
While the SEC’s study has been completed and resulted in staff recommendations for a uniform 
fiduciary standard,31 the SEC has not yet proposed any new regulation.  On April 6, 2016, the 
Department of Labor (DOL) released its final version of a “fiduciary rule” that would require all 
persons providing investment advice to tax qualified retirement accounts to adhere to a fiduciary 
standard.32  Promulgated after significant study, debate, and a lengthy notice and comment period, 
the fiduciary rule would result in a major shift in regulation of financial advice.33   
Robo-advisers  received  significant  attention  during  the  DOL  fiduciary  rule  debate.  The 
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), predicted that the fiduciary rule would lead its 
broker-dealer  members  to  abandon  IRA  accounts  under  $25,000  due  to  prohibitively  high 
compliance costs.34 Moreover, while acknowledging that robo-advice may benefit “some classes 
of knowledgeable investors,” FINRA commented that for many others, “robo-advice is a poor 
substitute for a financial adviser who understands the customer’s needs and guides the customer 
through market turbulence or life events.”35  On the other hand, DOL leadership predicted that 
robo-advisers could make it possible for ever more investors to receive fiduciary level investment 
advice at lower costs.36 Robo-advisory firms claimed that they had already been providing advice 
                                                 
29 See, e.g., Christine Lazaro and Benjamin P. Edwards, The Fragmented Regulation of Investment Advice: A Call 
for Harmonization, 4 MICH. BUS. & ENTREPRENEURIAL L. REV. 47 (2014); Ryan K. Bakhtiari, Katrina Boice, & 
Jeffrey D. Majors, The Time for a Uniform Fiduciary Duty is Now, 87 ST. JOHN’S L. REV. 313 (2013).   
30 See, Black,  supra note __ at 59-61; James S. Wrona, The Best of Both Worlds: A Fact-Based Analysis of the 
Legal Obligations of Investment Advisers and Broker-Dealers and a Framework for Enhanced Investor Protection, 
68 Bus. Law. 1, 5-7 (2012). 
31 U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION, STUDY ON INVESTMENT ADVISERS AND BROKER DEALERS (Jan. 
2011), available at https://www.sec.gov/news/studies/2011/913studyfinal.pdf.  
32 Definition of the Term “Fiduciary”; Conflict of Interest Rule- Retirement Investment Advice; Best Interest 
Contract Exemption (Prohibition Transaction Exemption 2016-01); Class Exemption for Principal Transactions in 
Certain Assets Between Investment Advice Fiduciaries and Employee Benefit Plans and IRAs (prohibited Transaction 
Exemption 2016-02); Prohibited and Transaction Exemptions 75-1, 77-4, 80-83, 83-1, 84-24 and 86-128 (Apr. 7, 
2017).  By virtue of its oversight of ERISA, the Department of Labor issues rules concerning tax advantaged retirement 
accounts such as individual retirement accounts and 401(k) accounts, among others.  See Roberta S. Karmel, The 
Challenge of Fiduciary Regulation: The Investment Advisers Act After Seventy-Five Years, 10 Brook. J. Corp. Fin. & 
Com. L. 405, 423-424 (2016) (describing obligations of fiduciaries under ERISA). 
33 See, e.g., Roberta S. Karmel, The Challenge of Fiduciary Regulation: The Investment Advisers Act After 
Seventy-Five Years, 10 Brook. J. Corp. Fin. & Com. L. 405, 424-425 (2016) (describing critiques of fiduciary rule). 
34 Marcia E. Asquith, PROPOSED CONFLICT OF INTEREST RULE AND RELATED PROPOSALS, RIN-1210-AB32 at 5-
6 (2015), http://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/FINRACommentLetter_DOL_07-17-15.pdf.  See also Paul R. Walsh 
& David W. Johns, Can the Retail Investor Survive the Fiduciary Standard?, 87 St. John’s L. Rev. 437, 449 (2013) 
(“the imposition of a fiduciary duty onto the broker or salesman will create a barrier to the availability of investment 
advice to the small investor.”). 
35 Asquith, supra note 34. 
36 Testimony of Hon. Thomas E. Perez, Secretary, U.S. Depart. Of Labor, Hearing: Restricting Access to Financial 
Advice: Evaluating the Costs and Consequences for Working Families and Retirees, at 102 (June 17, 2015) (describing 
how robo-adviser Wealthfront may be able to provide fiduciary level service at lower cost through technology). 6  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
meeting a fiduciary standard as registered investment advisers under the 1940 Act.37 Scholars 
likewise argued that the elimination of a commission-based fee structure “would likely accelerate 
the growth of so-called robo-advisers.”38 
President Trump executed a Presidential Memorandum on February 3, 2017 directing the DOL 
“to examine the Fiduciary Duty Rule to determine whether it may adversely affect the ability of 
Americans to gain access to retirement information and financial advice.”39   As a result, full 
implementation has been delayed repeatedly and the fiduciary rule may ultimately be revised or 
eliminated.40  Nevertheless, the DOL’s efforts to mandate that all providers of investment advice 
meet a fiduciary standard focused moved the topic from the regulatory realm into popular culture.41  
 
D.  The Promise of Robo-Advisers 
 
Robo-advisers’ promise is tied to their potential to address these challenges while capitalizing 
on opportunities technological growth creates.  Robo-advisory firms differ from traditional human 
investment advisers because they generally do not have as high account minimums for advice and 
charge fees that are substantially less than human investment advisers.42  The enthusiasm for robo-
advisers comes from a belief that they are well-equipped to serve a previously underserved 
population of investors that includes, but is not limited to millennials – investors with accounts 
deemed too small for traditional investment advisers.43  Investment advisers typically charge at 
                                                 
37 See Jon Stein & Eli Broveman, Letter re: Conflict of Interest Rule, RIN 1210-AB32 (Sept. 24, 2015), available 
at  https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ebsa/laws-and-regulations/rules-and-regulations/public-comments/1210-
AB32-2/03108.pdf. (“the rapidly growing category of automated investment advice is emerging as a clear rebuttal to 
those who worry that small accounts will be left unserved.  Modern technology allows for fiduciary advice to be 
delivered at unprecedented scale, with the expected quantum leap in affordability.  We believe that these services, 
offering lower, transparent prices, fiduciary advice, and superior experiences, will prevail in the market against heavily 
conflicted, legacy business models.”).   
38 Benjamin P. Edwards, Conflicts and Capital Allocation, 78 OHIO ST. L.J. 181, 221 (2017). See also Ralph 
Derbyshire and Jay Haines, Department of Labor Rule Shakes Up Retirement Industry, 61 BOSTON BAR J. 18, 19 
(2017) (arguing that fiduciary rule should result in increase in accounts managed by robo-advisers). 
39 Presidential Memorandum on Fiduciary Duty Rule, (February 3, 2017), https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-
office/2017/02/03/presidential-memorandum-fiduciary-duty-rule.  
40 See, e.g., Carmen Germaine, Further Delay Tees Up Fiduciary Rule for Major Changes, Law360 (Aug. 10, 
2017) (describing Department of Labor plan to delay implementation of not-yet-in-place provisions of fiduciary rule 
until July 2019). 
41 As on example, comedian John Oliver made the DOL’s fiduciary rule the focus of his popular late night show, 
“Last Week Tonight,” describing a rule that had, until then, “been considered too complicated or boring for the average 
person  to  understand.”  Mark  Schoeff,  John  Oliver’s  Criticism  Helps  Fiduciary  Duty  Go  Prime  Time, 
INVESTMENTNEWS,  June  19,  2016,  http://www.investmentnews.com/article/20160619/FREE/160619914/john-
olivers-criticism-helps-fiduciary-duty-go-prime-time.  The segment has over 6.5 million views on YouTube since it 
was  posted  on  June  12,  2016.    See  Retirement  Plans:  Last  Week  Tonight  with  John  Oliver  (HBO), 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gvZSpET11ZY.  
42 White, supra note 9; U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, INVESTOR BULLETIN: ROBO-ADVISERS 
(2017), https://www.sec.gov/oiea/investor-alerts-bulletins/ib_robo-advisers.html ("Robo-advisers often seek to offer 
investment advice for lower costs and fees than traditional advisory programs, and in some cases require lower account 
minimums than traditional investment advisers."). 
43 ACCENTURE, supra note 3 at 2 (“full-service advisors are looking at robo-advice as a way to serve smaller 
accounts and increase advisor productivity.”); id. at 7 (“"Part of the excitement surrounding robo-advice services is 16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  7  DRAFT 
 
least 1% of assets under management as fee for their services.44  Robo-advisers, on the other hand, 
charge much less, including fees starting as low as 15 basis points of assets under management.45   
In addition to their purported ability to provide broader access to financial advice at a lower cost, 
robo-advisers are heralded for another aspect of the fiduciary rule – the purported ability to provide 
conflict-free advice at a fiduciary level.46  Robo-advisers’ promises about the services they can 
provide are also met with significant questions, including questions about their limitations and the 
humans who may potentially introduce flaws into them.47   
 
II. ROBO-ADVISERS DEFINED 
 
Establishing a single definition of “robo-adviser” presents a problem:  there is no universal 
platform or design.48  “Robo-adviser” as colloquially used encompasses a wide spectrum of 
services  and  business  models,  but  all  provide  investment  advice  in  a  digital  format  using 
proprietary algorithms.49  Beyond this common trait, there is substantial variation between robo-
advice platforms, with differences in (1) end user of the digital advice; (2) range of investment 
advice and options provided; and (3) level of human investment adviser interaction.50 
                                                 
their appeal to non-traditional clients, especially younger clients with fewer assets to manage.”); BLACKROCK, supra 
note 10, at 6 ("For a large segment of the investing public, digital advisory services have the potential to provide 
affordable and accessible services."). 
44 Desai, supra note 29. 
45 Id (“Fees are competitive and range between 15 to 35 basis points of AUM.”); See also Benjamin P. Edwards, 
Conflicts and Capital Allocation, 78 OHIO ST. L.J. 181, 221 (2017) (describing fee structure of one robo-adviser that 
does not charge any fees for accounts under $10,000 and 0.25% of assets under management for accounts over 
$10,000).   
A recent study of robo-advisory platforms found that they “present[] investors with an interesting value 
proposition – with a price reduction of as much as 70 percent for some services.” ACCENTURE, supra note 5 at 2.  See 
also THE BOARD OF THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF SECURITIES COMMISSIONS, REPORT ON THE IOSCO 
SOCIAL  MEDIA  AND  AUTOMATION  OF  ADVICE  TOOLS  SURVEYS  at  4  (2014), 
http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD445.pdf  (“From  an  intermediary’s  perspective,  providing 
customers advice through an automated means presents an opportunity to formulate and deliver advice in a cost 
effective way.”); CFA INSTITUTE, supra note 1 at 11 (“cost, access to advice, and product choice are all viewed as 
more likely to have a positive impact on customers.”)  
46 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 12 ("Digital advisory services have the potential to significantly mitigate 
behavioral finance biases and provide customized investment tools to individual investors at a relatively low cost."). 
47 Thus, while Professors Tom Baker and Benedict G.C. Dellaert argue that a well-designed robo-adviser has the 
capacity to operate at a greater level than humans, because the humans who design robo-advisers are flawed, robo-
advisers may exhibit those flaws.  Tom Baker & Benedict G.C. Dellaert, Regulating Robo Advice Across the Financial 
Services Industry __ Iowa L. Rev. __, at 18-19 (forthcoming 2017) available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2932189.  
48 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 1 (“Digital advice is not all the same”). 
49 Investor.gov, supra note 34. (“The term 'robo-adviser' generally refers to an automated digital investment 
advisory  program.”);  SIFMA,  DIGITAL  INVESTMENT  ADVICE  RESOURCE  CENTER  OVERVIEW, 
http://www.sifma.org/issues/legal,-compliance-and-administration/digitial-investment-advice/overview/  (describing 
robo-advisers as “digital investment advisers”);  ACCENTURE, supra note 4 at 2 (robo-advice is "the use of  automated 
and digital techniques to build and manage portfolios of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and other instruments for 
investors"); U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, SEC STAFF ISSUES GUIDANCE UPDATE AND INVESTOR 
BULLETIN  ON  ROBO-ADVISERS  (2017),  https://www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2017-52.html  (robo-advisers  are 
"registered investment advisers that use computer algorithms to provide investment advisory services online with 
often limited human interaction.").  
50 Investor.gov, supra note 34; U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, supra note 32; BLACKROCK, supra note 8  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
 
A.  End Users of Robo-Advisor Advice 
 
Robo advisory platforms are both industry- and investor-facing, with users who include 
financial advisers, investors working without financial advisors, and investors working with 
financial advisers.51  The financial industry has used digital tools for many years, perhaps even 
without  investors’  knowledge.  For  example,  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO) found that firms use digital tools to gather the information upon which 
human advisers make investment recommendations.52  Bo Lu, CEO of robo-adviser FutureAdvisor 
believes that robo-adviser technology assists human investment advisers in serving their clients 
because “they can have the digital platform take the workload off them and focus on things where 
they add the unique value, such as relationship-building, trust-building, and coaching with their 
clients.”53  Indeed, some even argue that a human investment adviser must use the technology 
available in digital advisory products to fully understand the client and provide the best services.54 
Other platforms using robo-advice are designed with an investor end user in mind.  Though 
serving the same end-user, these investor-facing robo-advisers comprise myriad tools with varying 
functionality.55  On one end of the spectrum is an advisory firm that integrates robo-advice 
capabilities with traditional, human investment advisers.  The most simplistic hybrid platforms 
obtain information from an investor to develop the customer’s profile so that a human investment 
adviser can provide some level of traditional, face-to-face advice to an investor.56 Others offer 
clients full access to digital investment advisory tools along with human support.  Robo-advisory 
services partnered with a human investment adviser are cited as an option for ensuring that investor 
clients with less assets than traditionally managed by an investment adviser can obtain the full 
service advice that they may need for their particular circumstances.57 
On the other end of the spectrum are fully digital robo-advisers that use an algorithm to review 
information  input  by  the  customer  to  recommend  services  from  “asset  allocation,  to  tax 
                                                 
10 at 4 (differences include “(i) customization, (ii) tax management, (iii) human intervention/oversight, and (iv) type 
of entity providing digital advice.”).   
51 FINRA, REPORT ON DIGITAL INVESTMENT ADVICE at 2 (2016), https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/digital-
investment-advice-report.pdf (digital investment tools “can be broken down into two groups: tools that financial 
professionals use,, referred to here as ‘financial professional facing’ tools, and tools that clients use, referred to here 
as ‘client-facing’ tools.”).  
52 THE BOARD OF THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF SECURITIES COMMISSIONS, supra note 36 at __. 
53 SEC FINTECH FORUM, supra note 4 at 38.  See also BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 6 (“these services can be 
advantageous for financial institutions, including traditional advisors, by automating routine aspects of the client 
servicing process and providing advisors with greater channels of communications with clients."). 
54 Id. at 55 (Personal Capital’s Mark Goines describing how digital technology improves investment advisers’ 
advice to their clients). 
55 FINRA, supra note 50. 
56 Id. 
57 PWC, supra note 2 at 13 (“Robo-advisors provide a viable solution for this segment and, if positioned correctly 
as part of a full service offering, can serve as a segue to full service advice for clients with specific needs or higher 
touch.”); ACCENTURE, supra note 4 at 11 ("robo-advice services can be a bet on the future - a way to get customers 
and financial advisors acclimated to working with machines that can enhance and extend human performance."). 16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  9  DRAFT 
 
management, to product selection and trade execution.”58 All provided tools are on a digital 
platform and many of the provided services, such as rebalancing of accounts to meet a pre-
determined asset allocation, are accomplished automatically.59  Robo-adviser service models may 
include one, all, or several different pieces of the available customer-facing digital investment 
tools.60   
 
B.  Range of Advice Provided and Investment Choices Available 
 
Another definitional challenge relates to the range of advice and investment choices robo-
advisers provide.61 The most simplistic digital investment tools include financial planning targets 
for different ages and risk profiles that an investor may find on an investment adviser or broker 
dealer’s website.62  Some digital advice tools go a step further and “provide[] a list of securities, 
investment funds or model portfolios that may be considered low, medium, or high risk for 
investors to choose from based on the customer’s risk appetite but without detailed information 
about the individual customer.”63   
The platforms that better fit the name robo-adviser provide tailored financial advice by 
applying algorithms that analyze and make decisions based on customer-provided information 
relating to financial circumstances and goals.  A recent study summarizes the spectrum of advice 
such providers give:  "Algorithms can range from a simple or pre-packaged algorithm that builds 
a single portfolio to a complex multi-strategy algorithm that reviews thousands of instruments and 
scenarios in order to construct an aggregate portfolio based on an individual's current holdings, 
investment horizon, and risk tolerance."64  Nevertheless, even the most sophisticated robo-advisers 
that provide fully personalized advice based on specific investor inputs typically offer their 
investors a narrower range of investment choices than traditional investment advisers, often 
limiting choices to low-cost exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and mutual funds.65   
 
C.  Levels of Human Involvement 
 
Robo-advisers may not provide a human touch that some believe essential to the investor 
adviser/client  relationship:  the  ability  to  provide  in-person  support,  comfort,  and  advice  to 
investors in times of market volatility.66  The traditional investment adviser’s “personal touch” is 
                                                 
58 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 1. 
59 Desai, supra note 1 (Robo-advisers' "services include automated portfolio planning, automatic asset allocation, 
online risk assessments, account rebalancing and other digital tools."). 
60 FINRA, supra note 50. 
61 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 3 (“Digital advisors have a number of different investment philosophies, 
methods, and strategies.  The algorithms fueling digital advice very in terms of sophistication.”).   
62 THE BOARD OF THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF SECURITIES COMMISSIONS, supra note 36. 
63 Id at 7-8. 
64 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 3.     
65 ACCENTURE, supra note 4 at 2. See also THE BOARD OF THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF SECURITIES 
COMMISSIONS, supra note 36 at 27 (investment choices include “collective investment schemes, mutual funds, ETFs 
and equity classes are the most common.”); The Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, 
UPDATE ON THE REPORT ON THE IOSCO AUTOMATED ADVICE TOOLS SURVEY at 9 (Dec. 2016).   
66  SEC Investor Advocate Rick Fleming described the role of the investment adviser in working with clients 
during rocky markets: “[T]here’s a lot of benefit that comes from the human touch and having somebody there that’s 10  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
why some predict that robo-advisers will never entirely replace the traditional, human investment 
adviser.67  Financial industry-backed studies support this prediction, finding that 74 percent of 
investors prefer receiving their investment advice from a human in a volatile market.68     
This does not mean, however, that investors employing robo-advisers do not interact with 
humans.  The term “robo-adviser” may thus be a misnomer as it may lead investors to believe that 
financial advice provided through such a service comes without any human interaction.69  Mark 
Goines, vice chair of digital wealth management firm Personal Capital, says that “we don’t like 
the term ‘robo’” because “even robo-advisors aren’t really robo-advisors.”70   A human touch is 
required for all robo-advisers,71 though that touch differs from that of a traditional human 
investment adviser by design so that the cost of the ultimate advice may be lower.72  Each robo-
adviser makes its own decision about the total level of human involvement, though there are some 
common themes.73  Humans must be involved in the design of robo-advice platforms and the 
proprietary algorithms that deliver advice to the investor.74 Other humans ensure that robo-advisers 
comply with relevant rules and standards, both within the advisory firm and outside the firm at the 
regulatory level.75  Finally, some robo-adviser platforms even permit their investor customers to 
                                                 
going to sort of calm the waters and, when the markets are going down, making sure that investors aren’t making 
really bad decisions at the worst possible time.  And so, I think it, again, is one of those things that sort of remains to 
be seen, is how well technology can sort of replicate that and put those protections into place.”  SEC Fintech Forum, 
U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 5 at 244.  Asquith, supra note 35 (“for many customers robo-
advice is a poor substitute for a financial adviser who understand the customer’s needs and guides the customer 
through market turbulence or life events.”). 
67 ACCENTURE, supra note 4 at 5; SEC Fintech Forum, U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 
5 at 243 (attorney John Walsh describing challenges faced by robo-advisers: “We’re used to face to face human 
interaction, and we have confidence in our ability to deal with other people, and that’s why I think, even though 
Fintech is booming and growing, personal advice has a big future ahead of it...”).   
68  Capital  One  Investing,  RETIREMENT  CONFIDENCE  DIPS  IN  2017  (2017), 
https://content.capitaloneinvesting.com/mgdcon/core/aboutus/press/20170310_Financial-Freedom-Survey.pdf 
("when markets are volatile, most (74 percent) investors would prefer engaging a financial advisor"). 
69 Humans play a significant role in all aspects of fintech, and scholars predict that will continue even as financial 
technology continues to grow and change.  See, e.g., Tom C.W. Lin, The New Financial Industry, 65 ALA. L. REV. 
567, 580 (2014) (describing myriad and key roles of humans in financial technological changes). 
70 U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 5 at 27-28. 
71 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 4 ("digital advisors have a fundamental obligation to oversee their systems and 
mitigate risks associated with digital processes."). 
72 U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 32.   
73 Only one regulatory scheme, that in place in Canada, currently requires that humans either gather initial 
customer information or proactively contact an investor if the investor’s responses to an online questionnaire appears 
incomplete or provides inconsistent information.  See The Board of the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions, UPDATE ON THE REPORT ON THE IOSCO AUTOMATED ADVICE TOOLS SURVEY at 6 (Dec. 2016) 
(describing Canada’s phone and no-phone rules and requirement for no-phone advisers that customers be contacted if 
their responses to an initial questionnaire raise potential concerns). 
74 For example, robo-adviser firm Personal Capital’s Mark Goines notes that robo-adviser “tasks are automated 
by humans who figure out what algorithms are, assign strategies, interpret data from people.”  SEC FINTECH FORUM, 
supra note 4 at 27-28.   
75 See BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 10 (“We emphasize the need for investment professionals to be closely 
involved in the design and oversight of the financial advice tool to ensure that the algorithm delivers the expected 
outcome.”). 16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  11  DRAFT 
 
work with a live investment adviser as part of their service model.76 The availability of such 
services may be dependent upon the provider, the amount of assets under management, or the 
package elected by the investor.77  When human interaction is part of a robo-adviser’s offerings, 
it does not necessarily mean an in-person discussion with a dedicated investment adviser but may 
instead be a phone call or electronic access to a member of an advisory team.78  In addition to 
variation across the method of contacting a human investment adviser, robo-adviser platforms vary 
in the frequency with which an investor can reach out to a human adviser.79   
 
D.  Gathering Information and Making Investment Recommendations 
 
Robo-advisers operate through the information they receive from the end user, which is, in our 
case, the investor customer.80  In this way, robo-advisers differ very little from traditional 
investment advisers in that both are required to begin by collecting information from their 
customer in order to provide investment advice tailored to the individual investor.81  Human 
investment advisers typically obtain information to know their customer and provide suitable 
advice from a questionnaire.82  Robo-advisers obtain the same categories of information from their 
customers prior to providing investment advice, also using a form of questionnaire.83  In both 
cases, the information comes from the investor, and, in the case when an investment adviser gives 
an investor a paper questionnaire to fill out, both the human- and robo- adviser clients provide the 
initial information on their own.  Both human-based and robo-adviser questionnaires have been 
criticized for purported failures to obtain full information from which to provide suitable advice 
to the customer.84  In addition, regulators warn consumers considering robo-advisers that it may 
be up to them to update their profile and financial circumstances.85   
                                                 
76 U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 32.  One industry study indicated that investors appear 
to value digital advisers coupled with traditional, human investment advisers over digital advice provided directly to 
investors with little human interaction.  See Capital One Investing, supra note 20.   
77 U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 32. (“a robo-adviser may offer access to a person only 
for accounts that meet a certain minimum account size.”). 
78 Id. (“If a robo-adviser does make an investment professional available to you, the format and amount of the 
interaction also may vary.”); id. (“a person may be available by email but not by phone.”). 
79 Id. (“a person may be available…only for a limited number of in-person meetings.”). 
80 SIFMA, supra note 10 (robo-advisers “offer discretionary investment advice using algorithms and information 
provided by the customer.”). 
81 For example, securities intermediaries using digital methods for obtaining sufficient information upon which 
to base a recommendation report (1) that their tools “cover the mandated regulatory requirements”; (2)  “their tools 
will not permit recommendations to be made unless all necessary information is obtained;” and (3) they rely on firm 
account opening policies irrespective of whether the account is opened on-line or in person.” THE BOARD OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF SECURITIES COMMISSIONS, supra note 36. 
82 Michael Tertilt and Peter Scholz, To Advise, or Not to Advise – How Robo-Advisors Evaluate the Risk 
Preferences of Private Investors, 1 (June 12, 2017), available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2913178 (“Financial 
advisors typically complete a questionnaire to evaluate the client’s risk tolerance.”). 
83 See, e.g., U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 32 (robo-adviser information collection via 
online questionnaire); Tertilt, et al., supra note __ at 6-11 (describing robo-adviser information collection). 
84 Tertilt, et al., supra note __ at 3 (“human questionnaires commonly used by financial planners do not adhere 
to psychometric standards; they are generally too brief (a reliability problem) and contain too many ‘bad’ questions 
(a validity problem).”).  
85 U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 32 ("the burden to update this information will fall on 12  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
Robo-advice employs computer algorithms to recommend portfolio choices based upon the 
investor’s response to the initial questions posed concerning their background, risk tolerance, and 
goals.86  While robo-adviser proponents argue that computer generated advice lacks the conflicts 
of interest or behavioral biases of human advisers, others note that algorithms may be the greatest 
risk associated with robo-advisers.87  Cautions concerning the use of robo-advisers focus on the 
potentially limited information upon which algorithm relies.88 One recent study focusing on a 
subset of international robo-advisers found that, on average, robo-advisers ask few questions and 
only use responses from a small proportion of those questions to generate their advice.89 Industry 
experts recommend robust due diligence into and supervision of algorithms.90  In the same way 
that  a  traditional  investment  adviser  must  know  her  customer  and  obtain  a  wide  range  of 
information in order to provide suitable advice, the means through which robo-advisers provide 
their advice - proprietary algorithms -- require robust inputs and are only as good as the information 
upon which they base their calculations and recommendations.91 
Although the robo-adviser designation can describe multiple models, end users, and degrees 
of human involvement, this essay will focus on robo-advisory platforms with the investor client as 
the anticipated end user of a digital platform that predominately delivers investment advice via 
proprietary algorithms, including models where the client has access to a human investment 
adviser for additional support.   
                                                 
you."). 
86 Algorithms are not new.  Financial intermediaries began using them decades ago to replace roles formerly 
processed by humans.  See, e.g., Arthur B. Laby, Reforming the Regulation of Broker-Dealers and Investment 
Advisers, 65 Bus La. 395, 403 (2009) (describing introduction of ECNs and use of algorithms in 1990s to automate 
trade executions and replace human judgment). 
87 CFA INSTITUTE, supra note 2 at 14 (“46% of respondents note that flaws in automated financial advice 
algorithms could be the biggest risk introduced from automated financial advice tools, followed by mis-selling (30%) 
and privacy and data protection concerns (12%).”).  See also Tom C.W. Lin, Compliance, Technology, and Modern 
Finance, 11 BROOK. J. CORP. FIN. & COMM. L. 159, 180 (2016) (“Uncertainty and risk in finance can never be perfectly 
modeled, reduced, or eliminated.  Despite all the advances in new financial technology and artificial intelligence, there 
exists no machine so smart that it flawlessly forecasts financial futures and economic risks in a world filled with 
flawed, whimsical, and random human actors.”). 
88 U.S. SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION, supra note 32; Horacio A. Valeiras, Expert’s Corner: Portfolio 
Construction Highly Dependent on the Initial Conditions, 23 PIABA B.J. 75, 75-76 (2016) (“However, as with so 
many so-called investment panaceas, many of the robo-adviser models can lead to flawed portfolio construction 
decisions caused by poorly analyzed assumptions and historical data”).   
89 Tertilt, et. al, supra note __ at 19 (“In our sample, the robo-advisors pose around ten questions, but only about 
ca. 60% of questions actually have an impact on the risk categorization…The recommended portfolios derived from 
robo-advice seem to be rather conservative.”). 
90 BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 10 (“A number of key questions to be asked when conducting due diligence on the 
algorithm include: (i) whether the algorithm factors in transaction costs or termination fees, if any; (ii) whether the 
algorithm factors in tax implications and, if so, does it have the cost basis of each asset; and (iii) whether the algorithm 
factors in the level of risk that is appropriate for the consumer, especially if the consumer has limited financial 
knowledge and experience.”).   
91  BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 9 (“Digital advisors, like traditional advisors, are dependent on client-provided 
information to gauge suitability, which is typically obtained through questionnaires.  The information gathered from 
these questionnaires should be used to make appropriate recommendations to clients.”); SEC FinTech Forum, supra 
note 5 at 65 ("I think it's malpractice to not understand a client and make a recommendation to them, and algorithms 
with minimal input run the risk of not fully understanding the client."). 16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  13  DRAFT 
 
 
III. REGULATION OF ROBO-ADVISERS UNDER CURRENT SCHEME AND IN THE FUTURE 
 
 Robo-advisers face a dual challenge and opportunity: can they provide investment advisory 
services meeting a fiduciary standard under the 1940 Act?92  The 1940 Act was the final major 
financial legislation arising out of the Great Depression and its focus was on a new breed of 
professionals:  investment  advisers  who  received  compensation  from  clients  to  recommend 
investment strategies.93  At that time, little was known about the investment adviser industry and 
the 1940 Act was perceived as an opportunity to learn about the industry and collect the names of 
all practicing in the new arena. 94  Though it is well known today that investment advisers subject 
to the 1940 Act owe their clients a fiduciary duty, the 1940 Act was promulgated without the term 
fiduciary within it.  It was not until twenty years later that duties owed by investment advisers to 
their clients was first addressed by the U.S. Supreme Court in Capital Gains Research Bureau v. 
SEC, after which full disclosure became a hallmark of the fiduciary standard owed from investment 
advisers to their clients.95  In subsequent cases, courts continued to shape the contours of the duties 
owed to investor advisers’ clients.96  Since then, the fiduciary duty owed under the 1940 Act has 
been defined as requiring disclosure, avoiding conflicts of interest, and acting in the customer’s 
best interest.97 
Although lawyers representing both human and robo-advisers have weighed in on whether 
robo-advisers can meet the requirements of the 1940 Act, there is little in legal scholarship 
addressing  whether  robo-advisers  can  be  fiduciaries.98    Nevertheless,  robo-advisers  avail 
                                                 
92 White, supra note 9. (“So, in this area, the key questions are focused on whether and how a firm meets its 
Advisers Act obligations, as well as its fiduciary duties, when it provides only or primarily automated advice.”).   
While it is possible that some robo-advisers are operating as broker-dealers, most direct to customer platforms 
appear to be operating as investment advisers.  Accordingly, the remainder of this essay will discuss the investment 
adviser regulatory framework rather than the duties owed by broker-dealers 
93 Karmel, supra note __ at 406 (“As the last of the New Deal securities laws that date between 1933 and 1940, 
the Advisers Act was probably the least considered and the least important.  It was a weak statute, which accomplished 
little more than creating a registration list of investment advisers.”). 
94 Investment Advisers and Disclosure of an Intent to Trade, 71 YALE L.J. 1342, 1342 (1962) ( “relatively little 
was known about the practices of investment advisers; in fact, the act was in large part designed to acquire information 
about the industry.”).  See also Arthur B. Laby, Reforming the Regulation of Broker-Dealers and Investment Advisers, 
65 BUS LAW. 395, 403 (2009) (“little was known about the number of investment advisers operating at the time or the 
amount of assets they managed”); id. (1940 Act “little more than a ‘compulsory census.’”).   
95 Dealing by Advisers in Recommended Securities, 78 HARV. L. REV. 292, 294 (1964) (“By interpreting the act 
to require full disclosure in any situation in which there is a possibility of bias, the client himself may evaluate the 
disinterestedness of the advice.”). 
96 Karmel, supra note __ at 410-411 (2016) (describing development of fiduciary duty for investment advisers 
through judicial decisions). 
97 Irwin, et al., supra note __ at 59. 
98 Representing the traditional advisory community, lawyer Melanie Fein argues that robo-advisers cannot meet 
the  1940  Act’s  standards.  See  Melanie  L.  Fein,  Robo-Advisors:  A  Closer  Look  at  1,  available  at  SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2658701 (June 30, 2015) (robo-advisors “are not designed for retirement accounts subject 
to ERISA and should be approached with caution by retail and retirement investors looking for personal investment 
advice.”); Melanie L. Fein, FINRA’s Report on Robo-Advisors: Fiduciary Implications at 8, available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2768295 (Apr. 1, 2016) (questioning whether robo-advisers can meet fiduciary standard). 
On the other hand, lawyers at a firm that represents robo-advisers argue that robo-advisers do meet the fiduciary 
standard.  See Morgan Lewis, The Evolution of Advice: Digital Investment Advisers as Fiduciaries at 17, available at 14  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
themselves to that framework, assuming its applicability and their ability to live up to it.99  Federal 
regulators believe robo-advisers are subject to the 1940 Act just as human advisers are.100  The 
SEC thus holds robo-advisers to the fiduciary standard.101  SIFMA, a group representing the 
securities industry, appears to agree, stating that it is possible for robo-advisers to meet the 
fiduciary standard.102  Only Massachusetts regulators so far present a contrary opinion, writing in 
a policy statement that they do not believe that one subset of robo-advisers, those that are fully 
automated, can meet a fiduciary duty.103  The consensus appears to be that since robo-advisers are 
availing themselves to the 1940 Act, it is up to them to ensure, and prove, that they can comply 
                                                 
https://www.morganlewis.com/-/media/files/publication/report/im-the-evolution-of-advice-digital-investment-
advisers-as-fiduciaries-october-2016.ashx?la=en&hash=7A28D9586FD8ACADC9731733BFE4281F4E6FEB49 
(2016) (“digital advisers are capable of fulfilling fiduciary standards that are consistent with the scope and nature of 
the advisory services that they provide to clients.”).  With a view towards the greater financial services industry, two 
scholars have proposed some guiding principles from which a robo regulatory scheme can be developed.  See Tom 
Baker & Benedict G.C. Dellaert, Regulating Robo Advice Across the Financial Services Industry __ Iowa L. Rev. __, 
at 20 (forthcoming 2017) available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2932189 (“we propose a regulatory trajectory, rather 
than a regulatory agenda, that starts by building the necessary human capital and only then will move to setting an 
agenda.”). 
99 See The Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, UPDATE ON THE REPORT ON THE 
IOSCO AUTOMATED ADVICE TOOLS SURVEY at 4 (Dec. 2016) (finding in study of international securities regulators 
that majority of regulatory frameworks “are technology neutral and do not differentiate between advice or portfolio 
management delivered by a human and that delivered by a software package, possibly win a human interface overlay.”) 
available at www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD552.pdf.; id. at 10 (reporting FINRA/SEC response to 
survey that concerns related to robo-advisers “also apply in the context of more traditional advisors and are unique 
only to the extent that robo advisors place greater emphasis on technology.”).   
100 Earlier this year, the SEC stated that digital investment advice under the Investment Advisers Act is no different 
than human-directed financial advice:  “Robo-advisers, as registered investment advisers, are subject to the substantive 
and fiduciary obligations of the Advisers Act.” Id.  Similarly, IOSCO’s 2014 international study on digital investment 
tools  reported  that  “[a]ll  but  one  regulator  responding  to  the  survey  stated  that  the  rules  governing 
advice/recommendations apply irrespective of whether the advice/recommendations were made by automated tools 
or otherwise.” THE BOARD OF THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF SECURITIES COMMISSIONS, supra note 36 at 24. 
Further, IOSCO found that regulators’ guidance to firms “on areas such as disclosure, the provision of advice, 
supervision, AML, advertising and assessment is technology neutral… [and] applies irrespective of whether the advice 
is given by telephone, email, internet, face-to-face or by a combination of these or other ways.”  Id. at 22.  See also 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, supra note 32 (“Providing financial advisory services electronically is 
different than the traditional adviser model, but in many respects our [the SEC’s] assessment of robo-advisors is no 
different than for a human-based investment adviser.”). 
101 SEC, IM Guidance Update No. 2017-02: Robo-Advisers (February 2017) (“Robo-advisers, like all registered 
investment advisers, are subject to the substantive and fiduciary obligations of the Advisers’ Act.”) 
102 SIFMA, supra note 10 (“Digital investment advisers can fulfill their fiduciary duties under the law so long as 
they act in good faith, disclose the material facts, and use reasonable care not to mislead clients.”).   
103 See Massachusetts Securities Division, Policy Statement: Robo-Advisers and State Investment Adviser 
Registration at 1 (April 2016) (“it is the position of the Division that fully automated robo-advisers, as currently 
structured, may be inherently unable to carry out the fiduciary obligations of a state-registered investment adviser.”); 
id. at 3 (defining fully automated robo-adviser as including following criteria: “(1) do not meet with or conduct 
significant (or any) due diligence on a client, (2) provide investment advice that is minimally personalized, (3) may 
fail to meet the high standard of care that is imposed on the appropriateness of investment advisers’ investment 
decision-making, and (4) specifically decline the obligation to act in a client’s best interests.”).  Massachusetts’ 
Securities Division does nevertheless believe that “robo-advisers and traditional advisers shoulder the same fiduciary 
duty.”  Id. at 4.   16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  15  DRAFT 
 
with it.104   
If the robo-adviser industry is voluntarily availing itself to the 1940 Act, regulators’ next step 
should be to test whether robo-advisers are meeting the 1940 Act’s requirements.  Such an inquiry 
should use the current regulatory toolkit of disclosure, investigation, and enforcement.105  The SEC 
appears to be pursuing this approach.  For example, a February 2017 staff guidance update 
concerning robo-advisers identified three areas that robo-advisers should ensure they are meeting 
to be in compliance with the 1940 Act: (1) adequate and effective disclosure; (2) collection of 
information to deliver suitable advice; and (3) effective compliance systems.106  Following up 
through investigation and pursuing enforcement for additional information will provide regulators 
with information that can guide their next steps, including whether the current regulatory regime 
is sufficient or if new regulations are needed.  Indeed, due to President Trump’s moratorium on 
new regulation unless two other regulations are discarded, such an approach may be preferable to 
creating new regulation specifically to address robo-advisers.107  While it seems counterintuitive, 
refraining from regulation until more information about the industry emerges is a commonly used 
approach and recommended by some scholars as a means of evaluating technological innovation 
in the financial industry.108 
Thus, before proposing regulatory changes to address the proliferation of robo-advisers, 
                                                 
104 See, e.g., Iris H-Y Chiu, Fintech and Disruptive Business Models in Financial Products, Intermediation and 
Markets – Policy Implications for Financial Regulators,  21 J. Tech. L. & Pol’y 55, 90 (2016) (“it is for the providers 
of such automated portals to demonstrate that they meet the same standards of suitability as those imposed on 
investment advisers generally.”); Morgan Lewis, The Evolution of Advice: Digital Investment Advisers as Fiduciaries 
at 17 (2016) available at https://www.morganlewis.com/~/media/files/publication/report/im-the-evolution-of-advice-
digital-investment-advisers-as-fiduciaries-october-2016.ashx?la=en (lawyers for robo-advisers arguing that robo-
adviser platform “fits entirely within the existing regulatory framework governing investment advisers.”). 
105 There may also be a role for the private bar to take in ensuring that robo-advisers operating under the 1940 
Act live up to their fiduciary standards.  See, e.g., Diana Novak Jones, Morningstar, Prudential Face Class Action 
Over Robo-Adviser, Law360 (Aug. 4, 2017) (describing putative class action alleging that investment advisers 
conspired to develop a robo-adviser that directed clients to high fee investments for benefit of advisers). 
106 SEC, IM Guidance Update 2017-02: Robo-Advisers at 2 (Feb. 2017). 
107 Presidential Executive Order on Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs (Jan. 30, 2017) 
(“Unless prohibited by law, whenever an executive department or agency (agency) publicly proposes for notice and 
comment or otherwise promulgates a new regulation, it shall identify at least two existing regulations to be repealed.”), 
available  at  https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/01/30/presidential-executive-order-reducing-
regulation-and-controlling.   
108 See, e.g., Chiu, supra note __ at 63 (“the regulatory engagement with financial innovation has always been 
one of relative passivity and catch-up.  Regulators, cautious of not impeding the development of competitive 
innovation and choice for consumers, often dismantle regulatory barriers to support competition or refrain from adding 
such barriers.  This is because much of financial innovation depends on low cost and flexible models, which would 
be stifled by the high cost of regulation. Thus, regulators often take a ‘wait and see’ approach, preferring to monitor 
developments regulating financial innovation.”); id. at 94 (“The judgment-based approach championed internationally 
and in the United Kingdom can form the basis for a regulatory approach that adopts early monitoring and reflective 
consideration of the key aspects of fintech innovation in terms of ‘change,’ ‘substitutive potential,’ and ‘structural 
impact.’”).   
This approach is not without its risks.  See, e.g., Lin, supra note __ at 166 (2016) (“financial innovation frequently 
finds roots in attempts to evade or arbitrage new regulation.”).  Regulators could be perceived as not protecting the 
investing public, and any scandal or crisis involving robo-advisers before regulators have crafted specific regulations 
may then result in over-regulation.  See, e.g., id. at 166-168 (describing over-regulation after economic crises, followed 
with cycle of deregulation in future years, which increase compliance costs). 16  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
regulators should reflect upon the evolution of the 1940 Act and similarities between that time and 
today.  Like the then-new investment adviser category of professionals that Congress hoped to 
learn about through the 1940 Act, robo-advisers are not an entirely well-known, uniform, or 
understood entity.109 As it did in developing the contours of the 1940 Act, regulators should use 
existing rules and regulatory tools to develop knowledge about how robo-advisers operate before 
constructing new regulation.110  For example, the SEC’s can employ enforcement actions as it did 
in the early decades of the 1940 Act to learn about the robo-adviser industry, test whether the 
existing contours of the 1940 Act’s fiduciary standard apply to robo-advisers, and consider refining 
or expanding those contours as has been done in the past when the industry changed.111  
In particular, because disclosure is a “bedrock principle of federal securities law,”112 it should 
remain a key focus of regulators as they determine what, if any, additional regulatory is necessary.  
Disclosure is a crucial aspect of fiduciary relationships because it goes to the heart of trust, the 
very relationship that some believe hardest for robo-advisers to achieve without a human touch.113  
It is therefore not surprising that the robo-adviser industry and regulators alike recognize the 
important role disclosures play in transparency relating to robo-advisers’ operations, algorithms, 
limitations and assumptions.114  Regulators have already begun to focus on the quality and content 
of robo-adviser disclosures to ensure their compliance with the 1940 Act, concerned that customers 
will not fully understand what specifically the robo-adviser is providing to them.115  Scholars 
                                                 
109 See Arthur B. Laby, Models of Securities Regulation in the United States, 25 Ford. Int’l L. J. 20, 26 (1999) 
(describing objections to regulation of investment advisers before promulgation of 1940 Act including “that the 
profession was not yet mature enough to be regulated.”). 
110 Internationally, regulators are already taking this approach.  IOSCO reports that eight regulators, including 
FINRA and the SEC, “reported that their existing rules appear to be sufficient at the present time to cover automated 
advice tools.” The Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, UPDATE ON THE REPORT ON 
THE IOSCO AUTOMATED ADVICE TOOLS SURVEY at 13 (Dec. 2016). 
111 See, e.g., Karmel, supra note __ at 407 (2016) (“As frequently occurs when the SEC is unable to engage in 
rulemaking, it has attempted to impose its views concerning proper conduct upon investment managers through 
enforcement actions.”).  Use of enforcement as an after-the-fact tool to regulate financial intermediaries is not without 
criticism, with some arguing for regulation before enforcement.  See Onnig H. Dombalagian, Preserving Human 
Agency in Automated Compliance, 11 Brook. J. Corp. Fin. & Comm L. 71, 81-83 (2016) (describing critiques of 
enforcement as regulatory tool and shift towards prophylactic regulatory scheme). 
112 Barbara Black, Are Retail Investors Better Off Today?, 2 BROOK. J. CORP. FIN. & COM. L. 303, 306-307 (2008). 
113  SEC FINTECH FORUM, supra note __ at 18 ("the most interesting part of this sort of disruption is that the 
paradigm of how we establish trust online is changing"). Others in the industry similarly believe that from an investor 
protection standpoint, FinTech boils down to trust.  See, e.g., id. at 234 (“Are they [robo-advisers] trustworthy? And 
it’s not just does it work or is the disclosure right, but what is it about it that will make it trustworthy…?”). 
114 Both the industry and regulators seem to agree the complete and clear disclosure of key elements of robo-
advisers is required.  See, e.g., BLACKROCK, supra note 10 at 10 (“digital advisors should disclose to clients the limits 
of their services and their dependence on client-provided information”); id. at 9 (“It is important that digital advisors 
reasonably design their algorithms based on their stated investment strategies and methods and make appropriate 
disclosures to clients concerning such investment strategies and methods.”); SEC, IM Guidance Update 2017-02: 
Robo-Advisers at 3-6 (Feb. 2017) (describing quality, quantity, and form of disclosure that robo-advisers may need to 
meet requirements of 1940 Act); U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, Investor Alert: Automated Investment 
Tools,  available  at  https://www.sec.gov/oiea/investor-alerts-bulletins/autolistingtoolshtm.html  (May  8,  2015) 
(advising investors to “[r]eview all relevant disclosures for an automated investment tool”). 
115 See, e.g., SEC, IM Guidance Update 2017-02: Robo-Advisers at 3-6 (Feb. 2017) (describing special 
considerations for disclosure that may apply to robo-advisers due to their unique features); The Board of the 16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  17  DRAFT 
 
similarly argue that disclosure should be a key component of future regulation applicable to 
artificial intelligence’s growth in the financial industry.116 
Disclosure is not, however, a miracle cure that renders robo-advisers appropriate for every, or 
even any, investor.117  Indeed, commentators criticize current robo-advisers operating under the 
1940  Act  for  purportedly  using  their  disclosures  to  limit  the  scope  and  character  of  their 
relationship with clients in an entirely permissible manner, but one that investors may not 
understand.118  From the time of the Capital Gains definition of fiduciary responsibilities owed by 
the investment adviser to the client, commentators suggested that disclosure may not be an 
effective device.119  Investor uses of and actions after disclosure are sometimes unintended or 
illogical.120  Disclosures to consumer investors in the mutual fund context, a type of investment 
that appeals to the same retail investors as robo-advisers, have been criticized as too dense and 
difficult to read, let alone understand, even before SEC plain English requirements.121  Regulators 
should recommend robo-adviser disclosures that do not suffer from this critique.122   
In addition to using current tools, it is imperative that, along a parallel track, the current 
regulatory tools be studied to determine their efficacy in protecting consumers.  For example, 
studying  retail  investor  understanding  of  robo-adviser  disclosures  will  provide  valuable 
information from which to further evaluate this key tool.123  Thus, in addition to reviewing robo-
                                                 
International Organization of Securities Commissions, UPDATE ON THE REPORT ON THE IOSCO AUTOMATED ADVICE 
TOOLS SURVEY at 11 (Dec. 2016) (describing regulator, including FINRA and SEC, “concerns about customers 
lacking awareness of, or not understanding, the limitations of automated advice tools.  Clients may not understand the 
service offered; for example that the automated advice tool may not consider their full financial and personal 
circumstances.”); Massachusetts Securities Division, Policy Statement: State-Registered Investment Advisers’ Use of 
Third-Party Robo-Advisers at 1 (listing six items as minimum required disclosure). 
116 Tom C.W. Lin, The New Financial Industry, 65 ALA. L. REV. 567, 599-603 (2014) (arguing for enhanced 
disclosure as component of multi-part framework for regulating “cy-fi.”).   
117 See generally Tamar Frankel, The Failure of Investor Protection by Disclosure, 81 U. CIN. L. REV. 421 (2013). 
118 Melanie L. Fein, Robo-Advisors: A Closer Look, available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2658701 (June 
30, 2015); Melanie L. Fein, FINRA’s Report on Robo-Advisors: Fiduciary Implications, available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2768295 (Apr. 1, 2016); But see Morgan Lewis, The Evolution of Advice: Digital Investment 
Advisers as Fiduciaries, at 7 (2016), available at https://www.morganlewis.com/~/media/files/publication/report/im-
the-evolution-of-advice-digital-investment-advisers-as-fiduciaries-october-2016.ashx?la=en (arguing that investment 
advisers may limit the scope of their relationship with clients). 
119 A case note describing the Capital Gains decision at the time of its issuance noted flaws inherent in disclosure.  
Dealing by Advisers in Recommended Securities, 78 Harv. L. Rev. 292, 295 (1964) (“If the investing public is truly 
naïve, disclosure does not provide a realistic method of protection.”). 
120 See, e.g., Arthur B. Laby, Reforming the Regulation of Broker-Dealers and Investment Advisers, 65 Bus. Law. 
395, 429-230 (2009) (describing concerns with disclosure of conflicts of interest as including lack of filtering of 
information between conflicted principal and client, understanding the magnitude of bias the disclosed conflict creates, 
and focus on investor and exclusion of how the disclosure impacts the disclosor’s actions); Troy A Paredes, Blinded 
by the Light: Information Overload and its Consequences for Securities Regulation, 81 Wash. U. L.Q. 417, 441-443 
(2003) (describing information overload and impact on decision making). 
121 See, e.g., Barbara Black, Are Retail Investors Better Off Today?, 2 Brook. J. Corp. Fin & Comm. L. 303, 325-
327 (2008) (describing mutual fund disclosures as “dismal,” too complicated, and difficult to digest). 
122 See Benjamin P. Edwards, The Professional Prospectus: A Call for Effective Professional Disclosure, __ 
Wash. & Lee L. Rev. __, 33 (forthcoming 2017) (arguing that disclosures for a  Professional Prospectus that would 
allow consumers to have more information about professional service providers should presents “information in a 
short, standardized, and clear format”). 
123See Black, supra note __ at 333 (“To state the obvious, the purpose of disclosure should be to provide useful 
information to investors.”); Paredes, supra note __ at 418 (describing two necessary components of disclosure’s 18  Computer as Confidant  [16-Aug-17  DRAFT 
  Comments welcome: niannarone@gsu.edu 
 
adviser disclosures for completeness and accuracy, outside studies should be conducted to evaluate 
consumers’  comprehension  of  disclosures  being  made  to  them.124    These  studies  should 
incorporate a focus beyond behavioral finance and cognitive biases and start with a threshold of 
comprehension.  In particular, studies should incorporate experts in adult literacy to determine 
whether and how much information in disclosures is being comprehended and to develop best 
practices for crafting effective disclosures that will allow investors to truly understand the contours 
of their relationship with their robo-adviser.125   
Moreover, it is necessary to explore the means of disclosure in addition to retail investors’ base 
comprehension of it.  Robo-advisers’ technological innovations may be effective in deploying 
disclosures  to  retail  investors.126    Accordingly,  regulators  should  explore  robo-advisers’ 
technological capacities to deliver disclosures in a fashion more relevant to today’s investors.127  
While technology could address some of the critiques of information overload associated with 
disclosures in investing, challenges nevertheless remain.128  Robo-advisers provide an interesting 
opportunity to determine if, and how, their purportedly consumer-friendly technology can be 
deployed to increase efficacy and consumer comprehension of disclosures.129  For example, 
regulators and robo-advisers alike could explore robo-adviser capabilities to track whether and to 
                                                 
efficacy: that information is disclosed and that end users of the disclosure “use the disclosed information effectively.”). 
124 See, e.g., Paredes, supra note __ at 420 (advocating “more empirical research to better understand how 
investors process information and make investment decisions.”); id. (“the federal securities laws could be improved 
by accounting for how investors actually process information and make decisions.”). 
125 Black, supra note __ at 337 (“the likelihood that investors will be forced to participate in markets that they do 
not understand and that they do not perceive as fair should drive current reform efforts.”); Paredes, supra note __ at 
432 (“for our mandatory disclosure system to work, securities market participants must not only have access to 
information, but must be able to search and process in an effective manner the information that is disclosed.”).   
126 See, e.g., SEC, IM Guidance Update 2017-02: Robo-Advisers at 5-6 (Feb. 2017) (describing how consumer 
engagement with robo-advisory platforms may require different format and character of disclosures involving 
technological innovation).  In recent years, regulators have focused attention to the collection and dissemination of 
data in formats that will permit regulators and scholars to interpret and use the data with the hope that retail investors 
may also be able to benefit from the information.  See Onnig H. Dombalagian, Preserving Human Agency in 
Automated Compliance, 11 BROOK. J. CORP. FIN. & COM. L. 71, 74-75 (2016) (describing regulatory efforts to 
standardize and automate information relating to disclosures for more meaningful use); Paredes, supra note __ at 479-
480 (advocating for investor education and training coupled with decision aids to encourage more effective investor 
use of disclosure). 
127 Investor Advocate Rick Fleming has argued that current disclosure regimes have not kept up with how 
Americans access information and that “new technologies give us new opportunities to provide disclosure that is both 
comprehensive and comprehensible.  Times have changed, and so should the delivery of information to investors.”  
Rick  A.  Fleming,  Effective  Disclosure  for  the  21st  Century  Investor  (Feb.  20,  2015),  available  at 
https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/022015-spchraf.html.  
128 See, e.g., Erik F. Gerding, Disclosure 2.0: Can Technology Solve Overload, Complexity and Other Information 
Failures?, 90 TULANE L. REV. 1143, 1167-1180 (2016) (discussing technology's  potential and challenges  in 
addressing informational overload and complexity issues investors face in assessing securities and arguing for 
evidence to inform disclosure initiatives); id. at 1146 ("Can new technologies help investors understand complex 
firms, particularly financial institutions, as well as complex financial instruments and markets, while not overtaxing 
the cognitive abilities of individuals? Investors need a rich set of information to value firms and securities, but the fear 
is that they cannot process too much information or that too much information will exacerbate behavioral biases and 
prompt cognitive errors."). 
129 See Tom C.W. Lin, The New Financial Industry, 65 ALA. L. REV. 567, 601 (2014) (arguing that “policymakers 
should examine new ways to leverage technology towards creating a better, more workable disclosure framework.”) 16-Aug-17]  Chicago-Kent Law Review (forthcoming)  19  DRAFT 
 
what extent their customer users read and understand disclosures and follow up with those 
consumers who may need additional attention to fully understand.130 
 
CONCLUSION 
Robo-advisory platforms, as newer entrants to an established advisory industry, challenge 
convention and will disrupt the provision of financial advisory services in the future.  Though 
“robo-adviser” is currently synonymous with innovation, the industry’s swift growth may render 
the services it provides so ubiquitous that the term will fade away.131  Yet the means through which 
advice is provided is not fully understood and will continue to evolve.132 Operating within an 
existing framework, the robo-advisers now regulated under the 1940 Act will challenge regulators 
to examine and articulate the parameters of the fiduciary duties they owe to the clients and how 
those duties will be met.  However, just as with the promulgation of the 1940 Act, the application 
of the current regulatory regime to a new breed of advisers will guide regulators and shape investor 
protection policy after study and real-world experiences inform direction and identify needs and 
gaps.  The new breed of investment advisers, robo-advisers, provide regulators with an opportunity 
to refocus on the core principles of the 1940 Act and use their current tool kit to guide future 
activity while evaluating whether the technology itself affords opportunities to better ensure that 
the consumer protection aspect of disclosure actually results in fully informed consumers. 
                                                 
130 For example, Canadian regulators require robo-advisers to follow up with a telephone call to any investor 
whose response to online initial information appears to be incorrect or inconsistent.  See The Board of the International 
Organization of Securities Commissions, UPDATE ON THE REPORT ON THE IOSCO AUTOMATED ADVICE TOOLS 
SURVEY at 6 (Dec. 2016).  Robo-advisers could develop algorithms to determine whether customers need additional 
disclosure mechanisms if, for example, they have not spent a certain amount of time on a disclosure page before 
acknowledging that they have read it. 
131  In the SEC’s FinTech forum, robo-advisor Betterment’s CEO Ben Alden described how robo-advisers may 
be subsumed into the lexicon of financial services as they continue to grow: “We don’t use “online brokerage” or 
“discount brokerage” quite the way that it was in the, you know, ‘80s-‘90s, and I think, similarly, “robo-adviser” will 
drop away.” SEC Fintech Forum, supra note __ at 71. 
132 See, e.g., Lin, supra note __ at 163 (arguing that technology will continue to transform all aspects of financial 
industry in future years). 