BANK GOVERNANCE AND  SYSTEMIC STABILITY:
THE "GOLDEN SHARE" APPROACH
Saule T Omarova*
INTRODUCTION  ................................................ 1030
I. RETHINKING THE PUBLIC'S ROLE IN BANK GOVERNANCE: TOWARD
A NEW PARADIGM.  ..................................  ...... 1033
A.  Bank Governance and FinancialS tability: An Unresolved
Tension ..................................... 1033
B.  Bank Governance as a Matter ofPublic Interest. ...  .... 1040
II. THE GOLDEN SHARE MECHANISM:  SETTING THE STAGE...................1043
A.  The Concept of a Golden Share: Background.....  ..... 1043
B.  SGS Basics: Substantive Mandate; Key Definitions..............1045
1.  Covered Entity  ........................  ..... 1045
2.  SGS and SGS Holder  ..................  ....... 1047
C.  The SGS Mechanism: The PassiveM  ode.........  ....... 1048
III. THE GOLDEN SHARE IN ACTION: THE "MANAGER OF LAST
RESORT"................................................1052
A.  Activating SGS: TriggeringE  vents.............  ..... 1052
B.  The SGS Mechanism: The Active Mode......  ......... 1055
IV. INSTITUTIONAL DESIGN: KEY CONSIDERATIONS  ................. 1058
A.  OrganizationalC hoices; Place in the Regulatory Structure. 1059
B.  Funding;A  ccountability Mechanisms  ...........  ..... 1063
C.  Dealingw  ith the Fear Factor..  .................... 1067
CONCLUSION..................................................1069
*  Saule T.  Omarova is Professor of Law at Cornell University Law School. For thoughtful
comments and criticisms, I thank the organizers of and participants in the The University of Alabama
School of Law Bank Director & Officer Responsibilities Conference (Aug. 26, 2016).  Special thanks to
Julie Hill, Robert Hockett, Hope Mehlman, and Heidi Schooner.
10291030 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
INTRODUCTION
The global financial  crisis  of 2008-2009  has  taught the world many
invaluable lessons.  One such lesson concerns the central importance of the
banking sector and its regulation for the stable and efficient functioning of
the global  financial  system-a subject  matter considered  too boring  and
old-fashioned in the precrisis era of fascination with financial innovation in
capital markets and so-called disintermediation of banks. In the wake of the
crisis, policy-makers'  attention, both  domestically  and globally, has been
directed  primarily  at  correcting  mistakes  of the  deregulatory  precrisis
period and  strengthening and recalibrating  the regulatory and supervisory
framework for banks and other systemically important financial institutions
(SIFIs). The crisis shattered the unfettered faith in the traditional notions of
market discipline, market rationality,  industry self-regulation,  and internal
risk  management  as  sufficiently  reliable  mechanisms  of  market  self-
correction.'  Accordingly,  the  explicit  focus  of  postcrisis  reforms  on
macroprudential  regulation  reflects  our  collective  realization  that
safeguarding  systemic  financial  stability  requires  a  more  assertive  and
effective  government  oversight  of individual  banks'  and  other  financial
institutio-ns' business operations.2
But  where  does  that  leave  banks'  internal  governance?  Does  firm
governance  have  any  role  as  a  mechanism  of crisis  prevention,  or  are
externally  imposed  regulation  and  supervision the  only  viable  means  of
achieving this goal? Scholars of corporate governance  continue to grapple
with this question.  Some of them advocate for corporate governance  as a
more effective or market-friendly alternative to what they see as excessive
government intervention in private firms'  affairs.3 Others seek to adjust or
enhance  some of the traditional corporate governance  tools to aid,  rather
1.  Perhaps one of the most revealing moments in this respect came in October 2008, when the
former Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the Federal Reserve), Alan
Greenspan, publicly admitted that he had erred in putting too much faith in the self-correcting powers of
free markets. See Edmund L. Andrews, Greenspan Concedes Error on Regulation, N.Y. TIMES (Oct.
23, 2008), http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/24/business/economy/24panel.html;  see also RICHARD A.
POSNER, A FAILURE OF CAPITALISM: THE CRISIS OF '08 AND THE DESCENT INTO DEPRESSION  114-15
(2009)  (arguing  that  rational  profit-maximizing  behavior  of  market  actors  produces  negative
externalities that cannot be controlled without government regulation). For a more recent discussion,
see David Min, Understandingt he Failureso fMarket Discipline, 92 WASH. U. L. REV. 1421 (2015).
2.  For in-depth analyses of the postcrisis shift to macroprudential regulation, see Robert Hockett,
The  Macroprudential Turn: From Institutional 'Safety  and Soundness' to Systematic  'Financial
Stability' in Financial Supervision, 9  VA.  L. & BUS. REV. 201  (2015), Gabriele Galati & Richhild
Moessner, MacroprudentialP olicy - A Literature Review (Bank for Int'l Settlements, Working Paper
No.  337,  2011),  www.bis.org/publ/work337.pdf,  and INT'L MONETARY FUND,  MACROPRUDENTIAL
POLICY: AN ORGANIZING FRAMEWORK (2011), www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/03141  la.pdf.
3.  See,  e.g., Valentina Bruno & Stijn Claessens, Corporate Governance and Regulation: Can
There Be Too Much of a Good Thing?, 19 J. FIN.  INTERMEDIATION  461  (2010); Sean J. Griffith,
Corporate Governance in an Era of Compliance, 57 WM. & MARY L. REv. 2075 (2016).2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1031
than supplant, regulatory  efforts.4  The Dodd-Frank Act, the centerpiece  of
the  postcrisis  reform  legislation,  mandates  various  measures  aimed  at
strengthening  internal  risk oversight  at U.S.  banks  and  other  SIFIs.'  In
passing  the  Act,  Congress  sought  to broaden  the responsibilities  of the
boards of directors of such institutions,  with an eye toward safeguarding
the long-term stability of the U.S.  financial system. Regulators have voiced
the  need  to  consider  special  bank  governance  measures  as  a  tool  of
postcrisis prudential regulation.6  And, across the board, there are calls  for
improving the risk-taking culture at banks and other financial institutions.
Unfortunately,  it is not  clear whether,  and  to what  extent,  any such
newly  enhanced  corporate  governance  requirements  would  succeed  in
changing  banks'  private profit-oriented  culture and  preventing  excessive
accumulation  of risk in the  financial  system.  Part of the problem  is the
sheer technical difficulty of managing systemic risk in today's dynamic and
complex  financial  markets.  More  fundamentally,  however,  the  limited
utility of traditional corporate governance as a mechanism of systemic risk
management  reflects  deep-seated  inadequacies  in  the  conceptual  and
normative apparatus of modern U.S.  corporate law.  Its prevailing notions
of what a corporation is, what goals it does or should legitimately pursue,
and  whose  interests  its  directors  and  managers  do or  should serve,  are
simply  not  capacious  enough  to  be  able  to  incorporate  a  meaningful
emphasis on the interests of society as a whole.9  The dominant conception
of the corporate  form as  a contractually  created  vehicle  for maximizing
shareholder value is inimical to the idea of making business corporations-
or their directors and officers-agents of the broader public interest. To the
extent the private and public interests can be legitimately  reconciled,  it is
usually  done at the periphery,  in an attempt  to find "win-win"  solutions
that benefit  both society  and  individual  shareholders.  Curbing  excessive
executive  compensation  practices  at  systemically  important  banks,  for
example,  is  one  such  area  where  regulatory  objectives-and  the public
interest they serve-are largely in line with the tenets of the corporate law
4.  See, e.g., Lucian A. Bebchuk & Holger Spamann, Regulating Bankers'Pay, 98 GEO. L.J. 247
(2010).
5.  Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat.
1376 (2010) (codified in scattered sections ofthe U.S. Code).
6.  See, e.g., William C. Dudley, President & Chief Exec.  Officer, Fed. Reserve Bank of N.Y.,
Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry (Oct. 20, 2014),
https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2014/dudl41020a.html;  Daniel  K.  Tarullo,
Governor, Bd. of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., Corporate Governance and Prudential Regulation
(June 9, 2014), https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/tarullo2Ol4O6O9a.htm.
7.  See,  e.g.,  Governance  &  Culture  Reform:  Archive,  FED.  RES.  BANK  N.Y.,
https://www.newyorkfed.org/govemance-and-culture-reform/archive.html.
8.  For a detailed discussion of why this is the case, see Robert C. Hockett, Are Bank Fiduciaries
Special?, 68 ALA. L. REV. 1071 (2017).
9.  See infra Part I.A.1032 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
and theory.10 All too often, however, the incentives of bank managers  and
shareholders  to pursue  short-term private  gains are perfectly  aligned but
work directly against the public interest in preserving long-term  financial
stability."  The  recent  financial  crisis  exposed  how  these  socially
destructive dynamics  operate in practice.12  It also made abundantly  clear
that the modem system of corporate governance,  with its traditional focus
on  solving  specific  principal-agent  problems  within  a  firm,  is  not  a
sufficiently  reliable  or consistent  mechanism  for managing  this insidious
and apparently pervasive conflict in a publicly beneficial way.
This Article  accepts the existence of that built-in potential conflict as
the critical  starting point for answering  the central  question of postcrisis
bank  governance:  How  do we  ensure  that  the  board  of directors  of a
privately  owned banking  institution consistently  and effectively  acts  in a
manner  that  serves  the overarching  public  interest in safeguarding  long-
term systemic financial stability? The Article offers an unorthodox solution
to  this problem:  in lieu of "improving"  or "tweaking"  existing  standards
and procedures  that determine board composition or guide specific board
actions,  it  advocates  a  fundamental  structural  reconfiguration  of  bank
governance  by giving the federal government  a seat on the board of each
systemically important banking organization.
Specifically, the Article proposes a special "golden share" regime that
would  grant  direct  but  conditional  management  rights  to  a  designated
government representative  on the board of each affected  institution.13 The
goal  of the proposed regime would be to create  a powerful organizational
node  of public-interest-driven  management,  which  would  operate  as  a
dynamic  and flexible  internal  "emergency  brake"  on individual  banks'
activities presenting  significant systemic stability concerns.  To paraphrase
a  staple metaphor,  this mechanism  would  effectively  enable  the  federal
government  to  accept  the  role  of  the  "manager  of last  resort"  of  a
systemically  significant  financial  firm-but  only  temporarily  and  well
10.  See, e.g., Bebchuk & Spamann, supra note 4.
11.  See Hockett, supra note 8.
12.  For  detailed  analyses  of  market-wide  and  firm-specific  dynamics  that  resulted  in
unsustainable levels of risk and leverage in the financial system, see FIN. CRISIS INQUIRY COMM'N, THE
FINANCIAL CRISIS INQUIRY REPORT: FINAL REPORT OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE CAUSES
OF  FINANCIAL  AND  ECONOMIC  CRISIS  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  (2011),  https://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/GPO-FCIC.pdf;  S.  PERMANENT  SUBCOMM.  ON  INVESTIGATIONS,  112TH  CONG.,  WALL
STREET  AND  THE  FINANCIAL  CRISIS:  ANATOMY  OF  A  FINANCIAL  COLLAPSE  394  (2011),
http://hsgac.senate.gov/public/_files/FinancialCrisis/FinancialCrisisReport.pdf;  FIN.  SERVS.  AUTH.,
THE  TURNER  REVIEw:  A  REGULATORY  RESPONSE  TO  THE  GLOBAL  BANKING  CRISIS  (2009),
http://www.ecgi.org/tcgd/2009/FSATurnerReport-onFinancialCrisis_2009.pdf
13.  The proposal advanced in this Article builds upon  and elaborates the concept originally
formulated in Robert C. Hockett & Saule T. Omarova, Public Actors in Private Markets: Toward a
Developmental Finance State, 93 WASH. U. L. REV. 103, 167-74 (2015) [hereinafter Public Actors].2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1033
before that  firm's  actions  threaten to bring  down the financial  system.14
Importantly, the proposed golden share regime is neither a nationalization
measure  nor an institutionalized  bank bailout.  Its overarching  purpose  is
not to put the federal government  in charge  of private  firms but,  on the
contrary, to steer the firms toward self-correcting and preventative actions
necessary  to  avoid  that  undesirable  result.  In  effect,  the  golden  share
regime would operationalize a novel approach to bank-and, more broadly,
SIFI-corporate  governance  as  an  inherently  hybrid  public-private
process.1
A proposal of this kind is bound to raise potentially  significant issues
of legal doctrine and practical implementation. The present Article does not
purport to offer a full set of solutions to all of these problems;  it merely
outlines in principle the key elements of the proposed regime's design and
operation. The proposal advocated here is essentially a thought experiment:
an attempt to push the boundaries of the familiar debate and to stimulate a
productive  discussion of how public our privately owned banks and other
systemically significant  financial institutions really are-and how public-
minded their internal governance should be.
The  Article  proceeds  as  follows.  Part  I  lays  out  a broad  normative
justification  for the  golden  share proposal.  Parts  II  and IHl  outline basic
substantive  and  operational  features  of the  proposed  regime.  Part  IV
addresses some of the key issues in connection with the institutional design
and administration of the proposed scheme.
I. RETHINKING THE PUBLIC'S ROLE IN BANK GOVERNANCE: TOWARD A
NEW PARADIGM
A.  Bank Governance and FinancialS tability: An Unresolved Tension
The  term "corporate  governance"  generally  refers  to  the  system  of
intrafirm structures  and procedures through which shareholders  and other
stakeholders  in  the  firm  exercise  control  over  its management.16  In  the
14.  The  federal bank regulators, such as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation  (FDIC),
already act as managers of last resort with respect to banks that are either insolvent or meet certain
statutory standards for so-called prompt corrective action. See 12 U.S.C.  ยง 1831o (2012). In that sense,
the proposal advanced here should not be seen as a truly radical departure from the existing practice.
Nevertheless,  as discussed below, granting more flexible and direct internal-management rights to a
special public instrumentality that does not perform regulatory or supervisory functions and acts strictly
as a market actor would create a qualitatively new arena for systemic risk prevention and, in that sense,
constitute a radical departure from the current regime. See infra notes 116-121 and accompanying text.
15.  See infra Part IV.C.
16.  See Jens Hagendorff, Corporate Governance in Banking, in THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF
BANKING  139, 139 (Allen Berger et al. eds., 2d ed. 2015).  According to one influential definition,
"[c]orporate governance involves a set of relationships between a company's management, its board, its
shareholders and other stakeholders. Corporate governance also provides the structure through which1034 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
United States, where corporate law is a matter of state law, the model of
corporate  governance  focuses  primarily  on potential  conflicts  of interest
between  equity  holders,  as  residual  claimants  on  the  firm's  assets,  and
corporate  managers  and  directors  to whom  they delegate  the  day-to-day
control over the  firm's business  affairs.17  In the academic  literature,  this
fundamental tension is generally referred to as the "agency problem," or a
problem of motivating  the agents-who possess superior information and
decision-making  authority-to act in the best interests of the principals.18
The agency problem remains the dominant analytic and normative focus of
mainstream  U.S.  corporate  law  scholarship  and  continues  to  dominate
academic  and policy  discussions on corporate governance.  Critically,  this
mainstream paradigm generally  views shareholders  as the only legitimate
category of principals in the corporate context and, accordingly, approaches
problems  of  corporate  governance  from  a  fundamentally  shareholder-
centric  perspective.1 9 Among  other  things,  it provides  the basis  for  the
currently dominant claim that the sole legitimate corporate purpose is, and
should be, maximization of shareholder value.20
One of the key legal mechanisms  for addressing the agency  problem
and reducing shareholders' agency costs is the imposition of a special set of
fiduciary duties on corporate managers  and, importantly, board members.
Under U.S.  corporate law, the board of directors is charged with the crucial
task  of  managing  and  supervising  the  business  and  affairs  of  the
corporation.21  The dominant paradigm accordingly  views fiduciary duties
as indispensable  gap  fillers  in the fundamentally  contractual  relationship
the objectives  of the company  are set,  and the means of attaining those objectives and monitoring
performance  are  determined."  ORGANISATION  FOR  ECON.  CO-OPERATION  &  DEV.,  G20/OECD
PRINCIPLES  OF  CORPORATE  GOVERNANCE  9  (2015),  http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/
download/2615 021e.pdfexpires=1488685295&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=58B3733B64C759
8CF12DOCOA72EB8FB8.
17.  See, e.g., D. GORDON SMITH & CYNTHIA A. WILLIAMS, BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS 174 (3d
ed. 2012) ("Many of the issues that arise under corporate law relate to conflicts between the board of
directors and the shareholders.").
18.  The economic and legal literature on the essence of the agency problem and the significance
of minimizing  "agency costs"  in a corporate setting is simply too voluminous  to cite  here. For a
succinct overview  of the agency problem  as a subject of corporate law, see John Armour,  Henry
Hansmann  &  Reinier Kraakman,  Agency  Problems and Legal Strategies, in THE ANATOMY  OF
CORPORATE LAW: A COMPARATIvE AND FUNCTIONAL APPROACH 35 (Reinier Kraakman et al. eds., 2d
ed. 2009).
19.  Once again,  citing in  a meaningful way  an  extensive body of literature proffering  this
dominant  (at least,  in  the Anglo-American  context)  shareholder-centric  perspective  on corporate
governance  would be a futile task.  For a compelling critique  of the shareholder-centric view  of a
modem corporation, see LYNN STOUT, THE SHAREHOLDER VALUE MYTH (2012).
20.  For recent critical  analyses of the "shareholder  value  maximization" paradigm,  see id;
Robert C.  Hockett & Saule T.  Omarova,  "Special," Vestigial, or Visionary? What Bank Regulation
Tells Us About the Corporation-andV ice Versa, 39 SEATTLE U. L. REv. 453 (2016).
21.  See SMITH & WILLIAMS, supra note 17, at 174 ("Officers ...  are in charge of the day-to-day
operations of the corporation.... and they make many  of the decisions that define a corporation's
activities.... [The board of d]irectors [is] elected by shareholders to supervise the officers.").2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1035
between shareholders and their agents, which "essentially call on directors
to  work  hard  and  to promote  the  interests  of shareholders  above  their
own."22
As fiduciaries, directors are subject to the duty of care and the duty of
loyalty and may be personally  liable to the corporation's  shareholders  for
the damages caused by the breach of those duties.23 In general, directors are
required to exercise reasonable care, prudence, and diligence in managing
and  supervising  the  corporation's  affairs.  However,  the  judicially
developed  "business judgment  rule" protects  them from liability  for bad
judgment  calls,  as  long  as  directors  followed  reasonable  due  diligence
procedures. 24 In most  states, plaintiffs  can sustain  their burden  of proof
only by showing that directors acted with gross negligence, a standard that
is much stricter than ordinary negligence.25
These  fundamental  principles  of  corporate  law  and  governance
generally  apply  to  banking  institutions  that  are  typically  organized  as
corporations.  At the same time,  however, modern banks represent  a very
special  type  of business  corporation,  which  complicates  straightforward
application of such principles in the banking context.
Thus, it has long been recognized, albeit not without controversy,  that
26
deposit-taking  banks  are  "special"  even  among  financial  institutions.
Banks are said to be special in that they perform certain important public
functions:  they provide  transactional  accounts,  operate  payment  systems,
and serve as channels for transmission of monetary policy.27 While each of
these  functions  can  be,  and  often  is,  performed  by  various  nonbank
institutions, banks have historically combined them in a way and on a scale
not evident outside the banking system, which led many to view banks as
22.  Jonathan R. Macey & Maureen O'Hara, The Corporate Governance of Banks, 9  FRBNY
ECON. POL'Y REv. 91, 93 (2003).
23.  Id. Some scholars treat the duty of good faith as a separate and distinct form of fiduciary
duty. For the purposes of this Article, however, these and other doctrinal and theoretical nuances are
largely irrelevant.
24.  See Aronson v. Lewis, 473 A.2d 805, 812 (Del. 1984) (stating a presumption that "in making
a business decision the directors of a corporation acted on an informed basis, in good faith and in the
honest belief that the action taken was in the best interests of the company").
25.  See  Heidi  Mandanis  Schooner,  Fiduciary Duties' Demanding Cousin: Bank Director
Liability for Unsafe or Unsound Banking Practices, 63 GEO.  WASH. L. REV.  175,  186-87  (1995);
Ronald W. Stevens & Bruce H. Nielson, The Standardo f Caref or Directorsa nd Officers of Federally
Chartered Depository Institutions. It's Gross Negligence Regardless of Whether Section 1821(k)
Preempts Federal Common Law, 13 ANN. REV. BANKING L. 169, 191-93 (1994).
26.  For a classic articulation of this argument, see E. Gerald Corrigan, Are Banks Special?, in
FED.  RESERVE  BANK  OF  MINNEAPOLIS,  ANNUAL  REPORT  1982,  at  5  (1983),
https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/files/docs/historical/frbminn/1982_frb_minneapolis.pdf  [hereinafter  Are
Banks Special?]; E. Gerald Corrigan, Are Banks Special?: A Revisitation, REGION  (Mar.  1, 2000),
http://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/the-region/are-banks-special.
27  See Are Banks Special?, supra note 26. For a recent restatement of the argument, see Alan M.
White, Banks as Utilities, 90 TUL. L. REv. 1241 (2016).1036 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
quasi-public  utilities.28  Furthermore,  banks'  traditional  business  model,
based  on  high  leverage  and  large-scale  maturity  and  liquidity
transformation, renders them inherently vulnerable to creditor runs.29 Banks
issue  very  little  equity,  their  core  assets  are  highly  opaque,  and  their
liabilities are extremely short-term-a fragility-producing  combination.  In
order to protect banks  from failure and to ensure their ability to continue
providing  publicly  important  services,  modem  governments  typically
subsidize banks by providing them with credit and liquidity support. Thus,
in the United States, the two central pillars of such support are the federal
deposit  insurance  system,  administered by the Federal  Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC), and access to the Federal Reserve's liquidity backup
facilities.30
These  "special"  features of banks  also shaped their internal corporate
governance. For example, American courts have a long history of holding
bank directors to a heightened standard of duty of care, by virtue of banks'
quasi-public functions.31 While many of these cases preceded the advent of
federal deposit insurance and even the widespread adoption of the general
incorporation statutes, the importance of holding bank directors to a higher
standard of care continues  to be recognized  to this day.32  In some  states,
directors  of  state-chartered  banks  are  subject  to  personal  liability  for
breaches of the duty of care if they are found to have acted with negligence,
as  opposed to  gross  negligence.33  Even  self-professed  supporters  of the
currently dominant view of the corporation  as a purely private "nexus of
contracts,"  whose primary purpose  is maximization of shareholder value,
have  advocated  for  expanding  the  scope  of fiduciary  duties  of bank
directors to include a duty to ensure their bank's safety and soundness.34
Characteristically, the primary object of the heightened director duties
and responsibilities  in all of these instances is the "safety  and soundness"
28.  See  Are Banks Special?, supra note  26.  While  this  canonical  articulation  of banks'
"specialness"  identifies  some of the key factors that explain the heightened public significance  of
banks' core business activities, it nevertheless fails to capture the more fundamental relational dynamics
that render privately owned banks public agents in a more direct sense, as specially licensed de facto
"franchisees" of the sovereign. See infra notes 53-56 and accompanying text.
29.  See Douglas W. Diamond & Philip H. Dybvig, Bank Runs, DepositI nsurance, and Liquidity,
91 J. POL. ECON. 401 (1983) (analyzing the general dynamics of bank runs).
30.  See generally MICHAEL BARR ET AL., FINANCIAL REGULATION: LAW AND POLICY (2016).
31.  See Patricia A. McCoy, A  PoliticalE conomy of the Business Judgment Rule in Banking:
Implicationsf or CorporateL aw, 47 CASE W. RES. L. REv. 1 (1996).
32.  See Hagendorff, supra note 16; PATRICIA A. McCoy, BANKING LAW MANUAL  ยง 14.01,
14.04 (2013); Macey & O'Hara, supra note 22.
33.  See BARR ET AL., supra note 30, at 813-14 (discussing the standard for bank director liability
under the New York banking statute); McCoy, supra note 32, ยง 14.04.
34.  See, e.g., Macey & O'Hara, supra note 22, at 92 ("In particular, we call on bank directors to
take  solvency risk explicitly and  systematically  into account when making decisions,  or else  face
personal liability for failure to do so.").2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1037
of *the relevant  banks.5  The  principal  doctrinal  adjustment,  either  as
sanctioned by courts or as proposed by academics, is to broaden the range
of the beneficiaries  of bank directors'  fiduciary duties to include not only
the banks'  shareholders but the banks themselves-and,  in certain limited
circumstances,  the  banks'  depositors.36  By  creating  multiple  new
beneficiaries  of  directors'  fiduciary  duties,  however,  this  approach
potentially introduces a significant internal source of tension and conflict in
the  operation  of  the  fiduciary  relation  within  a  bank.  Even  more
importantly,  this  somewhat  expanded  version  of  fiduciary  duties  and
responsibilities of bank directors remains fundamentally tied to the familiar
notion of corporate governance  as a mechanism  of internal organizational
concern,  a  matter  of "micro"  rather  than  "macro"  ordering.  Any  truly
systemic  positive  externalities  of  holding  individual  bank  directors  to
higher fiduciary  standards  are  largely presumed to  follow the first-order
effects on the individual banks' safety and soundness, frequently used as a
proxy for profitability.
The financial crisis of 2008-2009 exposed the dangers of precisely this
kind  of  over-reliance  on  microprudential  tools  for  managing  critical
system-wide  risks.  It  laid  bare  the  systemically  harmful  dynamics  of
recursive collective action problems, whereby individually rational actions
by market participants  led to a  collectively  disastrous  result.38  To  put it
simply,  private  market  actors-firms  or  individuals,  big  or  small-
generally  operate  under  strict  profit-maximization  constraints,  which
renders them excessively susceptible to immediate pressures to avoid short-
term  losses  and  to  produce  short-term  competitive  returns,  even  where
pursuing  such  strategies  impairs  their  capacity  to  sustain  long-term
profitability. Rationally responding to these pressures, individual firms and
investors tend to buy inflated assets during the euphoric bubble buildup and
sell  them during  the  post-bubble  downward  price  spiral,  in  both  cases
exacerbating the destabilizing market-wide  trend.39  From this perspective,
declaring bank directors fiduciaries  of the bank, as opposed to the bank's
35.  See, e.g., id.
36.  See, e.g., id. at 98-102.
37.  For an  insightful analysis of the traditional concept of fiduciary duty as a status-derived
obligation of the agent to act as  the principal's alter ego, thus eliminating the functional difference
between  the  two,  see  Hockett,  supra note  8.  As  a  conceptual  matter,  then,  an  agent  cannot
simultaneously owe the same fiduciary obligation to several principals (or beneficiaries) whose interests
are not strictly identical. Introducing variations in the scope or intensity of fiduciary duty, depending on
the beneficiary's relative position or other circumstances, runs the risk of altering the nature of the
relation altogether.
38.  Robert C. Hockett, Recursive Collective Actions Problems: The Structure ofProcyclicality in
Financiala nd Monetary Markets, Macroeconomies and Formally Similar Contexts, J. FIN. PERSP., July
2015, at 1.
39.  See id.; see also Public Actors, supra note 13, at 122-37 (discussing the key differences in
the relative incentives, capacities, and roles of private and public market actors).1038 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
shareholders, makes little practical difference.  Even if directors  faithfully
discharge  their  duty  to  act  in  the best  interests  of the relevant  bank,  a
private profit-maximizing entity, their actions can nevertheless exacerbate
socially destructive boom-and-bust cycles in the financial markets.40
In the postcrisis era, systemic financial stability came to be recognized
as the overarching policy  goal that is explicitly separate from the goal of
preserving  individual entities'  safety  and soundness.  The Dodd-Frank Act
sought to  strengthen  the  resilience  of the  U.S.  financial system,  among
other things,  by mandating  compliance  with  a  range  of new,  or  newly
enhanced,  entity-wide  risk-oversight  responsibilities  of the  boards  of
directors  of banks,  bank  holding companies  (BHCs),  and other  SIFIs.41
However, the Act does not attempt to revisit the old underlying concept of
bank directors'  fiduciary duties as a firm-level  internal ordering  device.42
With respect to financial firms that are not chartered as banks-including
BHCs  organized  as  regular  state-chartered  corporations-a  fundamental
reorientation  of  directors'  fiduciary  duties  toward  the  broader  public
interest  in  systemic  stability  presents  an  even  bigger  conceptual  and
practical challenge.  Accomplishing  that task would require potentially  far
more  radical  adjustments  to the dominant  corporate law  and governance
paradigm  than  merely  tightening  certain  regulatory  compliance
requirements.
In  recent  years,  a  few  legal  scholars  explored potential  avenues  for
making  such  adjustments.  For  instance,  under  one  proposal,  individual
firms  would  be  required  to  appoint a  critical  mass  of so-called  public
directors who  would act as  representatives  of the public interest on such
firms' boards.43 These public directors would be either publicly elected or
administratively  appointed,  and  their  principal  function  would  be  to
introduce an explicitly other-regarding  perspective  into corporate boards'
deliberations, thus making banks and other SIFIs more likely to behave in a
40.  For an insightful recent discussion of the dynamics and history of financial asset booms and
busts, see ERIK F. GERDING, LAW, BUBBLES, AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 33-135 (2014).
41.  For an overview of such board-duty-enhancing measures under the Dodd-Frank regime and
implementing regulations, see MCCOY, supra note  32, ยง 14.04; Edward D. Herlihy et al., Financial
Institutions Developments: Key Trends in Financial Institutions M&A and Governance, 52 BANK &
CORP. GOVERNANCE L. REP. 23 (2014).
42.  One of the most controversial aspects of the postcrisis reforms in bank and SIFl  governance
concerned the regulators'  efforts to make such institutions' boards more directly responsible for the
effective functioning  of their firms' risk  management systems, which the industry perceived  as a
dangerous and unworkable attempt to blur the line between directors' traditional oversight role and the
managers'  executive role. See,  e.g., DEBEVOISE  & PLIMPTON,  CLIENT UPDATE: BASEL COMMITTEE
2015 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES (Aug. 11, 2015), http://www.debevoise.com/-/media/files/
insights/publications/2015/08/2015081 Ibasel committee_2015_corporategovernanceprinciples.pdf
43.  See Hilary J. Allen, The Pathologies ofBanking Business as Usual, 17 U. PA. J. BUS. L. 861
(2015); James Fanto, Whistleblowing and the Public Director: Countering CorporateI nner Circles, 83
OR. L. REV. 435, 490-540 (2004).2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1039
systemic-stability-enhancing  manner.4  Yet, it is not entirely clear whether,
or why,  these  "public"  directors  would  be  more  effective  than  today's
"independent"  directors  in  counteracting  "groupthink"  or  significantly
altering  the  systemically  harmful  shareholder-value-driven  board
behavior.45 As long as nonpublic directors'  fiduciary  duties continue to be
interpreted  as  running  to the firm's  shareholders,  the presence  of public
directors  is  unlikely  to  resolve  the  underlying  tension  between  micro-
rationality and macro-stability.
Another intriguing proposal targets the substantive scope of directors'
fiduciary duties, rather than the composition of SIFIs' boards.46 Under this
approach,  SIFI  directors  would  owe  a  broader  fiduciary  duty  of care
directly to the firm, rather than its shareholders,  and be liable for failure to
control  the  firm's  systemically  risky  behavior  that  results  in  significant
losses to that firm.47  The proposal "revives the case for director-negligence
liability as a method of constraining bank risk-taking, not limited to cases
of bank  failure but  rather addressed  to  cases  in which a  large  financial
institution suffers losses of a  magnitude  and kind that could threaten the
institution's stability."48 In effect, it seeks to align directors'  interests with
the  interests  of SIFIs'  diversified  shareholders,  likely  to  suffer  greater
losses from systemic distress than from any individual firm's failure.
What makes this proposal particularly noteworthy is that, in an attempt
to push conceptual  boundaries, it underscores  the inherent inability of the
traditional  corporate  law  and governance  doctrine  to  accommodate  the
postcrisis systemic risk perspective. However sophisticated, this proposal is
premised on a fundamentally questionable assumption that systemic harms
can, and should, be effectively policed by individual firms'  shareholders-
and on an ex post basis.49 Moreover, by conditioning directors'  liability on
44.  Allen, supra note 43, at 901-02. It is worth noting that Professor Fanto's original proposal
was not designed specifically to apply to financial institutions. See Fanto, supra note 43.
45.  For a discussion of the role and efficacy of independent directors on the boards of publicly
listed companies, see Roberta S. Karmel, Is the Independent Director Model Broken?, 37 SEATrLE U.
L. REv. 775 (2014).
46.  See John Armour & Jeffrey N. Gordon, Systemic Harms and Shareholder Value, 6 J. LEGAL
ANALYsIS 35 (2014).
47.  Armour  and  Gordon  offer  a  compelling  argument as  to  why traditional  private  law
mechanisms, such as tort liability, simply do not do the job of forcing SIFIs to externalize systemic
harms caused by their activities. Id. at 37.
48.  Id. at 64.
49.  While targeting the ex post director liability regime, Armour and Gordon's  proposal is
designed to force  the board  of directors  to take  a more  active role in monitoring and preventing
potentially systemically  harmful business strategies of the firm's management.  Perhaps the fear of
personal liability and shareholder suits in the event such strategies cause the firm to sustain large losses
would, in fact,  be a more "high-powered" director-oversight incentive than the threat of regulatory
sanctions.  But, even if true, this proposition  does not address the key  issue of whether individual
directors serving on individual firms' boards are, in fact, capable of determining-on an ex ante basis-
precisely which business decisions are potentially systemically harmful and, therefore, should be vetoed1040 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
significant losses to an individual  SIFI,  it erroneously  conflates  systemic
stability with "firm  stability." While the emphasis on private enforcement
of directors' fiduciary duties through  shareholder litigation clearly signals
the  fundamental  continuity  of  this  proposal  with  traditional  Anglo-
American  corporate  law, it  also undermines  its credibility  as  a potential
solution to the problem of systemic risk prevention.
To conclude, it appears that expanding bank directors' fiduciary duties
beyond  their  traditionally  limited  scope  does  not  help  to  overcome  the
inherently nonsystemic,  entity-centric  character  of this and other tools of
corporate governance. At its core, fiduciary duty functions as a mechanism
for structuring  and managing  the relationship  between  directors  (agents)
and those parties (principals or beneficiaries, shareholders  or entire firms)
on  whose  behalf or  for  whose  benefit  they  run  the  firm's  business.50
Fiduciary  duty is not designed to  govern directly  the firm's  relationship
with, and behavior toward, the rest of the outside world: it generally affects
such  external,  outward-looking  interactions  only  by  implication,  as  a
consequence  rather than  an intended  goal.  Acknowledging  this  inherent
limitation of the fiduciary duty construct underscores the need to search for
alternative mechanisms of incorporating the goal of systemic stability into
the very fabric of banks' internal governance processes.5
B.  Bank Governance as a Matter ofPublic Interest
As discussed above,  banks have  long been recognized as a "special"
group  of private  firms  that  are  publicly  subsidized,  by  virtue  of their
supposed  indispensability  in ensuring  smooth  operation  of the financial
system.52 More importantly, however, banks are also very "special" entities
in spite of their short-term profitability. Such determination, by its very definition, requires the relevant
decision makers to have a truly system-wide view and exercise their judgment on the basis of system-
wide considerations-which  gives public instrumentalities  a critical built-in advantage over private
actors. See Public Actors, supra note 13.
50.  See Hockett, supran ote 8.
51.  It is important to emphasize here that the preceding discussion focuses not on any specific
organizational or behavioral dynamics that tend to undermine corporate boards'  efficacy, but on the
deep structural limitations of fiduciary duty as a potential tool of enhancing systemic financial stability.
Undoubtedly, overcoming groupthink and other well-known cognitive  and organizational failures of
real-life  corporate  boards  is an  important  element  of improving  the overall  quality  of corporate
governance. However, this Article's key point so far is that, even in the absence of such distortions, an
individual firm's directors are not properly positioned to act consistently and predominantly on behalf
of the public as a whole. It would be misguided to pin our collective hopes for a more stable financial
system on the prospect of maintaining such a perfect  alignment of public and  private interests in
financial markets. Making bank directors better educated, less prone to groupthink, and more willing to
question bank managers may make them better, more effective fiduciaries in a traditional sense, but it
would not somehow redirect their primary duty toward the general public. For a discussion of what it
might take to turn bank directors into official "public fiduciaries," see Hockett, supra note 8.
52.  See supra note 26 and accompanying text.2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1041
in  a  deeper,  constitutive  sense:  though  organized  as  privately  owned
corporations,  banks  are  the  quintessential  public-private  partnerships.53
The government  authorizes banks to perform vital public (i.e., sovereign)
functions-creation  of money  and allocation  of credit-for private  gain.
Thus, banking is not simply a private economic enterprise but a delegated
public policy  responsibility,  and banks are not simply private  companies
but franchisees  of the public, entrusted to aid in the continuous generation
and distribution of the sovereign public's full faith and credit.54
A  full  elaboration  of  this  view  of  banking-and  finance,  more
generally-as  a  public-private  franchise  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this
Article.55 For present purposes, the key normative implication of reframing
banks'  systemic function as  that of a franchisee  managing  the flow  of a
vital public  resource  is the  recognition  that the  sovereign public,  as  the
franchisor, has an inherent right to control the terms on which that public
resource  flows  throughout  the  economy-and  to  do  so not  only  as  an
exogenous  source  of  "command-and-control"  regulation  but  as  an
endogenous  market  actor.56  Accordingly,  this  view  recasts  internal
corporate  governance  of banks  and  other  financial  firms  as  a  matter  of
direct concern  to  the government,  in its  capacity  as  the  collective  agent
representing  the sovereign public.  It  creates the crucial intellectual  space
for  designing  a  novel  regime  of  direct  government  participation  in
banks'- and, broader,  SIFIs'-internal management,  specifically  for the
purpose  of avoiding  socially harmful  shocks  to  the  financial  system.  It
explicitly imposes the burden of safeguarding the long-term public interest
in systemic stability on the party best equipped and motivated to bear it-
and to do so preemptively, from within the individual firm.
What specific form should this role take?
The sovereign franchisor, acting primarily through the Federal Reserve
and  the  Treasury  Department,  injects  its  full  faith  and  credit  into  the
financial system to support and underwrite the massive flows of public and
private capital  in a variety of forms and through a variety of channels.  It
acts  as  the  uniquely  indispensable  creditor,  insurer,  guarantor,  and
counterparty in a myriad of transactions that together constitute the modern
financial market.57 While these actions of the government as a market actor
53.  For a full elaboration of this concept, see Robert C.  Hockett & Saule  T. Omarova,  The
Finance Franchise, 102  CORNELL  L.  REV.  (forthcoming  2017),  http://ssm.com/abstract-2820176
[hereinafter The Finance Franchise); see also MORGAN RICKS, THE MONEY PROBLEM: RETHINKING
FINANCIAL  REGULATION  (2016),  http://search.ebscohost.com.1ibdata.lib.ua.edu/login.aspx?direct-
true&db-nlebk&AN=l 180882&site=ehost-live&ebv-EB&ppid-pp_Cover.
54.  See The Finance Franchise,s upra note 53.
55.  For a fully articulated argument, see id.
56.  See id.; see also PublicA ctors, supra note 13, at 164.
57.  See The FinanceF ranchise,s upra note 53.1042 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
often  remain  hidden  in plain  view,  they  are  readily  visible  and  widely
acknowledged  with  respect  to  deposit-taking  banks.  An  explicit  federal
guarantee of banks' privately issued deposit liabilities, in particular, makes
it easy to see that, in the final analysis, the government-as  a representative
of the  American  public-stands  behind private  financial  firms'  balance
sheets. In fact, an individual banking institution's entire balance sheet can
be viewed as "a  thick bundle of contingent claims on the government."58
Thus, at least in the context of an insured bank, it is an incontrovertible fact
that  the ultimate bearer  of full residual  risk of the bank's  failure  is the
federal  government,  rather  than  private  shareholders  shielded by limited
liability.59
This creates a puzzling inconsistency in our commonly  accepted view
of the  business  world.  Corporate  law  generally  identifies  stockholders'
equity with residual risk-bearing and accepts the intuitively just principle of
reserving  voting  and  management  rights  in  a  particular  enterprise  to
shareholders  most exposed to the risk of its failure.  The intuition behind
this  principle  is  that  shareholders  should  be  able  to  take  preventative
measures  lowering their  risk of loss.  However,  the  government-as  the
bearer  of the  most  residual  risk  of bank  failure,  including  its  systemic
consequences-does  not have  any such  rights in privately owned banks.
Neither the difficulty of quantifying the magnitude of potential public loss
on  a  bank's  balance  sheet  nor  the  general  availability  of  regulatory
protections  justifies  this  presumptive  denial  of  the  government's
entitlement  to  lower  its  risk through  direct participation  in the  bank's
management,  in  accordance  with the  basic  tenets  of corporate  law  and
governance. 60  On  the  contrary,  a  conceptually  coherent  way  to  prevent
socialization  of losses  and  privatization  of gains  in  the  banking  sector
58.  See Anna Gelpern, Common Capital: A Thought Experiment in Cross-BorderR esolution, 49
TEX. INT'L L.J. 355, 356 (2014). According to Gelpern,
Like the public-policy functions,  government commitments permeate the bank balance
sheet. Central-bank liquidity support, deposit insurance, regulatory valuation of assets and
liabilities, and resolution procedures all represent government commitments that shape the
way in which a bank does business.
Other  kinds  of firms-hospitals,  farming  cooperatives,  nuclear  power  plants,  and
insurance  companies-might deliver public goods, receive public  support, be subject to
intrusive regulation,  or all of the above.  Banks are extreme in two ways. First, a bank's
balance sheet is its policy work, most plainly visible in the combination of demand deposits
(money issuance) and long-term loans (credit allocation). A hospital's financial structure is
at best indirectly relevant to  its impact on public health.  Second, the number  of policy
functions and government commitments on a private bank's balance sheet is high compared
to just about any other enterprise. Governments direct, value, or underwrite virtually every
line of the bank balance sheet.
Id. (emphasis omitted).
59.  The same dynamics of support operate  outside the realm of the formal banking system,
where the public subsidy takes on a more implicit form. See The FinanceF ranchise, supra note 53.
60.  See infra notes 71-72 and accompanying text.2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1043
would be to restore the natural connection between risk and control.61 Since
it is unrealistic to expect private financial firms to internalize systemic risks
they pose,62  the only logical solution is to formalize the public's residual-
risk-bearing role by granting it direct control rights in such firms.
Recognizing  the public's  de  facto  equity-like  risk-bearing  stake  on
banks' balance sheets opens up new possibilities for preventing banks from
engaging  in  systemically  risky behavior.  Instead of trying to  stretch  the
limits  of  the  existing  corporate  governance  rules  to  solve  systemic
problems they  are not designed to solve, we  can focus on creating more
effective  mechanisms  that  would  put  on private  firms'  boards  a  public
instrumentality directly charged with protecting the public's interests. This
Article  explores  the  possibility  of  establishing  a  special  golden  share
regime as one such alternative governance mechanism.
II. THE GOLDEN SHARE MECHANISM:  SETTING THE STAGE
This Part begins outlining a general  scheme for using the golden share
device as a tool for safeguarding  long-term  stability  of the U.S.  financial
system.  Given its far-reaching  effects  on the rights and responsibilities of
principal stakeholders in financial firms, this new golden share mechanism
will have to be created by an act of the U.S.  Congress.  This Part outlines
the key substantive provisions of federal legislation, or the enabling statute,
that  would  accomplish  that  goal.  The  focus  is  on the  nature,  purposes,
jurisdictional  scope,  and  basic  "peacetime"  operation  of  the  proposed
63
regime.
A.  The Concept of a Golden Share. Background
In the context of government action,  the term  golden share  denotes a
wide range of legal arrangements giving the government special, exclusive,
and  nontransferable  corporate-governance  rights  in  privately  owned
enterprises. It is an instrument "that gives the state a continuing power over
certain  fundamental  corporate  decisions."6  Golden  shares  were  widely
used in the 1980s during the global wave of privatizations  of state-owned
61.  See Public Actors, supra note 13 at 164. See infra notes 71-72 and accompanying text.
62.  See Armour & Gordon, supra note 46, at 44-64.
63.  Parts II and III of this Article build and expand upon Public Actors, supra note 13, at 167-
74.
64.  Larry Cata Backer,  The Private Law of Public Law: Public Authorities as Shareholders,
Golden Shares, Sovereign Wealth Funds, and the Public Law Element in Private Choice of Law, 82
TuL. L. REv. 1801, 1806 n.12 (2008).1044 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
companies.65  Governments  used this mechanism to  (1)  ensure continuing
national, as opposed to foreign, control over privatized companies deemed
to be  strategically  important,  especially  in terms of the nation's  military
and economic  security,66  or (2) minimize post-privatization disruptions of
basic  social  services.67  The  key  perceived  benefit  of the  golden  share
mechanism  was  its  flexibility  and  malleability,  which  allowed  for
company-specific  adjustments.68  As  a  holder  of the  golden  share,  the
government could have disproportionate  voting power with respect to the
election  of  the  company's  directors  and  various  strategic  decisions
affecting  the  operation  of the  company,  including  decisions  to  merge,
dispose  of material  assets,  or  enter  or  discontinue  a  particular  line  of
business.69 In effect, the golden share enabled governments "to monitor the
ordinary commercial activity of a corporation."70
This  ability  to  affect  directly  a  private  firm's  substantive  business
decisions-without  holding  a  controlling  economic  equity  stake-is  a
particularly  promising  feature  of the  golden  share  as  a  potential  new
mechanism  for preventing  systemic  financial shocks.  The  latest financial
crisis  underscored  the  danger  of  overreliance  on  private  financial
institutions'  internal risk management  and individually  rational  decision-
making  to  ensure  systemic  stability.  Formal  regulatory  oversight  of
financial  institutions'  activities,  at  least  in  its  current  form,  also  has
significant  limitations,  especially  given  the  pervasiveness  of regulatory
arbitrage and the increasing complexity  and opacity of financial products
and transactions.71  As market "outsiders," financial regulators perennially
65.  When  Margaret  Thatcher's  conservative government  privatized  large and economically
significant British enterprises-including Britoil, Aerospace, British Telecom, and Jaguar-it retained a
golden share in each of these companies, which allowed the government to out-vote other shareholders.
Andrei A.  Baev, Is There a Niche for the State in Corporate Governance? Securitization of State-
Owned Enterprises and New Forms of State Ownership, 18 HOUS.  J. INT'L L.  1, 20-22  (1995).
Governments  of France, Turkey, Israel, and post-communist countries in Eastern and Central Europe
followed the British example by reserving a variety of special corporate-governance  and super-voting
rights in privatized firms. See id; Alice Pezard, The Golden Share ofPrivatizedC  ompanies, 21 BROOK.
J. INT'L L. 85 (1995).
66.  See Pezard, supra note 65, at 86-87. Many European governments used their golden shares
to block foreign acquisitions of corporate control in strategically important domestic firms. In a series
of cases decided between  2000 and 2007,  the European Court of Justice invalidated the use of the
golden share for such protectionist purposes as restricting the free movement of capital in violation of
the EU law. See Backer, supran ote 64; Christine O'Grady Putek, Limited But Not Lost: A Comment on
the ECJ's Golden Share Decisions, 72 FORDHAM L. REv. 2219 (2004).
67.  See Baev, supra note 65, at 36-38.
68.  See  Stefan Grundmann & Florian M6slein,  Golden Shares-State Control in Privatised
Companies: Comparative Law, European Law and Policy Aspects, 2001 EuR. BANKING & FIN. L. J.
623.
69.  See Baev, supra note 65, at 23-27.
70.  Id. at 27.
71.  For a discussion  of the role  complexity plays  in reducing  the efficacy of the current
regulatory regime, see, for example,  Saule T.  Omarova, License To Deal: Mandatory Approval of2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1045
lag behind private market participants in their ability to access and process
vital market  information,  and their ability to  act is inherently limited  by
various jurisdictional  constraints.72  By  contrast,  giving the government a
direct  equity  stake  with  special  management  rights  in  financial-service
firms-that  is,  making  the  government  a  firm  insider-would  remove
many of these legal and informational  obstacles. As a special  shareholder
with  uniquely  tailored  rights,  the  government  would  acquire  the  new
capacity  to  take  speedy  and  effective  action  necessary  to  counteract
socially harmful, and thus irrational, effects of pure market rationality.
Without a  doubt,  the  very idea of making  the  federal  government  a
direct equity owner  in private  financial firms is likely to attract familiar
criticisms  as being too radical,  unworkable,  or even  dangerous.  Some  of
these  criticisms  may  be  simply  variations  on  the  familiar  themes  in
reactionary rhetoric, so brilliantly described by Albert Hirschman.73  At the
same time, much like any innovative approach, this proposal poses a range
of legitimately complex questions of legal doctrine, administrative  design,
and economic practicality.  Without claiming to offer complete answers to
all of those questions, this Article outlines the general contours of how we
could potentially repurpose the golden share mechanism in order to ensure
systemic financial stability and minimize the likelihood of financial crises.
B.  SGS Basics: Substantive Mandate; Key Definitions
The main operative provision of the federal statute establishing the new
regime will mandate issuance by each "covered  entity" of a single share of
a  special  class-"state  golden  share"  or "special  government  share"  (in
either case, SGS)-to be beneficially and legally owned, exclusively and at
all times, by the federal government in its capacity as  the "SGS Holder."
Statutory definitions of these terms form the basic operational  framework
for the proposed scheme.
1.  Covered Entity
The  definition  of  covered  entity  is  essential  to  determining  the
jurisdictional  scope of the SGS  regime. As a matter of regime design, the
initial  choice is between (1)  a broad base definition followed  by specific
carve-outs  for certain types of financial institutions, and (2) a narrow, more
Complex Financial Products, 90 WASH. U. L.  REv.  63 (2012).  See also Dan Awrey,  Complexity,
Innovation, and the Regulation ofModern FinancialM arkets, 2 HARv. Bus. L. REv. 235 (2012).
72.  See Saule T. Omarova, Wall Street as Community of Fate: Toward FinancialI ndustry Self-
Regulation, 159 U. PA. L. REv. 411, 431-38 (2011).
73.  See  ALBERT  0.  HiRsCHMAN,  THE  RHETORIC  OF  REACTION:  PERVERSITY,  FUTILITY,
JEOPARDY 7 (1991).1046 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
targeted definition, coupled with an explicit grant of regulatory  discretion
to broaden it in certain circumstances.
Under  the  first  option,  the  statute  will  define  covered entity very
broadly, to include, for example, all financial institutions identified by their
regulatory  status  as  FDIC-insured  depository  institutions,  bank  holding
companies,  securities  broker-dealers,  and  so  on.  To  ensure  that  the
definition does not inadvertently  leave out other financial institutions,  the
statutory definition of covered entity could include a catch-all category of
firms whose business activities are "predominantly  financial" in nature-a
familiar  technique  in  U.S.  laws  governing  financial  institutions. 4  The
statute could even  simply define  covered entity as  any entity  engaged in
financial  or  "predominantly  financial"  in  nature  activities,  without  a
reference to its regulatory status.
The main virtue of a broad definition  of covered entity is its relative
simplicity and the lower likelihood of leaving significant jurisdictional gaps
in the regime. Its main drawbacks, however, are potential overinclusiveness
and  difficulty of administering in practice.  The broader the jurisdictional
scope of the SGS  regime, and the greater the number and variety of firms
subject to it, the more resource-intensive  its practical implementation  and
enforcement are likely to be. To avoid potential inefficiencies of this kind,
it will be necessary  to supplement the general  definition with a carefully
crafted list of statutory  exemptions.  In effect,  opting in favor of a broad
default category of covered entity will push difficult line-drawing decisions
into the exemption-drafting exercise.
For a more targeted application of the proposed regime, Congress may
start with a narrowly drawn base definition of covered entity. For example,
the new regime could be explicitly limited only to SIFIs. The statute could
either (1)  enumerate  the criteria for determining  systemic  significance  of
any financial firm for the purposes of the SGS regime, or (2) incorporate by
reference a particular definition of the concept under some existing law or
regulation.  Congress could also delegate the power to designate individual
entities  as  systemically  significant  for the purposes  of the  statute  to the
regulators.75
74.  Financial laws and regulations often define the universe of firms subject to a particular set of
rules  by focusing on the nature of their primary business as  financial service  providers. There are
various formulations of the nature-of-activities requirement ("substantially" financial, "predominantly"
financial, etc.) and the specific criteria for determining whether a firm meets it. Typically, the rules
focus on the composition of the company's total consolidated assets, revenues, and income. See, e.g., 12
U.S.C.  ยง 5311(a) (2012).
75.  Under the Dodd-Frank regime, the Financial  Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) has the
authority to designate a nonbank financial institution as a SIFI, which would make FSOC the natural
candidate for the same task with respect to the SGS regime. See, e.g., Authority to Require Supervision
and Regulation of Certain Nonbank Financial Companies, 77 Fed. Reg. 21,637, 21,637-62 (Apr.  11,
2012) (to be codified at 12 C.F.R. pt. 1310).2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1047
The main benefit of this approach is that it would allow the government
to concentrate  its  efforts only  on firms  determined  to pose  real risks  to
systemic stability. To the extent that going this definitional route will likely
lower both the number of covered entities and the degree of variety among
their business and risk profiles, it should render the new regime potentially
easier  to  implement  and  administer.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the
practical  efficacy  of  a  SGS  scheme  targeting  specifically  SIFIs  will
ultimately depend on the accuracy of that notoriously difficult judgment.76
More generally,  potential underinclusiveness  is the principal drawback of
this approach.  To counter  that danger,  the statute may have to allow for
some  form  of regulatory  discretion  to  expand  the  universe  of covered
entities beyond the narrowly defined base category.
Regardless  of  the  chosen  definitional  approach,  the  statute  should
specify  how  it  would  treat  large,  diversified  financial  conglomerates
combining  numerous regulated  financial intermediaries  within a complex
holding  company  structure.  For  the  proposed  regime  to  have  any  real
systemic effect,  it is critical that the government hold the golden share, or
SGS,  in  the top-level  holding  company,  where  all  strategic  group-wide
decisions are typically made  and all group-wide data are aggregated  and
assessed. To avoid unnecessary duplication, it may make sense not to hold
golden shares in subsidiaries of the same holding company. This approach
may also be preferable  as a scope-limiting  device because  it is based on
organizational  criteria  rather  than  the  qualitatively  complex  SIFI
determination.  If this approach is taken, however, it would be necessary to
draft the statute and implementing regulations to preclude  entity arbitrage
designed  to  shift  strategic  information-gathering  and  decision-making
functions into corporate layers below the top parent company.
2.  SGS and SGS Holder
Technically,  terms like SGS and SGS Holder can be defined simply by
reference to the exclusive rights associated with that instrument, as set forth
in  the  core  substantive  provisions  of the  statute.  In  that  sense,  these
statutory  terms  are  fundamentally  derivative  concepts  that  can  be
76.  To date, FSOC has made only a few such official determinations, and MetLife, Inc.'s lawsuit
against FSOC underscores  how deeply politicized  this process  can be.  See Andrew M. Harris &
Katherine  Chiglinsky, MetLife Judge Called FSOC Review Process 'Fatally Flawed,' BLOOMBERG
(Apr.  7,  2016),  http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-07/metlife-judge-found-fault-with-
fsoc-too-big-to-fail-review.
77.  This raises an additional question of which government instrumentality should be authorized
to exercise such discretion: FSOC, the SGS Holder, or some other regulatory body. For a discussion of
this and other issues of regime administration, see infra Part IV.1048 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68*1029
understood  only through  an examination  of how the  SGS  mechanism  is
intended to function.78
The  core  substantive  element  of the  proposed  SGS  regime  is  the
statutory delineation of the specific rights and obligations of the holder of
the golden  share, or SGS.  Because SGS  is a federally created instrument,
its terms do not have to comply  with the requirements  of state corporate
law,  and its holder's rights  and  obligations can be vastly  different  from
those  of a regular corporate shareholder.  At the same time, however, the
proposed regime does not seek to convert any firm into a nationalized state-
run enterprise. Therefore, the greatest challenge in designing the SGS is to
find a proper balance of public and private interests within the context of a
functioning economic enterprise.
In principle,  the SGS  is envisioned here as  a dynamic mechanism,  a
sliding scale  of management-and,  under  some  circumstances,  possibly
some economic-rights triggered by specified events. The SGS  should be
viewed as  a form of conditional  (as opposed to absolute),  temporary  (as
opposed  to  permanent),  and  calibrated  (as  opposed  to  uniformly
predetermined)  government  control  over  the  relevant  covered  entity's
internal governance.  To appreciate  in full these essential  attributes of the
SGS regime, it is helpful to examine potential mechanics of its operation in
each  of its two principal  modes:  the passive  "peacetime"  mode  and the
active "emergency" mode.
C.  The SGS Mechanism: The Passive Mode
Unlike  conventional  shareholders,  the SGS Holder would not have to
make a capital contribution in exchange for its golden share and, generally,
would not receive  any  dividends  or  distributions.  The  SGS  can have  a
nominal value of $1.00,  at which it would be carried on the covered entity's
balance  sheet.  Except  as  may  be provided  in  the  enabling  statute,  this
nominally  valued  instrument  would  not  entitle  the  government  to  any
economic rights of a conventional  shareholder,  such as the right to receive
dividends  or  distributions.  This  important  feature  distinguishes  the
proposed SGS mechanism from the more familiar instances of government
acquiring  control  through purchase  of a  majority  equity  stake  in a  firm.
Structuring the SGS as primarily,  if not exclusively,  a control instrument
underscores  its  quasi-regulatory  nature  and  highlights  the government's
role as a collective actor seeking to resolve certain market dysfunctions, as
opposed  to  seeking  pecuniary  gains.  However,  if the  government  later
78.  A related but more complex issue of which specific government instrumentality will act as
the SGS Holder with respect to all covered entities is discussed infra Part IV.A.2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1049
deems necessary to contribute capital to a covered entity, it could receive
statutorily specified economic rights.79
Unless and until one or more of the specified triggering events happen,
the SGS  is meant to remain largely a passive instrument. In this "normal"
period of dormancy,  the SGS  Holder would not be expected or entitled to
exercise  any  direct  management  rights  in the  firm.  Its rights  would  be
primarily  informational  and  representational  in  nature.  It  is  crucial,
however, that the SGS  give  its holder a broad right  of direct and timely
access to the firm's internal information.
This,  of course,  raises  the  issue  of balancing private  firms'  right to
preserve,  within  reasonable  limits,  confidentiality  of  their  business
information against the government's right to know what it needs to know
to protect the public from financial harm. Finding  a workable balance  of
these two interests is by no means a simple task, but it may not be quite as
difficult  as  financial  institutions  would  like  us  to  think.  Financial
institutions zealously guard their "proprietary" information, partly because
they fear that competitors would copy or otherwise  thwart their trading or
investment  strategies,  and partly because opacity  and complexity  of their
"branded"  financial products effectively allow these institutions to extract
monopoly rents.80 However, the public interest here is compelling enough
to  be  given  a  greater  weight  vis-i-vis  this  competitive  obsession  with
secrecy.  The private firms' interest, while subordinated in principle to the
public  interest,  can  be  reasonably  protected  through  carefully  designed
procedural mechanisms limiting the SGS Holder's ability to use or disclose
particularly sensitive  trade information to other market participants. Thus,
financial  regulators  routinely  collect  and  review  confidential  firm
information,  and financial institutions  themselves are routinely managing
various  internal  informational  walls  mandated  by  regulation.  The
accumulated  private  and  public  arsenal  of  information-management
techniques  is a good starting point for crafting procedural  confidentiality-
protection rules under the SGS regime.
To perform its key informational  and representational  roles, the  SGS
Holder must have permanent representation on the covered entity's board
of directors.  The  enabling  statute will need  to  mandate  such permanent
representation  and  then delineate  the  rights  and  duties  of special  SGS-
79.  For potential methods of calculating the government's economic interest in such cases, see,
for example, Jeffrey Maims, Building Better Bailouts: The Casef or a Long-Term Investment Approach,
63 FLA. L. REv. 1349, 1383-97 (2011).
80.  For an explanation of this phenomenon of "strategic complexity," see Awrey, supran ote 71,
at 262-67 (2012); Omarova, supran ote 71, at 68-75.
81.  It is also subject to doubt how much "trade secrecy" there really is  in the markets for
financial products, especially given the constant cross-pollination of financial  institutions' personnel
and clientele.1050 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
appointed directors (SGS  directors),  in line with the overarching objectives
of the SGS regime.
A few basic considerations are worth emphasizing here.
The statutory notion of an SGS director is fundamentally different from
the familiar corporate law device of an "independent" director. Independent
directors  are  private  parties  appointed  by  shareholders  and  afforded  a
special place in the traditional  corporate governance  structure  because of
their presumed neutrality and objectivity, primarily inferred from their lack
of direct financial interest in the firm. State and federal laws often mandate
a specific number of such presumably more reliable independent directors
to be appointed to boards  or to specific board committees.82  Yet, it is not
entirely  clear  to  what  extent  the  appointment  of independent  directors
improves  the  dynamics  and  outcomes  of corporate  decision-making  in
practice.83  Ultimately,  independent  directors still owe  a fiduciary  duty to
the corporation and its shareholders  and are subject to the same  standards
of care and loyalty as insider directors.84
By contrast,  SGS directors are representatives of the U.S.  government
(and employees  of the federal  entity  that  acts  as  the  SGS  Holder).  The
statute would specify that their primary fiduciary duties run explicitly to the
taxpaying  American  public.  The  specific  number  of  individual  SGS
directors  to  be  appointed  in  any  particular  case  would  depend  on the
individual profile, size,  and other relevant circumstances  of each covered
entity. The statutory goal here is not to have a majority-or even a "critical
mass"--of  government-appointed  directors  on the  board  but  to  have  a
special class of  directors  with  special  class-specific  rights  that,  under
certain circumstances, may override purely numeric voting outcomes.
In this respect,  it is critical to grant  SGS  directors enhanced rights to
request any additional information from the firm's management or agents,
if necessary to enable them to fulfill their duties.85  Importantly, the statute
should  expressly prohibit covered  entities  from taking  any action whose
intended  or unintended  effect  would be to  limit SGS  directors'  access to
information or participation in the decision-making process.
It  may  also  be  desirable  to  grant  SGS  directors  certain  "baseline"
special voting rights that remain in effect at all times, even when the SGS is
otherwise "dormant."  As discussed above, one of the defining features  of
the traditional golden share mechanism is the special supermajority voting
power  that  effectively  allows  the  government  shareholder  to  veto  any
82.  See Karmel, supra note 45.
83.  Id.
84.  See supra Part I.A.
85.  To the extent the SGS directors are "insiders" of the relevant firm, the firm's lawyers' duty
of confidentiality should not prevent them from providing requested information to the firm's SGS
directors. To strengthen this point, the SGS statute could include a specific provision to this effect.2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1051
corporate decision involving matters of special public policy concern.6 In a
similar vein,  the SGS  statute may require  the  SGS  directors'  affirmative
approval  of certain  important corporate  decisions that  potentially have  a
bearing on matters related to systemic financial stability. For example, the
SGS  directors'  approval could be required whenever the covered entity's
board of directors approves the management's strategic business plan or the
firm's  risk  management  policy,  approves  an  executive  compensation
program, or appoints external auditors.7
To  ensure  the  SGS  directors'  continuous  access  to  vital  intrafirm
information and to enhance their practical ability to exercise their decision-
making  rights in a meaningful manner, it would be advisable  to mandate
that  the  SGS  directors  have  designated  seats  on the  Risk Management
Committee and the Audit Committee of the relevant covered entity's board
of directors. Being a member of these particular committees is the best and
fastest way for the  SGS  directors  to gain  a  deeper understanding  of the
firm's business  and overall risk culture.  The knowledge  acquired  in this
process  would  be  an  invaluable  asset  to  the  SGS  directors  in  the
performance of their statutory duties.
In short, the principal function of SGS directors is to be our collective
eyes  and  ears  on  financial  institutions'  boards,  the  embodiment  of the
government-as-market-actor  striving to correct private markets' potentially
destabilizing and socially destructive  "natural" tendencies.88  Furthermore,
adding SGS directors to covered entities' boards is likely to have a deeply
transformational  impact  on  these  entities'  key  internal  processes  and
norms. Among other things, it is reasonable  to expect that their watchful
presence and explicitly systemic perspective  would  significantly improve
boardroom  dynamics  and  alter  the balance  of power  between  financial
firms'  boards of directors and managers.  It is difficult to overestimate the
importance  of this factor  for  altering  banks'  and  other  SIFIs'  currently
prevailing-and problematic-risk culture in publicly beneficial ways.89
In order to deliver these intended benefits, however,  the SGS  regime
must introduce  a  sufficiently  strong  incentive  for  financial  firms to take
their  SGS  directors  seriously  even  when the  latter  are performing  their
passive peacetime duties. The most powerful incentive in this respect is the
threat of triggering the SGS  Holder's special rights as the firm's manager
of last resort.
86.  See supra notes 66-70 and accompanying text.
87.  It is important to build some flexibility into this framework, giving the government entity
acting as  SGS Holder the necessary discretion to determine  which matters are significant enough to
require SGS directors' review and pre-approval, based on a particular covered entity's business/risk
profile, systemic footprint, or any other relevant considerations.
88.  See supra Part I.B.
89.  See supra note 7 and accompanying text.1052 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
III. THE GOLDEN SHARE IN ACTION: THE "MANAGER OF LAST RESORT"
This Part focuses on the operation of the proposed SGS  regime in its
"active" mode, when certain firm-specific  or systemic factors necessitate a
shift in the principal role of the SGS Holder from that of an observer to that
of an emergency manager of the covered entity.
A.  Activating SGS:  TriggeringE  vents
The  occurrence  of specified  events  would  trigger  additional  special
rights  of the  SGS  Holder.  In  effect,  statutory  "triggering"  events  would
activate the  SGS  Holder's  direct management  rights,  shifting  the  entire
mechanism  from its  relatively  passive  peacetime  state  into  the  actively
participatory  "high-alert"  phase.  While  this Article  does  not  purport  to
provide a precise list of statutory triggers and corresponding  SGS rights, it
is helpful to outline some of the potentially relevant considerations.
As  a  general  matter,  statutory  SGS  triggers  should  be  tied  to  the
regime's main policy objective: preserving systemic financial stability and
preventing excessive accumulations of systemic risk in the financial sector.
Therefore,  special  management  rights  of  the  SGS  Holder  should  be
activated in response to  certain internal  and external  signals indicating  a
potentially  greater  likelihood  of increasing  systemic  risk  or  instability.
Some of the familiar regulatory and supervisory  metrics-such as capital
adequacy  levels,  supervisory ratings,  or stress  test results-can  serve  as
proxies  for triggering additional  SGS  rights.90 Another category  of firm-
specific SGS triggers would encompass significant weaknesses or lapses in
a covered entity's legal and regulatory compliance,  financial reporting, or
internal  risk management-particularly  if not  uncovered,  reported,  and
preventatively corrected internally.91
90.  Incorporating these firm-specific metrics into the SGS regime would necessitate establishing
regular  channels  of communication  and  coordination-as  well  as  clearly  delineated  spheres  of
jurisdictional authority-between the SGS Holder and state and federal financial regulators. See infra
Part W.A.
91.  Obvious  cases  of  legal  misconduct  or  regulatory  violation-such  as,  for  example,
participation in a price-rigging scheme or fraudulent accounting practices-would trigger the additional
SGS rights.  Real-life  examples of such  instances include  scandals involving  LIBOR and  foreign
exchange  rates  manipulation,  as  well  as  "robo-signing"  and  other  illegal  home-loan  foreclosure
practices of large U.S. banks. Under the proposed regime, a particular firm implicated in, or subject to
investigation in connection with, any such scandal would risk immediate triggering of additional SGS
management rights. However, the SGS rights may also be triggered in response to a series of less
egregious violations that may nevertheless indicate a troublesome pattern of the management's failure
to ensure compliance with laws and regulations. An example of such a pattern is Citigroup's infamous
string of regulatory failures in 2004-2005, which led the Federal Reserve  to impose a temporary
moratorium on the company's acquisitions. See Arthur E. Wilmarth, Jr., Citigroup: A Case Study in
Manageriala nd RegulatoryF ailures,4 7 IND. L. REv. 69, 71 (2014).2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1053
Another  critically  important,  while  also  difficult  to  define  with
precision, group of SGS  triggers would include signs of certain troubling
trends  in  a particular  covered  entity's business  strategy  and  overall  risk
appetite.  For example,  in a proposed  scheme,  special SGS  rights can be
triggered by a potentially  problematic shift in a covered  entity's business
and risk profile, as a result of either acquisition-driven growth or internally
driven changes  in  the composition  or nature  of its assets  and  liabilities.
Some of the potential indicators here may include a sudden or rapid growth
of particular asset categories in a covered entity's or its key subsidiaries'
portfolios  (e.g.,  certain  types  of  asset-backed  securities  or  physical
commodities),  a discernible increase in the volume  or riskiness of certain
types of off-balance-sheet transactions (e.g., credit default swaps), or rising
levels or changing tenor of the company's or its key subsidiaries' liabilities
(e.g.,  increased reliance  on borrowing  in wholesale  securities  repurchase
markets).
Size-related  metrics may be  particularly  useful as  potential  triggers.
Size  remains  one  of the  key  factors  determining  the  level  of systemic
significance  of an  individual  financial  institution.92  Therefore,  it would
make  sense to  condition  the  scope  of the  SGS  Holder's  systemic  risk-
minimizing  powers  on the  size  of a  covered  entity,  measured  either in
absolute  (a specific quantitative  threshold) or relative terms (e.g.,  market
share or rate of increase in size over a certain period of time). The logic is
simple: the bigger the firm, the bigger its systemic footprint, the higher the
potential public costs  of its failure-and so the greater the need to have
direct public  say in its affairs.  Accordingly,  an absolute quantitative  size
trigger should be set at the level that would automatically pick up all of the
existing large financial groups that are potentially "too big to fail" (TBTF).
SGS  Holder's  broader and more  direct  powers  over the  management  of
TBTF firms would function, in part, as a substitute for weakened external
market discipline and, in part, as a corrective internal systemic-vision lens.
Moreover, the threat of potentially very intrusive governmental "meddling"
in  large  firms'  internal  business  affairs  may  operate  as  a  significant
deterrent against becoming TBTF.
In addition to firm-specific  triggers, it is important to ensure that the
SGS  mechanism is responsive  to external  signals  of potentially  troubling
systemic  imbalances  of vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  markets.  Thus,
enhanced SGS rights might be triggered simultaneously  across all covered
92.  Thus, under the Dodd-Frank Act and implementing regulations, financial institutions with
more than $50 billion in total consolidated assets are generally presumed to be systemically important.
Nonbanking  financial  companies  that meet this  size threshold  are  further evaluated  for systemic
significance based on a mix of quantitative  and qualitative  criteria. See, e.g., Authority to Require
Supervision  and Regulation of Certain Nonbank Financial Companies,  77 Fed. Reg. 21,637, 21,659
(Apr. 11, 2012) (to be codified at 12 C.F.R. pt. 1310).1054 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
entities--or their relevant subset-by sudden accelerations in credit growth
across the financial system, which may indicate excessive  buildup of risk
and  leverage  feeding  a speculative  asset bubble.  The  government  could
arrest this potentially destabilizing systemic trend by exercising  its special
SGS  rights  to  either veto  or  slow  down  certain  kinds  of lending  and
borrowing activities pursued by individual covered entities. For example, in
the context of a nascent system-wide credit bubble, the SGS  Holder could
demand that individual covered entities raise more equity as a condition to
continuing their lending activities-a demand that could also be framed as
a conditional promise to refrain from exercising the SGS Holder's relevant
veto  rights.  This  would,  in  effect,  function  as  an  internal  governance
mechanism for so-called dynamic provisioning, or building countercyclical
capital  buffers  at  financial  firms:  when  the  credit  is  plentiful  and  the
economy is in an expansionary mode, financial institutions would be forced
to  reduce  their  leverage.93  Building  external  triggers  into  the  SGS
mechanism,  therefore,  would  enhance  its  utility  as  an  important
complement to the government's efforts to preserve  systemic financial and
economic stability through regulation.
In general,  defining  and applying  SGS  triggers is a challenging  and
highly context-specific  exercise that requires an individualized assessment
of all relevant factors.  It is, therefore,  critical to allow the  SGS  Holder a
significant degree of discretion  in deciding when exactly its special rights
should be triggered,  and how exactly they should be used.  Of course, this
grant  of discretion  must  be  carefully  contained  to  ensure  there  is  a
sufficient degree  of public accountability.94 The enabling statute will need
to provide both a clear normative basis for the exercise of discretion and a
robust  procedural  framework  for  making  entity-specific  SGS  trigger
determinations.
As a  normative  matter, unambiguously  articulating  in  the statute the
key policy  goals  that  the  SGS  regime  is designed  to  serve-preserving
long-term  stability of the U.S.  financial  system and preventing potentially
destabilizing accumulation of risk in the financial sector- would go a long
way toward  establishing  guidelines  for  the exercise  of discretion by  the
SGS  Holder.  Due  to  the  inherent  difficulty  of  correct  and  timely
recognition  and  interpretation  of market  signals,  it is  also  important  to
introduce  an  explicitly  precautionary  principle  into  this  exercise.95
Although adopting a precautionary  stance may result in less precise, blunter
criteria  for  triggering  additional  SGS  rights,  an  alternative  approach
93.  For  a discussion  of countercyclical  capital buffers,  see Brett H.  McDonnell, Designing
Countercyclical CapitalB uffers, 18 N.C. BANKING INST. 123 (2013).
94.  For a discussion of some such accountability mechanisms, see infra Part IV.B.
95.  For a discussion of the role of precautionary principle in financial services regulation, see
Hilary J. Allen, A New Philosophyf or FinancialS tability Regulation, 45 LoY. U. CI. L.J. 173 (2013).2017]1 Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1055
advocating  a tightly  limited  statutory  definition  of each  SGS  triggering
event-and, thus,  prospectively  limiting the  circumstances  in which  the
government  can  exercise  its  full  SGS  rights-potentially  threatens  to
undermine the efficacy of the SGS mechanism.
As a procedural matter, the statute could enumerate the key factors that
the  SGS  Holder either "must"  or "may"  take into  account  in making its
determination  that a  specific triggering  event had occurred.96  The  statute
would  also  specify  basic  procedures  for internal  and  external  vetting  of
such determinations.  Internal rules would specify the timing and format of
the  intra-agency  process,  which  would  presumably  be  initiated by  the
affected  firm's  SGS  directors  and  then  approved,  with  any  necessary
modifications, by a special agency committee. Externally, the statute would
specify the timing and nature of communication and coordination between
the SGS Holder and other federal regulators-including,  most importantly,
FSOC and the Federal Reserve. It is critical, however, that these procedural
rules do not operate to  create undesirable  delays or otherwise  inhibit the
SGS Holder's ability to take necessary actions.
B.  The SGS Mechanism: The Active Mode
So,  what are  some of these special  SGS  rights that  are  triggered by
these various  events?  Essentially,  a triggering  event  ends  the passive  or
"dormant" state of the SGS and shifts it into the active or high-alert mode,
in response to firm-specific  or market-wide signals of potential increase in
the level of systemic risk. At that point, the government essentially assumes
its (temporary) new role as the manager of last resort.
In this active mode,  the  SGS Holder would  have broad veto powers
allowing it to block any decision by a covered entity's board of directors or
shareholders.  This  broad statement  of the  SGS  veto right  is based  on a
common  sense  understanding  that  the  government  should  not-and,
realistically,  is  highly  unlikely  to-exercise  its  broad  veto  rights
indiscriminately.  The  idea behind this  broad  formulation  is  to  give  the
government the necessary flexibility to take whatever measures are  called
for under the circumstances.  To this end,  the statute would grant the SGS
Holder an express right to call shareholder meetings and to propose specific
agenda items for such meetings. The statute may also grant the SGS Holder
supermajority  voting power,  but  only  with respect  to  matters  expressly
96.  This is a well-established  method of providing  congressional guidance  to U.S.  financial
regulators exercising their discretionary powers. See generally Hester Peirce, Economic Analysis by
FederalF inancialR egulators, 9 J.L. ECON. & POL'Y 569 (2013).1056 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
determined  by  the  SGS  Holder  to  be  critically  important  for  the
preservation of the long-term stability of the U.S.  financial system.97
As  a  practical  matter,  the  SGS  Holder  will  exercise  its post-trigger
rights through the relevant firm's serving SGS  director(s).  The occurrence
of a statutory triggering  event, in effect, transforms the primary role of an
SGS  director from that of an observer, monitor, and provider of a systemic
perspective-for the most part, remaining in the background-to that of the
key decision maker. At this stage,  the SGS  directors would take effective
control of the board's actions. The precise extent, nature, and mechanisms
of control would depend on the nature and severity of the SGS-triggering
concerns and other relevant circumstances of each particular case.
Generally,  however,  the SGS  directors would have a right to impose
temporary  moratoria  on  shareholder  distributions  and  major  corporate
transactions.  They  would  also  have  a  right  to  suspend  or  remove  any
manager or officer of the firm.  The SGS  directors would be empowered
to call special meetings of the board of directors and to propose specific
agenda items or resolutions,  or both, for the board's vote.99 For instance,
depending  on  the  circumstances  that  triggered  special  SGS  rights  with
respect  to  a  particular  covered  entity,  the  SGS  directors  could propose
board resolutions halting specific high-risk trading or investment activities,
reducing  the  firm's risk exposure by  selling certain assets or unwinding
trading  positions,  revising  internal  policies  and  procedures  governing
activities in question, raising more equity and reducing the firm's leverage,
suspending  or  replacing  individual  managers  or  executive  officers,  and
engaging  outside  counsel  to  advise  the  firm  on  improving  its  internal
regulatory compliance and risk management functions.
If these  measures  prove  insufficient  to  resolve  and  prevent  likely
recurrence of the firm's problems, the SGS directors could propose to the
board a resolution mandating sale of certain subsidiaries or segments of the
firm's business-a measure that could effectively break up a TBTF firm. If,
on the  other hand,  the less drastic  corrective  measures work,  so that the
degree of systemic risk posed by the covered entity's activities is reduced
below the statutory trigger level, the SGS  should revert to the pre-trigger,
97.  As is the case with the determination of the occurrence of a triggering event, the statute
would have to establish certain substantive and procedural guidelines that the SGS Holder, or any of its
agents, must follow in making the required determination of "critical importance." See supra notes 95-
96 and accompanying text.
98.  Depending on the nature or degree of egregiousness of misconduct, the SGS directors would
have the right  to petition relevant regulatory authorities to  consider appropriate  sanctions  against
individual managers or officers.
99.  Again, it may be desirable to grant  the SGS  directors supermajority voting power with
respect to matters expressly determined to be critically important for the preservation  of long-term
stability of the U.S.  financial system,  as provided in the enabling statute.  See supra note  97 and
accompanying text.2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1057
dormant  state  and  the  SGS  directors  should  relinquish  their  special
rights. 10
To be able to discharge their newly elevated responsibilities, the SGS
directors  should be  authorized  to make  certain  necessary  changes  in the
covered  entity's  internal  organizational  structure.  That  includes,  for
example, reordering the chain of command within the firm so that certain
key  audit, legal, risk management,  compliance,  or any other personnel-
including  managers of trading  desks  and other front  office operations-
work  directly  with,  and  report  directly  to,  the  SGS  directors  or  their
designated support staff.101 This "commandeering" of the firm's employees
would  be easier to  achieve  if the SGS  directors establish  direct lines  of
communication with certain key personnel during the pre-trigger dormant
period.102
It  is important  to  emphasize, however,  that  the ultimate  goal of the
proposed regime is not to put the federal government in charge of private
firms but, to the contrary, to minimize the need to trigger the SGS Holder's
special  management  rights  in practice.  An  effective  SGS  regime  should
create  strong  and  concrete  ex  ante  incentives  for the  covered  entities'
shareholders,  directors,  and managers to act in a way that reduces, rather
than  increases,  the  potential  negative  impact  of  their  firms'  business
operations  on the  ability of the broader  financial  system to  support  and
stimulate  real economic  growth.  An unambiguously  formulated threat  of
drastically,  if only temporarily, limiting these traditional corporate  actors'
control  over their firms'  business decisions would fundamentally  reshape
the context in which covered entities raise  capital and make investments.
Once investors have a strong incentive to price correctly the risk of an SGS
triggering event into their valuations of a specific covered entity, it would
put continuous pressure on the management to monitor and enforce proper
internal risk tolerance  limits  at every  level of the firm. In that sense,  the
100.  The  statute would have to establish special procedures and basic policy guidelines for
making this necessarily context-specific  determination.  These special, enhanced SGS rights are not
designed to give the government permanent control over management of a private financial services
firm. The goal here is to enable the government to intervene into the affairs of a specific firm acting in a
systemically harmful way, and do so at an early stage when internal corrections can still be made and
control can be returned to its own management. To ensure that this control reversion doesn't happen
prematurely, however, the SGS Holder's decision to put the SGS "back to sleep" would have to be
supported, reasoned, and properly documented.
101.  There are, of course, various questions regarding support staff for the SGS directors: who
should be hiring them and paying their salaries, how many of them should be hired, etc. These are
important but by no means critical details for present purposes.
102.  It is reasonable to expect that, in performing their general monitoring duties, the SGS
directors would build close working relationships with each covered entity's audit, legal, compliance,
and risk management departments. In fact, the very presence of the SGS directors on the firm's board,
even if in a relatively passive capacity, is likely to boost the relative power and independence of the
firm's legal and regulatory compliance managers by giving them an external  source of support and
often the necessary "cover" for their actions.1058 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
SGS  regime  would  perform  the  indispensable  role  of a  "well  oiled"
"shotgun ...  behind  the  door,"'03  which  is  there  as  a  reminder  of the
public's power to protect its legitimate interests-and to make the abstract
notion of market discipline far more real than it currently is.'0
IV. INSTITUTIONAL DESIGN: KEY CONSIDERATIONS
One of the critical  factors  in determining potential  efficacy,  or even
desirability,  of the proposed  SGS  mechanism is the  identity of the  SGS
Holder and its place within the overall organizational structure of the U.S.
government.  How much trust we, the taxpaying American public, put into
the  new golden  share  mechanism  depends  greatly on who  exercises  the
powers  it  creates-and  how  effective  that  entity  is  likely  to  be  in
performing such an important and complex task.
To  be  effective,  the  new  entity-the  SGS  Holder-would  have  to
satisfy several key requirements.  First of all, the SGS  Holder has to have
sufficient technical  expertise to be  able  to understand and manage  large
financial  institutions.  Secondly,  it has  to  have  a  strong  sense  of public
mission and be able to resist all forms of "capture" by private interests.105
Finally,  the  SGS  Holder  has  to  be  sufficiently  insulated  from  political
influence, while also publicly accountable for its actions.
Designing a new regime that  successfully  meets  these standards  is a
challenging task, but  it is neither new nor unique to this proposal.  Any
attempt  to  establish  effective  public  oversight  of  financial  markets
inevitably  raises  these  same  issues.  Not  surprisingly,  the  latest  crisis
reinvigorated  scholarly  debate  on  potential  methods  of  reducing  the
distortion of financial regulators' incentives as a result of undue influence
of private interests.  Many proposed solutions focus on regulatory  agencies
and  offer  ways  to  insulate  their  decision-making  from  direct  political
interference  by  Congress  or a  presidential  administration,106  to  increase
103.  William 0. Douglas, Reorganization of the New York Stock Exchange (May 20,1938), in
DEMOCRACY AND FINANCE: THE ADDRESSES OF WILLIAM 0. DOUGLAS 82 (James Allen ed., 1969).
104.  On the systematic failures of "market discipline" in the absence of an effective extra-market
disciplining device, see generally Min, supran ote 1.
105.  Regulatory  capture is a complex phenomenon that encompasses ideological,  or cultural,
capture.  See,  e.g.,  James  Kwak,  Cultural Capture and the  Financial Crisis, in  PREVENTING
REGULATORY CAPTURE: SPECIAL INTEREST INFLUENCE AND How To LIMIT IT 71 (Daniel Carpenter &
David A. Moss eds., 2014) (introducing and examining the concept of "cultural capture" as a channel of
improper  industry influence over financial  regulators); Simon Johnson,  The Quiet Coup, ATLANTIC
(May  2009),  https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2009/05/the-quiet-coup/307364/  (arguing
that the financial  industry over time successfully shaped both technical and normative views of the
regulators who came to share the industry's version of a public good).
106.  See  Rachel  E. Barkow,  Insulating Agencies: Avoiding  Capture Through Institutional
Design, 89 TEx. L. REV.  15 (2010); Lisa Schultz Bressman & Robert  B. Thompson,  The Future of
Agency Independence, 63 VAND. L. REv. 599 (2010).2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1059
transparency  of regulatory  decision-making  and agency  accountability,107
to strengthen the agencies' internal  subject-matter  expertise by increasing
compensation  of agency  employees  and  creating  an  elite  professional
culture among  them,108  or to institutionalize  "contrarian"  thinking  inside
regulatory  agencies.109  There  is,  therefore,  a  potentially  rich  source  of
helpful ideas to inform the search for an optimal organizational  design for
the SGS  regime-a task that lies beyond the scope of the current thought
experiment.
For present  purposes,  the  focus  is  on a  few  key  design  issues:  the
choice of organizational  form of the SGS Holder; the new entity's place in
the existing regulatory architecture; the source of funding for its activities;
and potential ways of ensuring its public accountability.
A.  OrganizationalC  hoices; Place in the Regulatory Structure
With respect to  organizational  form,  there  are two principal options.
First, Congress may choose to vest the SGS Holder responsibilities in one
of the existing financial regulators, such as the Federal Reserve or FDIC.
This approach may be attractive as a matter of logistics or politics, since it
avoids  creating  a  brand  new  agency.  However,  adding  a  special-
shareholder role  to  the  Federal  Reserve's  or FDIC's  existing  regulatory
functions  could  create  at  least an  appearance  of significant  conflicts  of
interest  and  potentially  undermine  credibility  and  efficacy  of the  SGS
regime. Moreover, each existing agency's established culture, with its own
internal peculiarities and  dysfunctions,  is  likely to "infect"  the new  SGS
corps and dilute its emerging sense of mission.
Alternatively, Congress may establish either a new federal agency or a
federally  chartered  government  corporation-or  both-to  act  as  the
exclusive  SGS  Holder  with  respect  to  all  covered  entities.  The  choice
107.  Thus, one of the most heated postcrisis debates focused on the secretive nature of the
Federal Reserve's  decision-making process.  See,  e.g., Lawrence G.  Baxter, "Capture" in Financial
Regulation: Can We Channel It Toward the Common Good?, 21  CORNELL J.L. & PUB. POL'Y  175
(2011).
108.  See, e.g., Lawrence G. Baxter, Capture Nuances in FinancialR egulation, 47 WAKE FOREST
L. REV. 537 (2012). The issue of compensation is extremely important in designing the SGS regime. To
ensure that the new regime employs highly knowledgeable and capable individuals, they would have to
be offered salaries comparable  to what they would get paid in the private  sector.  Purely from an
organizational-design perspective, this factor works strongly in favor of structuring the SGS Holder as a
federal  government  corporation  rather  than a  regulatory  agency.  Among  other  things,  specially
chartered government corporations may be (and often are) exempt from the typical budgetary controls
and statutory ceilings on employee compensation.  See KEVIN R. KOSAR, CONG.  RESEARCH.  SERV.,
RL30365, FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CORPORATIONS:  AN  OVERVIEW (2011); KEVIN R. KOSAR, CONG.
RESEARCH.  SERV.,  RL30533,  THE  QUASI  GOVERNMENT:  HYBRID  ORGANIZATIONS  WITH  BOTH
GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE SECTOR LEGAL CHARACTERISTICS (2011).
109.  See Brett McDonnell & Daniel Schwarcz, Regulatory Contrarians,8 9 N.C. L. REV.  1629
(2011).1060 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
between  a  federal  agency  and a  government  corporation  has  significant
consequences. The U.S.  federal government has a long history of chartering
special government corporations, many of which operate under a unique set
of privileges and constraints.110 Potential flexibility with respect to crafting
such  special  privileges  and  constraints  weighs  strongly  in  favor  of
chartering the SGS Holder as a government corporation.11
To enable  the new  entity to  perform  its functions  successfully,  it is
important  to  structure  its  relationships  with other  financial  regulators-
including  the  Federal  Reserve,  FDIC,  Office  of the  Comptroller  of the
Currency,  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  Commodity  Futures
Trading Commission, and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau-in a
carefully  balanced  manner.  On  the  one  hand,  the  SGS  Holder  must
maintain  close  working  contact  with  the  relevant  regulatory  and
supervisory  agencies,  especially  to  the extent  such  agencies  are  charged
with systemic, macroprudential  oversight. Mutual information-sharing  and
agency  coordination  are  indispensable  for  the  new  scheme  to  work
effectively.11 2  In  addition to  regular  interagency  discussion  meetings,  it
may be desirable to ensure the SGS Holder's ability to access supervisory
information,  both on a firm-specific  and aggregate basis, upon request.  In
particular,  SGS  directors  should  be able  to participate  in the process  of
supervisory reviews, to the extent necessary,  and have separate channels of
communication with the relevant firm's examiners.
On the  other hand,  however,  the SGS  Holder cannot become  simply
another  traditional  regulator-the  new  entity must  retain  its  distinctive
110.  See Lebron v. Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp., 513 U.S. 374 (1995)  (describing the history of
Amtrak and other government-chartered  corporations).  For academic analyses of the functions and
varied organizational  structures  of government corporations and quasi-governmental  entities, see A.
Michael Froomkin, Reinventing the Government Corporation, 1995 U. ILL. L. REv. 543 (1995); Anne
Joseph  O'Connell, Bureaucracy at the Boundary, 162  U. PA. L.  REv.  841  (2014);  Benjamin A.
Templin,  The  Government Shareholder: Regulating Public Ownership of Private Enterprise, 62
ADMIN. L. REV. 1127 (2010).
111.  Among other things, this option would (1)  allow the SGS Holder to offer salaries in excess
of the federal-employee compensation limits and, thus, attract and retain highly qualified personnel; (2)
potentially free it from many of the formal constraints and requirements of the administrative process;
(3) give it a greater degree of insulation from direct political pressure; and (4) encourage the emergence
of a more focused and mission-oriented  institutional culture. See sources cited supra note 108. The
principal downside of this option is the potential  loss of, or an ambiguity with respect to, federal
immunity. To solve or preempt this problem, the SGS statute would have to include explicit provisions
shielding the SGS Holder and individual SGS directors from potentially crippling shareholder suits. For
a discussion of such provisions, see infra Part IV.B.
112.  As discussed above,  regular and effective information-sharing and coordination with the
regulatory  and  supervisory  agencies  are  particularly  important  in  facilitating  the  SGS  Holder's
determination of whether a statutory triggering event has occurred with respect to a particular covered
entity. See supra Part III.A.2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1061
market-actor,  firm-insider  focus  and identity."3  The  SGS  Holder's  most
significant decisions  should reflect  its primary  mission to act as  a direct
stakeholder in a private firm, using internal levers of corporate governance
to  achieve  the  public  goal  of  correcting  individual  firms'  potentially
systemically  destabilizing behavior.  Even when other regulatory  agencies
pursue  the  same  general  goal  of preventing  systemic  instability,  their
typical  methods  and  general  posture  vis-d-vis  regulated  firms  are
fundamentally  different.  The  SGS  Holder's decisions,  while informed by
the relevant regulators'  actions and opinions, must nevertheless retain their
"genetic  code"  as  market-driven  decisions,  especially  since  the  SGS
Holder's  actions  aim  ultimately  at  preserving  the  market  from  self-
destruction. Otherwise, not only the legitimacy' '4 but also the very efficacy
of the SGS mechanism may be compromised."'
For example, the SGS Holder's expanded role in the active post-trigger
stage may be seen as excessively  overlapping  with the FDIC's and other
bank  regulators'  rights  under  the  existing  regime  of prompt  corrective
action  (PCA). 116  The  PCA  regime  establishes  a  scale  of  increasingly
intrusive regulatory restrictions on the ability of the board of directors and
management  of a  troubled  bank to  take various  corporate  actions-e.g.,
distributing dividends to shareholders  or making  acquisitions-that  could
hasten its bankruptcy.  It functions as an early warning system that forces
regulators to adopt a quasi-managerial stance with respect to banks facing
potential  failure.  As  discussed  above,  the  regulatory  and  supervisory
metrics  that  trigger  various  PCA responses  can  also  be used  to  trigger
special SGS  management  rights."7  Nevertheless,  the SGS  regime is not a
substitute  for, or a redundant  replication  of, the  PCA scheme.  Thus,  the
former  is potentially  significantly broader  in  its  scope,  both  because  its
explicit goal is the preservation of systemic financial stability and because
113.  Again, this need to establish a distinctive identity of the SGS Holder as a market actor, as
opposed  to  a regulator  or supervisor,  works in  favor of establishing  it  as  a federally  chartered
government corporation. See supra note 111.
114.  One of the expected criticisms  of the SGS proposal  could point to potential conflicts of
interest by virtue of the government acting both as a sovereign and a shareholder in financial firms.
Although frequently overstated, it is a legitimate concern that requires special attention to avoiding or
minimizing not only actual but also apparent conflicts of interest in the operation of the SGS regime.
Designing an institutional structure and providing a clear and transparent procedural framework for the
SGS Holder's decision-making are of paramount importance in this respect.
115.  Generally, there is an inherent difficulty in discussing the efficacy/feasibility aspect of any
new proposal simply because, in reality, much will depend on the culture of the new agencies and
personalities of individuals who would lead them. Who these people are, how smart and honest they
are, and how seriously they take their public duties will make all the difference in making the SGS idea
succeed or fail in practice. None of that can be theorized or "proven" in the abstract. By the same token,
of course, it cannot be theoretically "proven" that the proposed regime will necessarily fail for the lack
of the right people or the right mindset.
116.  See 12 U.S.C. ยง 18310 (2012).
117.  See supra note 89 and accompanying text.1062 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
the universe of covered  entities  is likely to extend  beyond FDIC-insured
depository  institutions.'18  Even  more  importantly,  the  SGS  Holder  will
have a unique  set of internal governance  tools at its disposal, potentially
enabling  it to target the individual firms' problems  more effectively, in a
flexible and timely fashion. In effect, a well-functioning  SGS  regime may
reduce  the  need to  use  the  more  intrusive  among  the  PCA  tools-and
possibly to place  troubled firms  in resolution-by  shifting the burden of
timely risk prevention and correction back on the relevant firm's directors
and managers whose actions (or inactions) allowed such risk creation in the
first  place.119  Of  course,  regular  and  close  information-sharing  and
coordination between the SGS Holder and FDIC are crucial to ensuring that
these two parallel processes  operate in a mutually  enhancing,  rather than
inefficiently duplicative, way: one working from within, and the other from
outside the troubled firm.
Furthermore,  in  contrast  to  PCA  or  other  traditional  tools  of bank
supervision,  the  SGS  regime  would  be  uniquely  designed  to  utilize
mechanisms of internal corporate governance in response to the early signs
of systemic  risk  accumulation  on a  macro,  as  opposed to  micro,  level.
Thus,  as  discussed  above,  the  SGS  special  management  rights  can  be
activated  if the SGS  Holder  identifies potentially  destabilizing  market or
industry  trends, even  if there  are no immediate  signs of weakness at the
level of an individual covered entity.120 This type of proactive correction of
systemic  imbalances  through  adjustments  to  individual  firms'  behavior
would  serve  as  an  invaluable  supplement  to  the  government's  current
inventory of macroprudential regulation.
To take full advantage of this vital benefit of the proposed SGS regime,
it would be necessary  to  ensure that the  SGS  Holder maintains  constant
communication  and  works  closely  with  both  FSOC  and  the  Office  of
Financial  Research  (OFR)  of the  U.S.  Treasury  Department.121  To  the
118.  See supraP art II.B.
119.  The same potential benefit also obtains with respect to the postcrisis SIFI resolution regime
under the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA).  See Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection  Act  ยงยง 201-217,  12  U.S.C.  ยงยง 4403,  5381-5394  (2012),  18  U.S.C.  ยง 1032  (2012).
Discussing the controversies surrounding the practical implementation and potential efficacy of SIFI
resolution under the Dodd-Frank regime is beyond the scope of this Article. It is worth emphasizing
here, though, that the SGS regime potentially provides a much more flexible, broader in scope, and far
less procedurally cumbersome alternative to SIFI resolution or liquidation. In that sense, it is likely to
be a more  effective potential  means  of avoiding politically  unpopular bailouts  of large financial
institutions.
120.  See supra Part III.A.  An example of a potentially troublesome market trend would be a
sudden rise in the price of a particular type of financial instrument, such as mortgage-backed securities.
An example of a potentially troublesome industry trend would be a sudden or rapid growth in assets or
leverage of a specific category of financial institution, such as mortgage lenders.
121.  Under the Dodd-Frank regime, the OFR's mission is to provide research and informational
support for FSOC and other financial regulators specifically for purposes of detecting, measuring, and
monitoring systemic risk. See About the OFR, OFF. OF FIN. RES., www.financialresearch.gov/about/.2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1063
extent that neither FSOC nor OFR have actual supervisory responsibilities,
their relationship  with  the  SGS  Holder  would  be  explicitly  focused  on
tracking  and analyzing key  system-wide dynamics.  The head of the SGS
Holder should have a place on FSOC,  even if in a  special capacity  as  an
observing  member (in order to preserve the SGS  Holder's  autonomy and
identity as a market actor). The SGS directors may be explicitly allowed to
solicit  information and  advice from the OFR personnel  and to  give such
information  or advice  a significant  weight in making  their  firm-specific
decisions.  It may also be desirable to establish regular OFR briefings for
the entire corps of SGS directors.
B.  Funding; Accountability Mechanisms
Proper  funding  is  another important  factor  in  ensuring  the  level  of
operational and decision-making autonomy vital to the efficient functioning
of the new SGS regime. To perform its hybrid role as a public market actor
effectively,  the  SGS  Holder  would  need  to  attract  and  retain  highly
qualified  and  committed  personnel,  which requires  not only  sufficiently
high levels of compensation  but also considerable  ongoing investment in
employee  training  and  organization  building.  Since  the  proposed  SGS
regime  is  not  designed  to  generate  any  financial  profit  for  the  federal
government, it would be critical to secure a reliable source of funding other
than discretionary congressional appropriations.
In principle, the SGS Holder could be funded by earmarking a portion
of the  Federal  Reserve's revenues.  Another potential  source of the  SGS
Holder's funding  could be some  sort of an industry surcharge,  applicable
either to all financial services firms (on a sliding scale,  depending on the
firms'  size or systemic significance)  or to some subset of such firms. 122  A
market-wide  "financial  transactions  tax"123-a  popular,  though
controversial,  idea-could  also  be  used  to  fund  the  SGS  Holder's
operations, at least in part. Finally, the function of an SGS Holder could be
vested in a public  instrumentality-which  could be a federal  agency  or a
government  corporation-that  performs  other market-actor  roles  as  well
and, as a result of such additional operations, generates its own revenues.124
The uniquely hybrid nature of the SGS  regime also raises potentially
complex  issues  of designing  effective  procedural  tools  for  ensuring  a
reasonable degree of transparency and public accountability-while, at the
122.  This subset could include, for example, all federally insured institutions, all BHCs, and all
nonbank institutions that either exceed a certain  size threshold  or meet other regulatory criteria for
potential systemic significance.
123.  See Ross P. Buckley, Reconceptualizing the Regulation of Global Finance, 36 OXFORD J.
LEGAL STuD. 242 (2016).
124.  See Public Actors, supra note 13, at 173.1064 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
same time, preserving the SGS Holder's ability to react quickly and to take
a wide range of actions shielded from public view by the corporate entity's
organizational walls. In devising  such tools for the SGS  regime, one may
be  able  to  draw  on  a  variety  of existing  examples,  both  in  financial
regulation and in other regulatory areas. Thus, as discussed above, building
into  the  SGS  regime  a  series  of  mandatory  interagency  coordination
requirements would provide an important channel for the external vetting
of the  SGS  Holder's  most  significant  firm-specific  determinations.125  I
addition, it may  be desirable  to establish  some  form of oversight  of the
SGS  Holder's  operations  by  FSOC,  as  the  principal  U.S.  systemic-risk
monitor. To avoid potentially excessive interference in the substance of the
SGS  Holder's  decision-making  process, however,  it may be  advisable to
limit  FSOC's  oversight  authority  to  certain  procedural  matters.
Furthermore,  the  statute could mandate  that the head of the SGS  Holder
submit annual  reports  to  Congress  outlining  its  principal actions  in  the
relevant period  and providing  its overall assessment of key trends  in  the
U.S.  financial system.126 The  statute could also require  periodic audits of
the SGS  Holder by an audit panel specially appointed for that purpose by
FSOC.  Finally,  it may be desirable  to establish  a  special advisory  body
comprising  independent  experts  and  public  interest  advocates,  whose
primary function would be to guard not only against potential abuses of the
SGS  Holder's  statutory powers  but also-and  very importantly-against
potential failures on the part of that entity to fulfil its statutory mandate.127
An important aspect of accountability, both in the realm of government
decision-making  and  in  the  traditionally  private  sphere  of  corporate
governance,  is  the  availability  of judicial  review  of  decision  makers'
actions. In the context of the SGS proposal advanced here, one of the most
delicate  issues  concerns  the  relative  rights  of private  shareholders  in
covered  entities  vis-i-vis  the  SGS  Holder.  A  similar issue  arose  in  the
context of the federal government's  acquiring  direct ownership  stakes in
firms that received emergency equity investments under the Troubled Asset
Repurchase  Program initiated by the U.S.  Treasury in the fall of 2008.128
This  crisis-driven  measure  raised  difficult  questions  regarding  the
availability  of judicial  and  administrative  review  of  the  government's
actions  in  its  new  capacity  as  a  controlling  shareholder.  Predictably,
125.  See supra Part m.
126.  The statute may also require the SGS Holder to submit copies of its annual congressional
reports to the FSOC, Federal Reserve, and the Treasury Department.
127.  For more on designing an independent public advisory body of this type, see Saule T.
Omarova, Bankers, Bureaucrats,a nd Guardians: Toward Tripartism in FinancialS ervices Regulation,
37 J. CORP. L. 621 (2012).
128.  Emergency Economic  Stabilization Act of 2008, Pub.  L. No. 110-343,  122 Stat.  3765
(2008) (codified as amended in scattered sections of the U.S. Code).2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1065
corporate  law  scholars  stressed  the  importance  of  protecting  private
shareholders  against  the  govermnent-shareholder's  politically  driven
actions  that  could  negatively  affect  the  corporation's  profitability  and
possibly the value of their individual investments.129 Yet, existing corporate
statutes-traditionally, the area of state jurisdiction-are not drafted with a
sovereign  shareholder in mind and, therefore,  fail to provide  a workable
solution.130  Administrative  law,  which  operates  on  an  assumption  that
federal government agencies make rules and administer laws rather than act
as direct stakeholders in private firms, is similarly unhelpful.131
To the extent that the SGS proposal vests potentially significant levels
of  control  over  corporate  decisions  in  the  hands  of SGS  directors,  it
similarly  transcends  the  doctrinal  boundaries  of  both  corporate  and
administrative law.  While filling this gap in the existing system of laws is
not a part of the present project, it is nevertheless possible to articulate the
basic approach  to designing a working system of judicial review of SGS
decisions.
As  a  general  matter,  the  SGS  statute  has  to  balance  two  goals:  (1)
shielding  the  SGS  Holder  from  lawsuits  brought  against  it  by  private
parties,  and  (2) giving private  shareholders  reasonable  protection against
excessive  harm  caused  by the  SGS  Holder's  actions.  However,  because
protecting  the SGS  Holder from incapacitating litigation battles  is a vital
prerequisite  for effective operation of the  SGS  regime, the statute should
explicitly and unambiguously prioritize the first objective over the second
one. 132
129.  See Marcel  Kahan  &  Edward  B.  Rock,  When  the  Government Is the  Controlling
Shareholder, 89 TEX. L. REV.  1293  (2011); J.W. Verret,  Treasury Inc.: How the Bailout Reshapes
Corporate Theory and Practice,2 7 YALE J. ON REG. 283 (2010); see also Barbara Black, The U.S. as
"Reluctant Shareholder": Government, Business and the Law, 5 ENTREPRENEURIAL BUS. L.J. 561, 593
(2010); Lissa L.  Broome,  Government Investment in Banks: Creeping Nationalization or Prudent,
Temporary Aid?, 4 FLA. INT'L U. L. REV. 409 (2009); Steven M. Davidoff & David Zaring, Regulation
by Deal: The Government's Response to the FinancialC risis, 61 ADMIN. L. REV. 463 (2009).
130.  For insightful  discussions of the doctrinal and practical  limitations of corporate law  in
dealing  with  a sovereign  shareholder,  see  Steven  M. Davidoff,  Uncomfortable Embrace: Federal
Corporate Ownership in the Midst of the Financial Crisis, 95 MINN.  L. REV.  1733 (2011),  Steven
Davidoff Solomon  & David  Zaring, After the Deal: Fannie, Freddie, and the Financial Crisis
Aftermath, 95 B.U. L. REV. 371 (2015), and Marcel Kahan & Edward Rock, When the Government is
the Controlling Shareholder:I mplicationsf or Delaware, 35 DEL. J. CORP. L. 409 (2010).
131.  See Solomon & Zaring, supra note 130.
132.  Ordinarily, federal government instrumentalities are protected from private lawsuits by the
doctrine of sovereign immunity. See United States v. Sherwood, 312 U.S. 584, 586 (1941) ("The United
States, as sovereign, is immune from suit save as it consents to be sued ....  ).  However, if the SGS
Holder  is set up as  a federally chartered  government corporation,  it may not be entitled to assert
sovereign immunity as an impenetrable shield against shareholder suits. See supra notes 110-111 and
accompanying text. In any event, depriving shareholders of covered entities of all access to courts may
be counterproductive and harm the regime's overall legitimacy. Finally, it may be difficult to claim full
sovereign immunity in the context in which a federal instrumentality acts in the capacity of a market
participant, rather than in its traditional regulatory capacity. See United States v.  Winstar Corp., 518
U.S.  839,  887-88  (1996).  A full discussion  of these complex  and highly technical  issues of legal1066 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68*1029
For example, the statute may give the holders of common stock in a
covered entity the right  to sue the SGS  Holder for damages  incurred by
such holders  as  a  direct result  of the  SGS  Holder's  actions.  This right,
however,  should be  subject  to  strict  limitations.  Thus,  only  holders  of
common  stock  above  a  specified  statutory  threshold  (expressed  as  a
percentage  of the  firm's  total common  stock  outstanding at the time  of
filing the lawsuit), who were common stockholders  of that same firm for a
specified minimum period of time (e.g., one year of continuous ownership),
would  have  standing  to  sue  the  SGS  Holder  under  the  statute.  These
conditions would eliminate strategic acquisitions by various arbitrageurs of
token amounts of common stock in covered entities with a view to suing
the government.
Furthermore,  the SGS  Holder would  be held liable under the  statute
only  for actions  taken  in bad  faith,  with  a specific  intent to  cause  the
plaintiff  direct  harm  that,  at  the  time  of the  SGS  action,  was  clearly
foreseeable,  highly  probable,  and  sufficiently  precisely  quantifiable.  The
shareholder  plaintiff must  bear the  initial  burden  of proving  bad  faith,
specific  intent,  high  probability  of the  quantifiable  direct  harm  to  the
plaintiff known  or susceptible to  proof at the  time of the  SGS  Holder's
action, and all other elements required by the statute. Setting this kind of a
high  standard  for  the  plaintiff will  help  to  protect  shareholders  from
egregious abuses of the SGS  Holder's statutory powers, while at the same
time preventing a potential onslaught of frivolous private lawsuits  against
the SGS Holder.
It  is  worth  noting  here  that  shareholder  lawsuits  against  the  SGS
Holder  are  also  likely  to  claim  some  form  of  an  uncompensated
governmental taking of their property in violation of the Takings Clause of
the  Fifth  Amendment  to  the  U.S.  Constitution.'33  In  essence,  these
shareholders  would  argue  that,  by  taking  effective  control  over  key
corporate  decisions  that  affected  the  firm's  ability  to  generate  greater
profits and thus increase  shareholder value, the SGS  Holder deprived the
firm's shareholders of their property rights. Controlling shareholders  could
also assert the uncompensated taking of their so-called control premium, a
concept familiar to scholars and practitioners of corporate law.  Under the
proposed  statutory  scheme,  however,  such  claims  would  be  unlikely to
succeed,  especially  because  they  would  be  fundamentally  analogous  to
doctrine and practice  is beyond the scope of what is necessary at this point in the proposed thought
experiment. The key for present purposes is that statutory assertion of full sovereign immunity on the
part of the SGS Holder and its agents may not be a viable, or desirable, choice.
133.  There is a large body of caselaw and academic analysis of the Takings Clause, discussion of
which is beyond the scope of this Article. For a summary of the U.S.  Supreme Court precedent,  see
ROBERT MELTZ, CONG. RESEARCH. SERV., 97-122, TAKINGS DECISIONS OF THE U.S. SUPREME COURT:
A CHRONOLOGY (2015), https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/97-122.pdf.2017]1 Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1067
"regulatory takings" claims. In general, it is difficult for private plaintiffs to
prevail  on  regulatory  takings  claims  because  every  regulatory  action
inherently diminishes the value of private property subject to it.134  In the
SGS  context,  the  SGS  Holder's  temporary  assumption  of  corporate
management  rights  is  designed  to  curb  systemically  risky  behavior  of
financial  institutions  that  some  shareholders  would  say  could  have
generated extra profits for them. To  the extent the SGS  statute  explicitly
and clearly articulates  its public policy objectives, it should preempt such
arguments.
C.  Dealing with the FearF  actor
A discussion  of the design and operative features of the SGS  regime
would be incomplete without  addressing, briefly but explicitly,  the single
most important challenge this proposal is bound to face: potentially  deep-
seated resistance to this type of bold institutional experimentation.
Some  of that  resistance  will  inevitably  represent  a  conscious-and
consciously concealed-effort by those who benefit, directly or indirectly,
from the current state of affairs to preserve  the status quo and to prevent
any reforms that threaten it. Because  of the fundamentally  self-interested
character  of their objections,  these  critics  are  not  likely to  engage  in  a
substantive discussion on the merits of the proposal. Their fear is that the
proposed scheme could actually work as intended.
On the other hand, some of the likely skepticism toward the concept of
a  special golden  share  regime  may come  from those who  are  genuinely
interested  in  finding  workable  mechanisms  of systemic  risk prevention.
These  critics  may raise  questions about specific  legal and administrative
details  insufficiently  developed  in  the  outlined proposal  or  may  worry
about its various unintended consequences.
Some  of  these  questions  and  concerns  may  reflect  the  inherent
difficulty  of mentally  reconciling the  proposed  shift in  the paradigm  of
bank  governance  with some  of the  basic  assumptions built into  today's
corporate  governance  orthodoxy.  One  such  familiar  assumption  is  that
allowing the government inside the boardroom would effectively amount to
"nationalization" of private enterprise and imposition of "socialism," which
is fundamentally incompatible with America's "free-market  economy" and
commitment to "capitalism."l35 This starkly dichotomous view of the world
is,  of course, empirically  false: the government is the crucial actor within
the  modern  free-market  economy;  its  actions  fundamentally  enable  and
134.  See Lucas v. S.C. Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003 (1992); Nollan v. Cal. Coastal Comm'n,
483 U.S. 825 (1987); Penn Cent. Transp. Co. v. City of New York, 438 U.S.  104 (1978).
135.  See Templin, supra note 110.1068 Alabama Law Review [Vol. 68:4:1029
often constitute  the very  markets  we  call  "private."136  In that  sense,  the
proposed SGS regime is neither "socialist" nor "capitalist." It is pragmatic
and  incremental:  it seeks  to improve  the operation  and efficiency  of the
hybrid public-private market economy we already have.
The  best  way  to  dispel the  fear  of change  induced  by  the  ossified
ideological  vocabulary  is to look past rhetorical  labels and to assess  the
proposed regime on its merits. As discussed above, the SGS mechanism is
designed to introduce the necessary systemic  corrective into an inherently
entity-centric perspective of individual firms' boards. It is meant to operate
as  a  dynamic  and  flexible tool  for  preventing  or minimizing  collective
economic  harms  from individual  firms'  actions.  A  well-functioning  SGS
regime should guide, rather than commandeer, individual banks' and SIFIs'
internal  decision-making  in  a  way  that  helps  to  smooth  seemingly
unavoidable boom-and-bust cycles in financial markets-and to avoid the
need  for the  government  to use  its  "manager  of last resort"  powers  in
practice. 137
Understanding  the  SGS  proposal  in  these  functional,  rather  than
ideological,  terms should also help to alleviate some of the more specific
potential  concerns  about  its consequences  for the  economic  viability  of
financial firms. For example, it may very well be that the covered entities'
cost of capital  might rise  significantly,  as  private  investors would  either
refuse to buy their shares or buy them at a deep discount. To the extent this
type  of  market  reaction  reflects  the  generalized  fear  of  a  de  facto
"nationalization,"  discussed above,  it is likely to be both temporary and
susceptible  to  correction.  To  the  extent  it  reflects  the  degree  of
internalization  of systemic risk posed by individual  financial institutions,
however,  this  change  in  their  cost  of  capital  should  be  seen  as  an
efficiency-enhancing  market adjustment.  Whether  or not  such  correction
proves  fatal  to  the  entire  banking  sector  is  a  question  that  cannot  be
answered in the abstract, though it seems unlikely that things would ever
get so bad.138 Speculative predictions  aside, there is a strong argument that
making bank managers focus on safeguarding the stability of the financial
136.  For  an in-depth  analysis  of the  role  of public  instrumentalities  in  constituting  and
augmenting financial markets, see Public Actors, supra note 13, and The Finance Franchise,s upra note
53. See also MARIANA MAZZUCATO, THE ENTREPRENEURIAL STATE: DEBUNKING PUBLIC VS. PRIVATE
SECTOR  MYTHS  (PublicAffairs  2015);  Fred Block, Swimming Against the Current: The Rise of a
Hidden DevelopmentalS tate in the United States, 36 POL. & SOC'Y 169 (2008).
137.  See supra note 103 and accompanying text.
138.  There is another, somewhat related, concern that triggering active SGS rights with respect
to a single SIFI could lead to a massive creditor and investor "run" on that SIFI and potentially trigger a
systemic  financial  crisis.  Essentially the same  issue was  widely  debated in  connection  with  the
regulatory attempts worldwide to mandate the issuance by banks of contingent debt claims susceptible
to bail-in under certain conditions.  See, e.g., Hilary J. Allen,  Cocos Can Drive Markets Cuckoo, 16
LEWIS & CLARK L. REV.  125 (2012) (discussing the pros and cons of contingent convertible capital
instruments as a systemic risk prevention tool).2017] Bank Governance and Systemic Stability 1069
system  should,  in  fact,  increase  banks'  and  other  financial  institutions'
long-term value to investors.139
This is not to suggest, of course, that the SGS  scheme is guaranteed to
work perfectly in practice. No such guarantees can ever be given. It would
be unrealistic,  however, to attempt to discuss in a single  article all of the
potential consequences-intended  or unintended, positive or negative-of
the proposed regime. A full understanding of such consequences is likely to
emerge only in the process of further refining and implementing the broad
conceptual framework elaborated above.
CONCLUSION
This  Article  outlined  principal  contours  of  a  new,  and  very
unconventional by today's standards, regime of bank governance, in which
the task of representing  the public interest on individual banks' boards of
directors is performed by a special federal instrumentality, the SGS Holder.
The  proposal  advanced  here  is  more  of a  thought  experiment  than  a
legislative blueprint.  Developing  such a blueprint would require  thinking
through  and resolving many complex legal, economic,  and administrative
issues that are bound to arise in connection with such a bold departure from
the  current norm.  Moreover, there may  not be sufficient  political will to
pursue decisive measures of this kind, at least in the near future. And the
financial services industry will relentlessly lobby against any reform likely
to reduce Wall Street's profits by restricting its ability to externalize risk.
For all these  depressingly familiar reasons,  the proposed regime may be
simply too difficult to implement in practice.
Yet,  it  would  be  short-sighted  to  reject  or  dismiss  this  thought
experiment  too quickly. The golden  share  regime may prove to be more
plausible  than  the  critics  are  willing  to  acknowledge.  Our  current
perceptions  of how  impossibly  difficult  it  would  be  to  implement  the
proposed  SGS  scheme  may  be  significantly  exaggerated,  in  large  part
because that proposal represents such a radical departure from what we've
been  conditioned  to  view  as  the  "normal"  state  of play.  Shifting  our
collective attitudinal and conceptual framework to accommodate the basic
concept of the public  as  a legitimate  endogenous  corporate  actor, on the
other  hand,  is  bound  to  broaden  the  universe  of potential  legal  and
administrative  solutions  to problems  that  might have  previously  seemed
intractable. From that perspective, operationalizing the golden share regime
envisioned here may be just the right challenge for the truly  creative and
ambitious lawyers and lawmakers.
139.  For a discussion of the interplay between  systemic  stability and shareholder value, see
Armour & Gordon, supra note 46.1070  Alabama Law Review  [Vol. 68:4:1029
For now, however, the task is to begin articulating the basic notion of a
hybrid public-private bank governance regime as an option on the menu of
potential  reforms.  Thinking  along these  unorthodox  lines  could hold the
key to unlocking the full potential of corporate governance, more generally,
as a tool of public interest. The alternative is clear: if our existing system of
corporate governance  is  simply too rigidly programmed  to prioritize and
safeguard short-term economic interests of certain private parties, then we
must stop pretending that it can offer meaningful long-term solutions to our
most pressing public policy problems. We will then have to search for such
solutions elsewhere.