EDUCATION
FILLING THE 
GOOGLE GAPS
Why ignore the  
Google elephant  
in the room?  
Harnessing the  
power of Google 
through instruction. 
BY REBECCA MATTSON
Ask any first-year (or maybe 
even second- and third-
year) student or associate 
where they begin to look for 
information, and the most 
likely response is “Google.” 
As librarians, many of us 
tend to urge our students 
not to use Google because 
of its faults. Our tendency to 
discourage the use of Google 
is, at least in part, warranted.  “Students ...   Google Advanced Search are not vetted for reliability. 
Studies, such as the ERIAL  do not understand  Librarians prefer Bool- Many young attorneys 
(Ethnographic Research in  there may be gaps in  ean searching to keyword  and law students are not 
Illinois Academic Libraries)  their Google research  searching when conducting  aware that Google is, in fact, 
project, show that while stu- that a librarian   serious legal research. When  capable of running a terms 
dents may believe they know  can help fill.” using a service such as Lexis  and connectors search as 
how to effectively research  Advance or WestlawNext,  well. Clearly, one search 
on Google, they consistently  Google can, however, be  we can construct efficient  is more effective than the 
fail to limit search results to  a powerful tool when taught  Boolean queries that narrow  other, especially when cost 
achieve a narrower pool of  and used correctly. Instead  down our results to a man- is factored. When we teach 
more relevant results and,  of ignoring the Google ele- ageable number of cases or  our students how to use 
perhaps more critically, do  phant in the legal research  articles. When law students  Boolean searching in Lexis 
not understand that there  classroom, we ought to  first encounter the “big box”  or Westlaw, we should also 
may be gaps in their Google  admit that our students are  and enter keywords, they are  be teaching them how to use 
research that a librarian can  going to use it and teach  granted the entire universe  Google’s advanced search to 
help fill. The findings of the  them how to do so effective- of legal research. When  narrow results.
ERIAL project are detailed  ly. By teaching students how  they put the same words in  Using the pre-created 
in Steve Kolowich’s article  to use Google, we are help- Google, the results are even  fields on advanced search  
“What Students Don’t Know,”  ing to create a generation of  more overwhelming: thou- at www.google.com/ 
published in Inside Higher Ed  internet-savvy, cost-effective  sands of results that may or  advanced_search, a stu-
on August 22, 2011. researchers. may not be law-related and  dent can search the Google 
38  AALL SPECTRUM  | SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2015equivalent of “and,” “or,” “exact phrase,”  to the foldering capabilities of West-
and “not.” One simple example shows  lawNext and Lexis Advance, so the user  SMOOTH OPERATORS
the clear advantage of using advanced  can save a citation into the library to 
search.  access at a later date. The option to save  THESE SEARCH TRICKS CAN HELP  
A user searching on advanced  appears below the description of the  STUDENTS AND ASSOCIATES IMPROVE  
search for “dog bite” as an exact phrase  document, alongside related articles  GOOGLE SEARCH RESULTS
retrieves 808,000 results, while a user  and citation metrics. A researcher can 
simply entering the words “dog bite”  limit the search in Scholar by author,  OPERATOR HOW TO USE IT
without quotations retrieves 15,700,000  which will return all Google-indexed  Get results from certain sites or do-
results. The 888,000 is still unmanage- articles written by that author (and  site: mains.Examples: olympics site:nbc.
able, but it’s certainly better than nearly   possibly another author with a similar  com and olympics site:.gov
16 million! name or first initial). Find pages that link to a certain 
link:
From the advanced screen, the user  Google Scholar’s ability to limit a  page. Example: link:youtube.com
can further narrow the search by type  search to case law is extremely helpful, 
Find sites that are similar to a  
of site, such as .edu, .gov, or .org. This  and the results are much more mean- related: web address you already know. 
will increase the credibility of the re- ingful than those retrieved by run- Example: related:time.com
sults. The same “dog bite” phrase search  ning the same search in Google. For  Find pages that might use one of 
limited to .edu sites brings the total  instance, if a searcher selects the “Case  OR several words. Example: marathon 
number of results down to 9,190. More  Law” option and searches “hearsay  OR race
experienced users can simply indicate  evidence,” the number one result is  Get information about a web ad-
the limiter in the search box: “site:edu  Crawford v. Washington. Once inside  dress, including the cached version 
info: of the page, similar pages, and 
(dog bite).” the document, there is a “How Cited” 
pages that link to the site.  
Google’s search operators also allow  option, which shows cases that are 
Example: info:google.com
users to drill down further with their  related, cases that cite the original case, 
See what a page looks like the last 
searching. A user can use the opera- and some examples of quotes from cas-
cache: time Google visited the site.  
tor “related” to find a website that is  es citing the original case. “How Cited”  Example: cache:washington.edu
similar to a site they already know. For  does not use signals or flags to indicate 
example, if you enter “related:time. type of treatment, nor does it indicate  Note: When you search using operators or  
punctuation marks, don’t add any spaces  
com” into the search box, it returns  depth of treatment. The researcher 
between the operator and your search terms.
similar breaking news websites, such  must read the cases listed to determine 
as CBS News, The Christian Science  the kind of treatment the case has been 
Monitor, and The Atlantic. given. A good example is Bowers v. 
Hardwick, which was overturned in 
Priming Effective Researchers
Google Scholar 2003 by Lawrence v. Texas. Lawrence is 
Students and associates are going to 
Google first launched Scholar in  listed as the first case under “cited by,” 
use Google for at least some research 
November 2004 as a platform for re- but the quote from Lawrence is fourth 
regardless of what they learn in Legal 
searchers to search scholarly literature.  on the list of examples of treatment, 
Research class. As educators and li-
In 2009, Google began making legal  and the quote used does not convey 
brarians, we are in the position to teach 
cases available for researchers, and  that it was actually overruled. 
them how to use Google effectively as a 
users are also able to search for patents 
free resource. S 
(more on this shortly). A searcher us- Google Patents
ing Google Scholar, which is available  Google Patents, at https://patents.
at https://scholar.google.com, can find  google.com, launched in 2006, but a 
not only citations to legal scholarly  recent update integrated the patent 
journal articles available through  search with Scholar. The search box on 
institutional or personal subscriptions,  Google Patents includes a check-box to 
but also links to full-text downloadable  include non-patent literature and prior 
REBECCA MATTSON 
articles. As many law reviews move  art. When that box is checked, Google 
SCHOLARLY COMMUNICATIONS & 
to an open-source model and upload  also searches using Scholar to find re- FACULTY SERVICES LIBRARIAN 
archived content, the ability to discover  lated literature and prior art. To search  Penn State Law
Montague Law Library
these articles becomes more valuable.   for a patent, a researcher can either 
Pennsylvania State University
Google Scholar also offers a “My  search by patent or application number  University Park, Pennsylvania
Library” link-saving option, similar  or use a keyword or advanced search. ram6023@dsl.psu.ed
 SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2015  |   AALL SPECTRUM  39