LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3 [2012-28]
How Librarians Can Help Improve Law Journal Publishing*
Benjamin J. Keele** and Michelle Pearse***
Librarians are well positioned to improve law journal publishing and help it evolve 
in the ever-changing digital environment. They can provide student editors with 
advice on a variety of issues such as copyright, data preservation, and version control. 
Librarians can also help journals adopt technical standards and improve the discover-
ability and usability of journal content. While few libraries will be able to adopt all 
these suggestions, a checklist of ideas is provided to help librarians select those that are 
most suitable to their libraries and journals.
Introduction
¶1 Numbering near one thousand titles and growing, more law journals than 
ever are now being published by U.S. law schools.1 Most of these journals are edited 
by students, and the fact that more journals are being established indicates there is 
demand from students for opportunities to work on a journal or from professors 
for publication venues. Editors and authors share a common goal to produce legal 
scholarship that is read, cited, and influential.
¶2 Law librarians assist in the production and dissemination of law journals at 
several points in the process. Librarians help produce legal scholarship by helping 
authors  use  resources  in  their  research. After  articles  have  been  written  and 
accepted by journals, librarians assist editors and staff as they verify references and 
  *  © Benjamin J. Keele and Michelle Pearse, 2012. This article is licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in 
any medium, provided the original authors and source are credited. The authors would like to thank 
Sarah Rhodes and Erika Wayne for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of the article, and Rich 
Leiter, Tom Boone, Roger Skalback, Ken Hirsh, and Valerie Craigle for helpful comments during a 
Law Librarian Conversations podcast related to the article. Many of the ideas in this article were first 
presented in a poster session at the 2011 Annual Meeting of the American Association of Law Librar-
ies. The poster is available at http://scholarship.law.wm.edu/libpubs/25/, and additional resources on 
library support for law journal publishing are available at http://libguides.law.harvard.edu/lawjournal 
publishing, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67WzAbNL3. As an example of preserving our 
online sources, we have archived snapshots of most online citations using WebCite (http://www 
.webcitation.org) and added a URL for that snapshot to the citation; because of this, “last visited” 
dates have been omitted from those citations. We have not archived online sources that are in reliable 
repositories or when the WebCite tool failed to accurately capture the source.
  **  Reference Librarian, William & Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia.
  ***  Research Librarian for Open Access Initiatives and Scholarly Communication, Harvard Law 
School, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
  1. See John Doyle, The Law Reviews: Do Their Paths of Glory Lead but to the Grave?, 10 J. APP. 
PrAc. & Process 179, 180 (2009).
383384 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
bring the articles into conformity with citation standards.2 In recent years, libraries 
have also become increasingly engaged in providing platforms through which jour-
nals may publish their content through online repositories and publishing systems, 
such as DigitalCommons,3 Open Journal Systems (OJS),4 WordPress,5 Drupal,6 and 
DSpace.7
¶3 This is hardly a complete list of how librarians contribute to journal produc-
tion, and there are other services librarians are especially qualified to provide to law 
journals. Our article considers ways in which libraries can broaden their roles in 
supporting law review publication and increasing the visibility and discoverability 
of these journals, in both the long and the short term. While libraries have been 
widely engaged in providing various services to journals (e.g., instruction, support 
for citation checking, and repository and other publishing platforms), we seek to 
reflect on activities that do not seem so common and to think broadly about how 
libraries and librarians might become more actively engaged in publishing law 
reviews and evolve in their roles as partners in the publication of law reviews. A 
checklist, included here as an appendix, reminds librarians of issues that could be 
raised with law review editors, IT departments, and anyone else engaged in the law 
journal production process.
¶4 Just as university libraries have found themselves increasingly partnering (or 
in some cases merging) with their university presses,8 law school libraries should 
be positioning themselves to support their journals’ evolution in the new digital 
publishing landscape by advising and supporting innovative initiatives in publish-
ing, becoming more engaged in supporting the editorial production of the journal, 
and helping with marketing and retailing. Librarians are well situated to lend their 
expertise to student editors, who do not possess much training in information 
distribution and retrieval and do not tend to think about the long-term institu-
tional goals of their journals.
¶5 Our article builds on discussion at meetings in reaction to the Durham 
Statement which advocated for the transition of law reviews to a purely digital 
  2.  For a discussion of how librarians can assist law journals with training, interlibrary loan, and 
cite-checking, see Pamela D. Burdett, Dorothy C. Clark & Sally G. Waters, What Librarians Can Do for 
Your Law Review, 30 sTeTson l. rev. 593 (2000).
  3. DigiTAlcommons, http://digitalcommons.bepress.com (last visited May 29, 2012).
  4. Open Journal Systems, Public knowleDge ProJecT, http://pkp.sfu.ca/?q=ojs, archived at 
http://www.webcitation.org/67WzSv8jk.
  5. worDPress.com,  https://wordpress.com,  archived  at  http://www.webcitation.org/67Wz 
T2R78.
  6. DruPAl, https://drupal.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67WzbsakH.
  7. DsPAce, http://www.dspace.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67WzbkGcg.
  8.  As of 2010, at least sixteen university presses reported to academic libraries. Richard W. 
Clement, Library and University Press Integration: A New Vision for University Publishing, 51 J. libr. 
ADmin. 507, 520 (2011). Recent reports and scholarship stress the increasing role of the library 
in publishing services. See lAurA brown eT Al., universiTy Publishing in A DigiTAl Age (July 
2007), available at http://www.sr.ithaka.org/research-publications/university-publishing-digital-age; 
sPArc, librAry Publishing services: sTrATegies for success; finAl reseArch rePorT (Mar. 2012), 
http://wp.sparc.arl.org/lps/, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67Wzrg4sK; Maria Carpenter 
et al., Envisioning the Library’s Role in Scholarly Communication in the Year 2025, 11 PorTAl: libr. 
& AcAD. 659 (2011) (contemplating potential future roles for libraries in scholarly communication 
through various scenarios, including the library as publisher).Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 385
mode of publication.9 While these meetings and papers emanating from them have 
laid the groundwork for a technical infrastructure and requirements for making the 
Durham Statement work, our more modest goal is to outline tools and resources to 
enable law librarians to have conversations with their journal editors and explore 
various activities for helping them publish better. We hope to flesh out concrete 
ways in which law libraries can increase their role in supporting student publica-
tions and expand on their traditional services and functions.
Copyright Agreements and Policies
¶6 For law journal editors and authors, profit is not the primary motivation. 
While some journals and authors may receive royalties from database vendors or 
textbook publishers, most participants are unpaid, or at least not paid beyond their 
normal salaries. Because copyright is primarily an economic privilege, it would 
seem that editors and authors would be largely unconcerned with copyright mat-
ters, and in many ways this assumption is being increasingly borne out in law jour-
nal policies.10 Since the late 1980s, law journal publication agreements have, in 
general, become less demanding of exclusive rights from authors. Rather than ask-
ing for a complete transfer of copyright, many journals now request a temporary 
exclusive license or even a nonexclusive license.11 Many journals also liberally grant 
permission for reproduction of articles, generally provided that the copying is for 
educational use, copies are distributed at or below cost, proper copyright notices 
and attributions are given, and notification is sent to the journal.12 Further indicat-
ing that these liberal policies are common is the National Conference of Law 
Reviews’ Model Code of Ethics. The Model Code provides that while journals have 
the right to ask for copyright in published articles, they should permit authors who 
wish to retain copyright to do so, and in any case should let authors republish and 
  9. See, e.g., Implementing the Durham Statement: Best Practices for Open Access Law Jour-
nals,  Duke  lAw  sch.,  http://www.law.duke.edu/libtech/openaccess/conference2010,  archived  at 
http://www.webcitation.org/67X094RpX.  For  more  about  the  Durham  Statement,  see  Richard 
A.  Danner,  Kelly  Leong  & Wayne V.  Miller,  The  Durham  Statement  Two Years  Later:  Open 
Access in the Law School Journal Environment, 103 lAw libr. J. 39, 2011 lAw libr. J. 2; Wayne 
V. Miller, A Foundational Proposal for Making the Durham Statement Real (Duke Law Work-
ing  Paper  29,  2010),  http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2948&context 
=faculty_scholarship. See also Tom Boone, Librarians Key to Open-Access Electronic Law Reviews, 
librAry lAws Are meAnT To be broken (Sept. 3, 2009, 3:57 P.m.), http://tomboone.com/library 
-laws/2009/09/librarians-key-open-access-electronic-law-reviews, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/67X0IJw10.
  10.  See Jessica Litman, The Economics of Open Access Law Publishing, 10 lewis & clArk l. rev. 
779, 783 (2006) (“Indeed, copyright is sufficiently irrelevant that legal scholars, the institutions that 
employ them, and the journals that publish their research tolerate considerable uncertainty about who 
owns the copyright to the works in question, without engaging in serious efforts to resolve it.”).
  11.  See Benjamin J. Keele, Copyright Provisions in Law Journal Publication Agreements, 102 lAw 
libr. J. 269, 274, 2010 lAw libr. J. 15, ¶ 18.
  12.  Examples of these provisions can be found in the Duke Law Journal, the Indiana Law Journal, 
the Minnesota Law Review, the Pepperdine Law Review, the U.C. Davis Law Review, and the William & 
Mary Law Review.386 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
adapt their articles.13 The Model Code also calls on authors to grant journals’ 
requests to republish, especially in electronic databases.14 In 1998, an Association 
of American Law Schools (AALS) special committee developed a fairly liberal 
model publication agreement for journals and authors.15
¶7 However, some sort of written copyright transfer or license is crucial to 
journals. These agreements provide the journal with clear authority to distribute 
articles through a variety of media. Journals want to distribute their content 
through as many reputable channels as possible, including the journal’s web site, 
LexisNexis, Westlaw, HeinOnline, and other disciplinary databases. Editors also 
need to ensure that their journals retain sufficient rights to distribute articles 
through new vendors that may appear in the future. Copyright lasts a very long 
time, so it is important for journals to have the flexibility to use distribution venues 
that were unforeseen when articles were first published.16
¶8 Authors, on the other hand, wish to post their articles, whether in draft or 
final form, on their personal web sites and sites like the Social Science Research 
Network (SSRN) or bepress. Many editors, recognizing that most law journals are 
products of educational institutions, also want to permit educational and noncom-
mercial reproduction of their articles. Most journals do not rely on subscription 
revenues as a significant source of funding, and so should not require more than 
nonexclusive licenses that give both journal and author great flexibility for repro-
ducing and distributing their work. 
¶9 Depending on the level of the library’s supervision over journals, librarians 
can help guide editors to adopt publication agreements and copyright policies that 
provide as much flexibility as possible for both the journal and the author to 
achieve their scholarly goals. To enable maximum circulation and impact of legal 
scholarship, librarians should encourage journals to use publication agreements 
that give the author and the journal nonexclusive rights to reproduce and distrib-
ute articles, provided that proper attribution is given. While U.S. copyright law 
does not protect a right of attribution for written works,17 publication agreements 
should generally provide that authors credit the journal as the point of first formal 
publication and that the journal credit the author in any excerpts or later publica-
tions. For a few journals, royalties may be a significant source of funding, but even 
for journals concerned about maintaining subscriptions, an exclusive license for a 
short period, between six months and two years, should suffice. A transfer of copy-
right is now outside the norm of law journal practice and should require special 
justification. 
¶10 Journals often also have copyright policies for the purpose of exercising 
their copyright over the journal compilation and the licenses to individual articles. 
As mentioned above, many journals explicitly grant permission for classroom 
  13.  Michael L. Closen & Robert M. Jarvis, The National Conference of Law Reviews Model Code 
of Ethics: Final Text and Comments, 75 mArQ. l. rev. 509, 519 (1992) (Rule 2.5).
  14.  Id. at 525 (Rule 4.5).
  15.  AALS Special Committee, Model Author/Journal Agreement (1998), available at http://www 
.aals.org/deansmemos/98-24.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67X0Z3Jsc.
  16.  See Michael N. Widener, Safeguarding “The Precious”: Counsel on Law Journal Publication 
Agreements in Digital Times, 28 John mArshAll J. comP. & info. l. 217, 241 (2010).
  17.  3 melville b. nimmer & DAviD nimmer, nimmer on coPyrighT § 8D.03 (2011).Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 387
reproduction as long as proper attribution is given and copies are not sold at a 
profit. 
¶11 A new mode of distribution for articles is the institutional repository, an 
online database of scholarly works by an academic institution’s faculty. A number 
of major research universities have recently adopted open access policies that 
encourage or require faculty to post their scholarly works online.18 Journals can 
facilitate author compliance with these policies by providing in their agreements 
and copyright policies that academic employers can archive their employees’ work 
without further permission. Such a policy will reduce transaction costs for both 
journals and libraries and further their educational goals. Any embargo on open 
access posting of articles can be specified. Librarians can explain to editors the ben-
efits of permitting posting in institutional repositories and help craft policy lan-
guage that serves both journal and library interests.19
¶12 Librarians should also encourage transparency of copyright agreements 
and policies. Very few journals make their agreements and policies available on 
their web sites.20 This lack of disclosure makes it more difficult for authors con-
cerned with retaining their rights to determine whether a journal has an agreeable 
policy, and it complicates the work of librarians and authors who want to know if 
they can distribute or use articles in certain ways. Librarians can encourage their 
institution’s journals to make their copyright documents publicly available and 
submit their policies to databases that provide a centralized collection of scholarly 
journals’ copyright policies.21
Version Marking
¶13 A consequence of the proliferation of electronic distribution channels for 
articles is that print journals are no longer the first or primary means by which 
researchers obtain journal content. For example, an article can be posted as a draft 
on SSRN, bepress, and any other web site to which the author wishes to post. As the 
author revises the article, she may add new drafts to these sites. Once the article is 
accepted by a journal, it is cite-checked, edited, and formatted for publication in the 
journal. This published version may then become available on the journal’s web 
  18.  See Registry of Open Access Repositories Mandatory Archiving Policies, ROARMAP, http://roar 
map.eprints.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67X0cEmRB.
  19.  Some have suggested adoption of a Creative Commons license for the purposes of creating 
an infrastructure for the Durham Statement. See, e.g., Miller, supra note 9, at [2]. An earlier project to 
promote open access law journals issued a statement of principles that included noninterference with 
an author’s desire to publish under a Creative Commons Attribution–Noncommercial Use license. 
Open  Access  Law:  Principles,  sciencecommons,  http://sciencecommons.org/projects/publishing 
/oalaw/principles, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67X11A9RM.
  20.  Keele, supra note 11, at 273, ¶ 15.
  21.  The most prominent service for most academic disciplines is SHERPA/RoMEO, http://www 
.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67X14OKDZ. Michael Froomkin has 
also created CopyrightExperiences, a wiki that contains information from law journals. coPyrighT 
exPeriences,  http://commons.umlaw.net/index.php?title=Main_Page,  archived  at  http://www.web 
citation.org/67X15Ktil. Coordinated efforts among law libraries and journals could help make infor-
mation consistently available in a variety of places where people look for journal policies.388 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
site, vendor databases, and any of the sites to which the author posts it. Even after 
formal publication, the author could revise, update, or correct the article and put 
that version online.
¶14 This scenario presents at least two challenges. First, by posting drafts, the 
published version, and even later revisions, authors increase the risk that research-
ers will find and possibly cite works that represent their preliminary thoughts. 
Some authors help mitigate this risk by putting notices on their papers indicating 
that they are drafts and should not be cited. But these admonitions cannot prevent 
a researcher from citing a draft, especially if the final version has not yet been pub-
lished or is not readily accessible. The ability to post drafts online for comment 
accelerates scholarly dialogue and makes legal scholarship more accessible to 
researchers outside the academy, but it also increases the risk that inaccurate or 
unpolished drafts will compete with their more complete and vetted successors. 
Second, researchers may have difficulty knowing the provenance of the article they 
are reading and may unknowingly use articles that have not been revised, proof-
read, or cite-checked. Multiple versions of a single intellectual work also make 
proper attribution to it more complicated than it would be if only one version were 
available.
¶15 One may wonder how different a draft article on SSRN is from the article 
published in the print journal. We do not know of any studies comparing drafts to 
formally published articles in legal scholarship, but several studies have examined 
the differences in other fields. One study of articles published by Blackwell found 
that a significant number of changes were made, most often to correct erroneous 
references.22 A second study of a small number of biology and social science articles 
found that numerous changes were made between drafts posted online and the 
final, published article. These edits generally made the papers more readable, but 
did not affect the validity of the conclusions. The study’s authors also found that 
some of the drafts posted by authors became inaccessible.23 Lastly, one study 
inspected drafts and articles from social science and humanities journals. The 
author concluded that most edits were minor and stylistic, but expressed concern 
that some errors in quotations and citations had not been corrected, even in the 
final, published version.24
¶16 While these studies did not look at law journal articles, their findings still 
have some value for law librarians and journal editors. The point most applicable 
to law journals is the problem caused when quotations and references are not veri-
fied by the editors of the journals; these errors, once published, are unlikely ever to 
be corrected in the future. Thus, cite-checking by law journal staff is an important 
service to legal scholarship that helps minimize errors in citation. By this we do not 
mean ensuring strict compliance with citation style (although some citation stan-
dard is valuable), but rather checking cited sources to ensure that they are acces-
  22.  Edward Wates & Robert Campbell, Author’s Version vs. Publisher’s Version: An Analysis of the 
Copy-Editing Function, 20 leArneD Publ’g 121, 126 (2007).
  23.  David Goodman et al., Open Access and Accuracy: Author-Archived Manuscripts vs. Published 
Articles, 20 leArneD Publ’g 203, 209–10 (2007).
  24.  Sanford G. Thatcher, Copyediting’s Role in an Open-Access World, AgAinsT The grAin, Apr. 
2011, at 30, 32.Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 389
sible to researchers and support the propositions for which they are cited. Many 
scholarly databases now automatically link articles with others that cite or are cited 
by them.25 Law librarians are most familiar with Westlaw’s KeyCite and LexisNexis’s 
Shepard’s citators, but HeinOnline’s ScholarCheck, SSRN’s CiteReader, and Google 
Scholar also automatically analyze citations and link to appropriate articles. Cita-
tion errors or formatting irregularities can prevent these programs from making 
the proper links. Perhaps the programs will eventually be sophisticated enough to 
decipher  any  citation,  but  until  then,  accurate  citation  is  important  to  later 
researchers who wish to find further resources. Since citations are unlikely to be 
corrected after formal publication, the cite-checking process is probably the last 
chance to get them right.
¶17 The ephemeral nature of some online drafts is also a concern. Upon formal 
publication, most articles are reproduced in paper copies distributed to libraries 
and in digital copies hosted by proprietary databases or institutional web sites. This 
comparatively widespread distribution to institutions means that an article will be 
retrievable, even decades after publication. Draft articles are not generally collected 
or retained to this extent, which reduces the likelihood that they will be available 
years into the future. Authors may choose to delete their drafts at some point, or the 
sites hosting them may purge drafts or simply cease operating. Without clear label-
ing of versions, researchers may rely on draft articles that are prone to vanishing 
into the ether.
¶18 Other scholarly disciplines have worked to develop a standard nomencla-
ture for article versions. PubMed, a major database of biomedical literature, has 
instituted standards for clearly labeling revised articles.26 The National Information 
Standards Organization (NISO) developed recommended standards for distin-
guishing between different versions of scholarly articles.27 The NISO-recommended 
practice provides for seven possible article versions: an author’s original draft, a 
submitted manuscript under review, an accepted manuscript, a proof, a version of 
record, a corrected version of record, and an enhanced version of record.28 This 
standard is based on the process of an academic journal that uses peer review to 
select articles. It also anticipates publishers later making corrections to articles or 
adding enhancements, such as supplementary data.
¶19 The NISO-recommended practice is instructive for law journals, but it does 
not correspond perfectly to law journal publishing practices. First, most law jour-
nals do not ask outside reviewers to help decide which articles to publish. Authors 
can submit to only one peer-reviewed journal at a time, while most law journals 
  25.  For discussion of automatic reference linking by a computer scientist, see DonnA bergmArk, 
AuTomATic exTrAcTion of reference linking informATion from online DocumenTs (Cornell Univ. 
Comp. Sci. Tech. Rep. 2000-1821, 2000), available at http://hdl.handle.net/1813/5809.
  26.  Sarah Torre, Versioning in PubMed, nlm Tech. bull. no. 384, e6 (Jan./Feb. 2012), http://
www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/techbull/jf12/jf12_pm_versioning.html, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/67X2vTUNl.
  27.  niso/AlPsP JAv Tech. working grouP, JournAl ArTicle versions (JAv) (Apr. 2008), 
available at http://www.niso.org/publications/rp/RP-8-2008.pdf, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/67X2xSkSd.
  28.  Todd Carpenter, Are These Two Versions the Same? Functional Equivalence and Article Version, 
AgAinsT The grAin, Apr. 2011, at 16, 16.390 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
accept papers that have been simultaneously submitted to other journals. Authors 
may also continue revising their papers after submission. Thus, the distinctions 
between an author’s original draft and submitted manuscripts are not very clear.
¶20 Law journals generally delegate responsibility for preservation of published 
articles to vendors such as LexisNexis, Westlaw, and Hein (which also handles most 
orders for print back issues), and law libraries that keep print and digital copies. 
Once an article is published, most law journals are not directly responsible for 
preservation and enhancement, so the corrected and enhanced versions of record 
designations are unlikely to be used. Authors, however, may very well update or 
correct their papers after formal publication.
¶21 Law librarians can help address article version ambiguity in at least three 
ways. First, librarians can assist journals with establishing clear policies on article 
versions. Some journals’ publication agreements distinguish between a draft (any 
version before formal publication) and a published version (the article as formally 
published, with no indication that later revision is anticipated). The agreements 
authorize authors to post drafts on SSRN or personal web sites. At least one pub-
lisher asks authors to replace all posted drafts with the formally published ver-
sion.29 These divergent practices seem to reflect differing views on how journals 
should best protect their subscription revenue and brand reputation.
¶22 An improved policy could permit online publication of both drafts and 
versions of record, but require that all be clearly marked so researchers know what 
stage of the publication process the paper they are reading represents. The seven 
categories of the NISO-recommended practice are probably more extensive than 
law journals need, but the draft/published dichotomy is too simplistic. A possible 
compromise could include four categories: an author’s draft that has not been vet-
ted or edited by a journal (successive drafts in this stage could be denoted by 
ascending numbers, e.g., version 3 or draft 2.5); an edited manuscript that has been 
proofread and, most importantly, cite-checked by journal staff, letting researchers 
know the sources have been independently verified; a version of record that has 
been approved by both the author and the journal, leading to what is traditionally 
thought of as formal publication; and, finally, a revised article that has been cor-
rected or updated by either the author or the journal. If changes are made to an 
article after the version of record has been published, the party responsible for the 
update (author or journal) should be clearly indicated so researchers know the 
revised paper’s provenance.
¶23 This, of course, is merely a suggestion, but a standard practice that reflects 
reasoned agreements in the legal publishing community would be valuable. Librar-
ians, with their expertise in organizing and accessing multiple versions of the same 
  29.  The University of Chicago Press Guidelines for Journal Authors’ Rights, univ. of chicAgo 
Press, http://www.press.uchicago.edu/journals/jrnl_rights.html, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/67X34Nm3M (“To avoid citation confusion, we discourage online posting of preprints and 
working papers. If you choose to submit a prepublication version of your accepted paper to a non-
commercial, discipline-specific preprint or working paper archive, however, we require that appropri-
ate credit be given to the journal as described above and ask you to remove the working paper from 
the archive after your article is published or replace it with the published version.”). See also Keele, 
supra note 11, at 275, ¶ 21.Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 391
intellectual item (such as multiple editions of a treatise or the many versions of a 
bill that are created as it progresses through the legislative process), are well suited 
to helping journals adopt version-labeling policies that reduce confusion and ambi-
guity regarding article versions.
¶24 Second, librarians can educate authors about the value of clearly indicating 
the publication status of their papers. If librarians are responsible for posting 
papers to SSRN, bepress, or institutional repositories, they can indicate the version 
in the article’s metadata.
¶25 Third, librarians can facilitate collection of faculty draft papers. Just as 
hard-copy faculty papers are often collected in school archives, so digital drafts 
posted online can be retained to more fully document an author’s scholarly record. 
Each library’s collection of digital drafts would be unique and an expression of each 
faculty’s distinct scholarly achievements. Library collection of drafts would increase 
demand for a consistent version-marking system and raise author awareness of its 
value.
¶26 Clear indication of article versions falls into the realm of administrative 
practices that many journal editors may not think of, or find too dull to address. An 
intuitive and substantively consistent system of indicating article versions will ease 
access and evaluation of journal articles. This kind of bibliographic infrastructure 
is precisely the sort of thing librarians should help build.
Preventing Link Rot with Persistent Identifiers
¶27 Another challenge presented by digital resources is link rot, or uniform 
resource locators (URLs) that no longer direct researchers to the correct online 
resource. In the dynamic online environment that exists today, as resources are 
altered, moved, or deleted, link rot is inevitable. Several studies have indicated that 
citations  in  law  journal  articles  to  online  resources  often  contain  short-lived 
URLs.30 These broken links are, at best, an annoyance for researchers who must find 
the resource through another access point. At worst, broken links undermine an 
article’s soundness by removing support for its assertions. Journals can reduce the 
likelihood of broken links to online copies of their articles by assigning and main-
taining persistent identifiers. Unlike URLs, which point to a physical spot on a 
computer, persistent identifiers point to the resource itself, regardless of whether 
the resource moves to another location. A physical analog is the International Stan-
dard Book Number (ISBN)—no matter what shelf a book is assigned to, the ISBN 
identifies the same book.
¶28 Several persistent identifier systems exist, including Handles, Persistent 
Uniform Resource Locators (PURLs), Archival Resource Keys, and Digital Object 
  30.  Simon Canick, Availability of Works Cited in Recent Law Review Articles on LEXIS, Westlaw, the 
Internet, and Other Databases, 21 legAl reference services Q., nos. 2/3, 2002, at 55; Helane E. Davis, 
Keeping Validity in Cite: Web Resources Cited in Select Washington Law Reviews, 2001–03, 98 lAw libr. 
J. 639, 2006 lAw libr. J. 38; E. Dana Neacsu, Legal Scholarship and Digital Publishing: Has Anything 
Changed in the Way We Do Legal Research?, 21 legAl reference services Q., nos. 2/3, 2002, at 105; 
Mary Rumsey, Runaway Train: Problems of Permanence, Accessibility, and Stability in the Use of Web 
Sources in Law Review Citations, 94 lAw libr. J. 27, 2002 lAw libr. J. 2.392 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
Identifiers (DOIs).31 DOIs have achieved a large measure of acceptance among 
scholarly publishers, including a few that publish journals in law and other fields. 
As of May 2012, almost fifty-four million DOIs had been registered with CrossRef, 
the DOI registration agency for scholarly publishers.32 PURLs have been adopted 
by the Government Printing Office to provide more reliable access to government 
publications.33 While they differ in their operational details, the basic principle 
behind these persistent identifiers is that an organization acts as an intermediary 
between the researcher and the sought resource. A central index connects the iden-
tifier with the current location of the resource, so even if a resource moves due to 
a web site redesign or change in resource ownership, a researcher using the identi-
fier will be able to find the resource.34
¶29 No legal citation guide requires using persistent identifiers (although both 
the Bluebook and the ALWD Citation Manual recommend using unique identifiers 
in commercial databases35), and law journals generally have not used DOIs in foot-
notes, even when DOIs exist for cited articles.36 Journals are thus forgoing mecha-
nisms that could help them ensure their articles remain easily retrievable online, 
even as the journal web site undergoes redesigns and updates. Librarians can 
encourage journal editors both to prefer using persistent identifiers in citations and 
to assign and maintain identifiers to their own articles. Persistent identifier systems 
rely on long-term maintenance and updating. The short terms of journal editors 
make them unlikely champions of such ongoing endeavors. Librarians’ more estab-
lished resources and professional ethos make them much better equipped to han-
dle assignment and updating of persistent identifiers. Miller suggests establishing a 
foundation that will preserve journal content and provide stable links.37 This ambi-
tious proposal supports the idea that projects that require long-term maintenance, 
like persistent identifiers, require organizations designed to function much longer 
than a student editorial board.
¶30 Perhaps librarians could offer this as a publication service to the journals. 
Journals could join CrossRef and register DOIs, with librarians advising or taking 
primary administrative responsibility for DOI management. Such a service would 
require additional resources to cover CrossRef membership fees and technical 
expertise, so a method for distributing costs through an existing or new consor-
tium might make this more practical for law journals. The California Digital 
  31.  For more on this, see Susan Lyons, Persistent Identification of Electronic Documents and the 
Future of Footnotes, 97 lAw libr. J. 681, 2005 lAw libr. J. 42.
  32.  CrossRef  Indicators,  crossref,  http://crossref.org/01company/crossref_indicators.html, 
archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67X4D7WBz.
  33.  Linking to Federal Resources Using Persistent Uniform Resource Locators (PURLs), fDlP Desk-
ToP (2010), http://www.fdlp.gov/collections/building-collections/614-purls, archived at http://www 
.webcitation.org/67X4ENhvM.
  34.  For more information on DOIs, see Patricia Feeney, DOIs for Journals: Linking and Beyond, 
info. sTAnDArDs Q., Summer 2010, at 27.
  35.  The bluebook: A uniform sysTem of ciTATion R. 18.3.1 (19th ed. 2010); Ass’n of legAl 
wriTing Dirs. & DArby Dickerson, AlwD ciTATion mAnuAl R. 39.1 (4th ed. 2010).
  36.  Benjamin J. Keele, What If Law Journal Citations Included Digital Object Identifiers? A 
Snapshot of Major Law Journals (Jan. 2010), http://works.bepress.com/aallcallforpapers/65.
  37.  Miller, supra note 9.Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 393
Library’s EZID provides persistent identifiers for documents and data sets for 
researchers and could be a model for law libraries.38 Bepress’s DigitalCommons 
platform is a common tool for publishing law journals online. Law libraries consti-
tute a major customer base for DigitalCommons, and librarians could encourage 
bepress and other publishing vendors to include support for persistent identifiers. 
While law journals in DigitalCommons do not use DOIs at present, the article 
URLs are at least consistently designed and therefore less likely to change than 
URLs for academic or commercially hosted web sites.
Plagiarism Detection
¶31 Journals’ interest in furthering scholarly research and education leads them 
to require that all articles be original (i.e., created by the author and not previously 
formally published) at the time of publication. Virtually all journal publication 
agreements ask authors to warrant that the article is original and does not infringe 
on anyone else’s copyright. The National Conference of Law Reviews’ Model Code 
of Ethics notes that authors have a duty to “produce manuscripts through the use of 
the law review author’s own talents, skills, knowledge, creativity, mental processes, 
research, and time.”39 It appears no studies have been conducted to determine how 
common plagiarism is in law journal articles. Whether it is common or rare, 
though, any plagiarism is a serious matter.
¶32 The precise definition of plagiarism is subject to some debate, but Terri 
LeClercq offers this definition in the context of academic institutions: “Plagiarism 
means taking the literary property of another without attribution, passing it off as 
one’s own, and reaping from its use the unearned benefit from an academic 
institution.”40 A determination of whether something amounts to plagiarism can be 
difficult in close cases, but one can easily imagine copying that is clearly plagiarism, 
such as replicating the entire body of another article without attribution. Plagia-
rism in law journals undermines journals’ common mission to advance legal 
thought through publishing original contributions and breaks readers’ trust in 
journals and authors that represent their articles as original.41
¶33 Especially difficult for law journal editors are instances of duplicate publi-
cation, also called recycling and self-plagiarism. Some authors reuse (verbatim or 
with minor edits) parts of their own published work in new articles without 
acknowledging the earlier publication. In these instances, the author’s work is not 
being misappropriated without her knowledge. The concerns, rather, are that the 
scholarly debate is not advanced and that readers are misled regarding the prove-
  38.  UC3EZID: Long Term Identifiers Made Easy, cAlif. DigiTAl librAry, http://www.cdlib.org 
/uc3/ezid/, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XYa9qz4.
  39.  Closen & Jarvis, supra note 13, at 522.
  40.  Terri LeClercq, Failure to Teach: Due Process and Law School Plagiarism, 49 J. legAl eDuc. 
236, 244 (1999). A well-researched discussion of plagiarism in higher education is Audrey Wolfson 
Latourette, Plagiarism: Legal and Ethical Implications for the University, 37 J.c. & u.l. 1 (2010).
  41.  Deborah R. Gerhardt, Plagiarism in Cyberspace: Learning the Rules of Recycling Content with a 
View Towards Nurturing Academic Trust in an Electronic World, 12 rich. J.l. & Tech. 10, ¶ 33 (2006), 
http://law.richmond.edu/jolt/v12i3/article10.pdf.394 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
nance of the article’s arguments.42 Law journal articles are important factors in law 
school tenure and promotion decisions, and authors who recycle papers may gain 
an unfair professional advantage. Editors should be careful to maintain the integ-
rity of the publication process and scholarly record.
¶34 Extensive databases of articles have made greater plagiarism detection 
efforts possible. Public announcements that accepted articles will be checked for 
plagiarism before publication may deter submissions with lifted material. The 
most common detection tool is TurnItIn,43 a program by iThenticate.44 For jour-
nals that participate in CrossRef and assign DOIs to their articles, a service called 
CrossCheck, also using iThenticate’s resources, is available.45 LexisNexis also offers 
SafeAssign, a service that checks submitted articles against several LexisNexis data-
bases.46 Unfortunately, none of these databases appears to have comprehensive 
coverage of law journal articles. TurnItIn is intended primarily for checking under-
graduate course papers, and iThenticate’s product for academic journals does not 
include student-edited law journals. LexisNexis’s SafeAssign product includes the 
ProQuest ABI/INFORM database (a business literature database), articles from the 
top five hundred law reviews (with coverage back to 2000), papers submitted 
through Blackboard, and articles available on the public web, which may include 
some other law journals that make their issues available online.47
¶35 Despite the lack of a comprehensive plagiarism-checking solution for law 
journals, editors may detect copying to some extent when they cite-check accepted 
articles (although finding potential misconduct after an article is accepted leads to 
awkward conversations with the author) and when they conduct preemption checks 
to ensure that the article’s thesis is an original contribution to the literature. Librar-
ians can offer information on plagiarism-checking services and methods during 
journal training. Even well-crafted searches in Westlaw, LexisNexis, HeinOnline, and 
Google Scholar can be valuable parts of a journal’s due diligence.
¶36 Journals also need policies for the unfortunate times when a paper is found 
to be a product of plagiarism or duplicate publication. Clear guidelines should be 
established so authors and staff have advance notice as to what copying will be 
regarded as plagiarism. Unattributed copying of another’s work is generally unac-
  42.  See richArD A. Posner, The liTTle book of PlAgiArism 43 (2007) (“Self-copying becomes 
fraudulent and therefore plagiaristic only when the author represents his latest work to be newly 
composed when in fact it is a copy of an earlier work of his that readers may have read.”); Patrick 
M. Scanlon, Song from Myself: An Anatomy of Self-Plagiarism, 2 PlAgiAry: cross-DisciPlinAry sTuDs. 
PlAgiArism, fAbricATion, & fAlsificATion 57, 63 (2007), available at http://hdl.handle.net/2027 
/spo.5240451.0002.007 (“The ethical crux of self-plagiarism seems to be the extent to which the 
words before us are original not only with the present author, unless otherwise noted, but with the 
present publication as well.”).
  43.  TurniTin, http://turnitin.com/en_us/home (last visited May 29, 2012).
  44.  iThenTicATe, http://www.ithenticate.com (last visited May 25, 2012).
  45.  CrossCheck, crossref, http://crossref.org/crosscheck, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/67XYsO7Ww.
  46.  SafeAssign  Plagiarism-Checking  Service,  lexisnexis  (2009),  http://www.lexisnexis.com 
/documents/LawSchoolTutorials/20091102103551_small.pdf,  archived  at  http://www.webcitation 
.org/67XYu0POt.
  47.  Id.; e-mail from Shelley Landfair, LexisNexis Account Executive, to author Keele (Mar. 22, 
2012) (on file with author).Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 395
ceptable, while recycling one’s own past work is perhaps more tolerable. Indeed, 
some limited copying of previously published language may be warranted when the 
published and new papers come from a common line of research. Even then, 
though, journals should insist on full disclosure of previously published work. This 
solution allows the reader to be fully informed about the article’s origins and ben-
efits readers by pointing them to relevant sources.48 If the recycling is too extensive, 
editors may need to reject a submission or ask the author to withdraw or revise an 
accepted paper due to lack of originality. A nightmare scenario for editors, finding 
that a plagiarized or copyright-infringing paper has been published, might neces-
sitate a retraction.49
¶37 Librarians can help editors develop antiplagiarism policies and plagiarism-
detection procedures. Science, technology, and medical journals have taken many 
of these steps, and their experience may be instructive.50 Journals can also join the 
Committee on Publication Ethics, a group of scholarly editors and publishers that 
develops guidance on protecting the integrity of scholarly publishing.51
Empirical Data Support
¶38 Law journals are increasingly publishing articles that are empirical in 
nature and based on data created by the authors or others.52 Articles based on 
empirical data in student-edited journals are not generally submitted to the same 
standards of review and challenges as articles in peer-reviewed journals.53 Many 
academic law journal editors do not have backgrounds that permit them to ade-
quately assess the methodology used in such works or to deal with the related issues 
that arise with data. Librarians are uniquely positioned to support editorial, cura-
tion, and metadata services that would help improve the quality and accessibility of 
  48.  See Carol M. Bast & Linda B. Samuels, Plagiarism and Legal Scholarship in the Age of Informa-
tion Sharing: The Need for Intellectual Honesty, 57 cATh. u. l. rev. 777, 810–11 (2008); Scanlon, supra 
note 42, at 63.
  49.  Various projects have evolved to address the problems of retraction. See, e.g., reTrAcTion 
wATch, http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XYwvFMM. 
Retractions might be difficult in law review settings where editorial boards and student participants 
are constantly changing.
  50.  See Declan Butler, Journals Step up Plagiarism Policing, 466 nATure 167 (2010); Kirsty  
Meddings, Credit Where Credit’s Due: Screening in Scholarly Publishing, 23 leArneD Publ’g 5 (2010).
  51.  commiTTee on PublicATion eThics, http://publicationethics.org, archived at http://www 
.webcitation.org/67XZ5sb59.
  52.  Shari Seidman Diamond & Pam Mueller, Empirical Legal Scholarship in Law Reviews, 6 Ann. 
rev. l. & soc. sci. 581, 587 (2010) (finding that nearly half of law review articles published in sixty law 
reviews between 1998 and 2008 included some sort of empirical content, although original empirical 
research was present in only about six percent of articles).
  53.  Id. at 592 (“[L]aw reviews can generally offer a swift decision on whether the article will be 
accepted and a short time line to publication, compared with the seemingly interminable waits that 
many peer-reviewed journals impose on authors, often with the added burden of revise-and-resubmit 
response that does not promise ultimate publication.”). See also Lee Epstein & Gary King, Building 
an Infrastructure for Empirical Research in Law, 53 J. legAl eDuc. 311, 316–18 (2003) (lamenting the 
problems inherent in student-edited law reviews without blind peer review and suggesting a review 
model for these journals).396 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
such work and potentially improve its reputation among legal scholars and in the 
world of scholarship in general.
¶39 A select number of journals do provide some form of faculty review of 
submitted articles,54 but we are not aware of many law school law reviews promot-
ing submissions procedures or policies that provide or facilitate formal review by a 
statistician or someone with a background in empirical work.55 While few libraries 
have a source of empirical support among the library staff, they could coordinate 
with members of the law school (or the larger university community if available) 
to provide such services.56 Perhaps a consortium service could be coordinated 
between librarians actively engaged in empirical legal studies, similar to the Peer 
Reviewed Scholarship Marketplace (PRSM) project created by law school journals 
for faculty review.57
¶40 Another natural role for librarians is in the deposit of data sets associated 
with journal articles to ensure the possibility of replication.58 For example, the 
Institute for Quantitative Social Science (IQSS) at Harvard University provides a 
service called Dataverse through which journals (or individual scholars) may 
deposit data.59 Some law reviews have already experimented with depositing data 
linked to their articles.60 While there has been discussion in law library circles 
  54.  See Peer Review at Student-Edited Journals: Best Practices?, PrAwfsblAwg (Aug. 11, 2011, 2:25 
P.m.),  http://prawfsblawg.blogs.com/prawfsblawg/2011/08/peer-review-at-student-edited-journals 
-best-practices.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XZBxFAv; Prsm: Peer revieweD 
scholArshiP mArkeTPlAce, http://www.legalpeerreview.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org 
/67XZFGNVS.
  55.  A search of the submission policies of many of the law school law reviews yielded only a 
few examples of journals that expressly state procedures for review of articles that are empirical 
in nature. The UCLA Law Review offers empirical review: “The Law Review has access to the Law 
School’s Empirical Research Group. The ERG is available to review an author’s empirical work should 
the author express interest in this service.” Submissions, uclA lAw review, http://uclalawreview 
.org/?page_id=40, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XZHzxvp. The NYU Law Review out-
lines best practices for its authors and encourages deposit of data sets in its data repository. Law 
Review:  Article  Submissions,  nyu  lAw,  http://www.law.nyu.edu/journals/lawreview/submissions 
/index.htm, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XZKJ0d7. See also Michelle Pearse, An Update 
on the Peer Reviewed Scholarship Marketplace, eT seQ. (Aug. 18, 2011), http://etseq.law.harvard 
.edu/2011/08/an-update-on-the-peer-reviewed-scholarship-marketplace,  archived  at  http://www 
.webcitation.org/67XZNga5n (noting that when asked about whether they have reviewers specifically 
qualified to review empirical work, a PRSM administrator answered: “Only one of our potential 
reviewers indicated that his expertise is ‘quantitative/empirical methods.’”).
  56.  See Kevin Smith, Lightning in a Bottle: Libraries, Technology, and the Changing System of 
Scholarly Communications, presentation at Charleston Conference, Charleston, S.C., Nov. 4, 2009, 
http://www.katina.info/conference/video_smith.php (video at 28:42) (suggesting librarians with 
subject expertise could manage the peer review process for publication).
  57.  See PRSM, supra note 54.
  58.  Many libraries (particularly in the sciences) have begun supporting data curation and 
researchers’ development of data management plans as required for NSF funding. See e.g. Data Man-
agement and Publishing, miT librAries, http://libraries.mit.edu/guides/subjects/data-management 
/index.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/68GxxfIGH; Resources for Data Management 
Planning, Ass’n of res. librAries, http://libraries.mit.edu/guides/subjects/data-management/index 
.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/68Gwnb1rA.
  59.  About the Project, The DATAverse neTwork ProJecT, http://thedata.org/book/about-project, 
archived at http://www.webcitation.org/681rMM1Z1.
  60.  At the time of this writing, the NYU Law Review and the Virginia Law Review have depos-
ited data associated with some of their articles (“journal replication archives”) in Dataverse. NYU Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 397
about preserving data from individual faculty members, there should be equal 
interest in encouraging journals to collaborate with authors in making the data 
associated with their publications available. In addition to advising on minimal 
technical requirements for data preservation,61 librarians are uniquely situated to 
develop rich metadata for the data sets that would increase discoverability and con-
nections with other relevant information. Making data available and accessible and 
preserving it would strengthen the quality of empirical legal scholarship.
¶41 Sharing data for replication and further analysis is more common in other 
areas of the social sciences.62 Making such activity the norm in academic legal 
scholarship would help improve authors’ and journals’ standing with empiricists in 
other fields.63 From a research perspective, librarians could help editors assess 
whether or not methodologies are accurately used and explained. They could also 
confirm understanding about human subject participation concerns (although this 
onus could be on the author). Librarians could be more actively involved in experi-
mentation with the visualization of data,64 mashing up the data with other content, 
advising on rights and licensing issues,65 and facilitating consistent citation within 
Law Review Dataverse, iQss DATAverse neTwork, http://dvn.iq.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/nyulawreview, 
archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XZYEeuC; Virginia Law Review Dataverse, iQss DATAverse 
neTwork, http://dvn.iq.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/vlr, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XZgKL2f. 
Georgetown Law Library recently released its own instance for use by individuals and its journals. 
Sarah Rhodes, Georgetown Law Library Launches Dataverse Archive, Due Process: georgeTown lAw 
librAry blog (Jan.12, 2012), http://www.ll.georgetown.edu/blog/index.cfm/2012/1/12/Georgetown 
-Law-Library-Launches-Dataverse-Archive, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/68LGkgmGR.
  61.  See Guide to Social Science Data Preparation and Archiving, inTer-univ. consorTium for 
PoliTicAl & soc. reseArch (icPsr), http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/content/ICPSR/access 
/deposit/guide, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XZmJmkK.
  62.  Several economics journals have adopted data availability policies. PhiliP glAnDon, rePorT 
on The AmericAn economic review DATA AvAilAbiliTy comPliAnce ProJecT (Nov. 2010), available at 
http://www.aeaweb.org/aer/2011_Data_Compliance_Report.pdf. Projects and scholarship about rep-
lication in other social sciences also exist. See, e.g., Tom Bartlett, Is Psychology About to Come Undone?, 
PercolATor (Apr. 17, 2012, 5:09 P.m.), http://chronicle.com/blogs/percolator/is-psychology-about 
-to-come-undone/29045, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XZt1Dii (discussing a project 
that plans to replicate every study published in three psychology journals during 2008).
  63.  Lee Epstein & Gary King, The Rules of Inference, 69 u. chi. l. rev. 1, 130 (2002).
  64.  Repositories such as Dataverse offer visualization tools within their repository environ-
ment, but there are many other tools and free programming options for creating very sophisticated 
visualizations. Tools include mAny eyes, http://www-958.ibm.com/software/data/cognos/manyeyes, 
archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XfMLLo3, which requires uploading of data, and visuAl.ly, 
http://visual.ly, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XfNaZTf. The Computational Legal Stud-
ies blog, http://computationallegalstudies.com, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XfRWa9m 
offers wonderful examples of the potential for visualizations.
  65.  Librarians  can  educate  journals  about  standards  and  best  practices  that  have  been 
developed—sharing data in ways that are open and facilitate reuse, further research, and replica-
tion. See oPen DATA commons, http://opendatacommons.org, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/67XfUPFS5; oPen DATA hAnDbook, http://opendatahandbook.org, archived at http://www.web 
citation.org/681rtF3iH.398 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
legal scholarship.66 Mandates for data deposit by organizations funding research in 
the sciences and other areas could increasingly impact the social sciences.67
Helping Law Journals Create Metadata
¶42 While libraries have been helping to provide publishing platforms through 
the use of institutional repositories and other services, there is room for librarians 
(particularly those with cataloging, metadata, and subject expertise) to be even 
more actively engaged in helping mark up content so that it is more easily discov-
erable.68 This is particularly true in the context of the semantic web.69 Libraries are 
already equipped to advise journals on technical formats, basic metadata elements, 
and schema for their underlying journal content.70 There are, however, new proj-
ects and concerns such as schema.org71 and linked (open) data72 that potentially 
  66.  See Micah Altman & Gary King, Commentary, A Proposed Standard for the Scholarly 
Citation  of  Quantitative  Data,  D-lib  mAg.,  Mar./Apr.  2007,  http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march07 
/altman/03altman.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XfZXxoL; Toby Green, We Need 
Publishing Standards for Data Sets and Data Tables, 22 leArneD Publ’g 325 (2009). Perhaps there is a 
role for librarians to collaborate with the editors of the Bluebook to address uniform citation formats 
for data.
  67.  For example, the National Science Foundation requires grantees to submit data plans “except 
where this is impossible or inappropriate. These plans should cover how and where these materials 
will be stored at reasonable cost, and how access will be provided to other researchers, generally 
at their cost.” Data Archiving Policy, nAT’l science founD., http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/ses/common 
/archive.jsp,  archived  at  http://web.archive.org/web/20110714060548/http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/ses 
/common/archive.jsp.
  68.   See Valeri Craigle, Legal Scholarship in the Digital Domain: A Technical Roadmap for Imple-
menting the Durham Statement, Tech. serv. l. libr., Dec. 2010, at 1, available at http://www.aallnet 
.org/sis/tssis/tsll/36-02/36-02.pdf; Richard A. Leiter, The Leiter Perspective: Tech Services in a Digi-
tal World, AAll sPecTrum, Nov. 2011, http://www.aallnet.org/main-menu/Publications/spectrum 
/Vol-16/No-3/tech-services-in-digital-world.html,  archived  at  http://www.webcitation.org/67Xgh 
3U8I (article available in online version only).
  69.  Also referred to as Web 3.0, the semantic web focuses on linked data between sources and 
incorporates the technologies “OWL [Web Ontology Language] (to build vocabularies, or “ontolo-
gies”) and SKOS [Simple Knowledge Organization System] (for designing knowledge organiza-
tion systems) . . . to enrich data with additional meaning, which allows more people (and more  
machines) to do more with the data.” Semantic Web, w3c, http://www.w3.org/standards/semantic 
web,  archived  at  http://www.webcitation.org/67XgjNPQr.  See  Michelle  Pearse,  Is  It  Time  for 
Law Libraries to Collaborate on Description for Their Own Institutions’ Legal Scholarship?, vox 
PoPulii (Sept. 30, 2011), http://blog.law.cornell.edu/voxpop/2011/09/30/is-it-time-for-law-libraries 
-to-collaborate-on-description-for-their-own-institutions%E2%80%99-legal-scholarship;  see  also 
generally APProAches To legAl onTologies (Giovanni Sartor et al., eds., 2010); bill coPe eT Al., 
TowArDs A semAnTic web: connecTing knowleDge in AcADemic reseArch (2011); DAviD sTuArT, 
fAciliTATing Access To The web of DATA: A guiDe for librAriAns (2011).
  70.  See Robert Richards, The Use of Non-MARC Metadata in AALL Libraries: A Baseline Study, 
103 lAw libr. J. 631, 2011 lAw libr. J. 38 (discussing the use of metadata for digital projects in law 
libraries).
  71.  schemA.org, http://www.schema.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XgoUfJU. 
Participants have been generating a list of potential schema.org vocabulary extensions and improve-
ments.  See  Web  Schemas/SchemaDotOrg  Proposals, w3c,  http://www.w3.org/wiki/WebSchemas 
/SchemaDotOrgProposals, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XgtQQJP.
  72.  The Library of Congress recently issued A bibliogrAPhic frAmework for The DigiTAl Age, 
http://www.loc.gov/marc/transition/pdf/bibframework-10312011.pdf,  archived  at  http://www.web 
citation.org/681sHpwkI, which embodies principles of linked data. For the past couple of years, it has Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 399
affect how journals would want to structure their web sites for maximum visibility 
and discoverability. While it remains to be seen how these standards will be adopted 
by web sites (and eventually incorporated into repositories), law libraries could be 
more actively engaged in helping journals determine whether their web-based  
content should be compliant with these new standards just as they have applied 
other standards in traditional institutional repositories.73 Libraries could also be 
more engaged in making journals aware of accessibility issues for visually impaired 
users on the web.74 They might also want to make certain that journals are aware of 
projects related to identifying scholarship associated with particular scholars and 
whether their journals are included in such services. These services include Google 
Scholar Citations, Microsoft Academic Search, and Open Researcher and Contribu-
tor ID (ORCID).75
¶43 Librarians, however, could also contribute more significantly to the devel-
opment of underlying taxonomies and ontologies that could then be consistently 
applied to enrich the metadata and make them more valuable. Since librarians 
often review articles with students and generally know how researchers look for 
information, they are in a unique position to contribute substantively to the terms 
and language that ensure accessibility and discoverability for relevant user groups. 
Some libraries use existing taxonomies provided by systems such as bepress’s Digi-
tal Commons and add additional keywords provided by authors or informed by 
some internal taxonomy used by the library. Academic law libraries could develop 
taxonomies and ontologies that could be shared among law schools and scholars,76 
also released its subject headings as linked data. Library of Congress Subject Headings, librAry of cong., 
http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67Xh20oKz.
  73.  “In the repository domain there are several standards that are widely implemented and 
ensure interoperability, the most well known being Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Meta-
data Harvesting (OAI-PMH) which is used as a common interface for harvesting metadata from 
repositories.” OAI-PMH Harvesting, Jisc infoneT, http://www.jiscinfonet.ac.uk/infokits/repositories 
/technical-framework/oai-pmh, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/68LHbjmXk.
  74.  See John Gardner et al., Making Journals Accessible to the Visually Impaired: The Future Is Near, 
22 leArneD Publ’g 314 (2009). The DAISY Consortium is an “international association that develops, 
maintains and promotes international DAISY (Digital Accessible Information System) Standards.” 
About Us, DAisy consorTium, http://www.daisy.org/about_us, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/68J9cxn6W.
  75.  Both Google Scholar Citations (http://scholar.google.com/citations) and Microsoft Academic 
Search (http://academic.research.microsoft.com) have begun offering scholar profiles with prelimi-
nary citations and data based on their search engines/sources. See Google Scholar Citations Open to All, 
google scholAr blog (Nov. 16, 2011, 8:30 P.m.), http://googlescholar.blogspot.com/2011/11/google 
-scholar-citations-open-to-all.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XhEnAIx. ORCID is 
a collaborative project among academic publishers, repositories, and others to solve the problem of 
author ambiguity by developing a central registry of unique identifiers for individual researchers and 
linking them to other author identification schemes. Welcome to ORCID, orciD, http://about.orcid 
.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XhJkNmH.
  76.  Some repository systems, like bepress’s DigitalCommons, already offer set subject head-
ings. Some may argue that additional efforts are unwarranted, as one could simply adopt preexist-
ing, commonly used subjects such as the Library of Congress subject headings. But journals and 
repository users do not consistently adopt these options. They are also often limited in their ability 
to capture deep knowledge of a subject area and create connections between ideas. Other disciplines 
have developed similar projects to make data discoverable. See, e.g., The NeuroCommons Project,  
sciencecommons, http://neurocommons.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XhStkcn.400 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
built more in response to how scholars look for information.77 For example, some-
thing as simple as geographic information included in the metadata could enable 
consistent access to the growing amount of foreign and comparative law work 
being done in U.S. law journals. A shared taxonomy/ontology emanating from the 
legal academy could also be “mapped” to taxonomies/ontologies developed for 
more practical or public uses such as projects in the open law movement78 or inter-
nal governmental use.79 It would facilitate cross-searching metadata and connect-
ing content between varied systems of legal knowledge. A variety of users could 
potentially search across the same content (e.g., law reviews and primary law) from 
their own situational perspective (e.g., pro se or academic).80 Authors could also be 
encouraged  to  create  their  own  metadata  (and  apply  a  supplied  ontology/ 
taxonomy) in the authoring process through tools like Microsoft Word add-ins.81 
There is an enthusiastic legal informatics community that could potentially sup-
port and mentor such efforts.
¶44 Partnering with the open law movement and coordinating activities with 
other journals would help create a larger system that could be truly open and 
interoperable, providing a potentially valuable resource to all users. Most law jour-
nals already practice consistent footnote formatting. Libraries could help law jour-
nals develop consistent technical formatting of footnotes to facilitate linking to 
open law sources and to each other through tools such as ParsIt or other parsers.82 
  77.  The importance of understanding the research habits of our scholars is discussed in Stepha-
nie Davidson, Way Beyond Legal Research: Understanding the Research Habits of Legal Scholars, 102 
lAw libr. J. 561, 2010 lAw libr. J. 32.
  78.  Projects focusing on open access to primary law include Law.gov (http://law.resource.org), 
the Legal Information Institute (http://www.law.cornell.edu), Justia (http://www.justia.com), and the 
Public Library of Law (http://www.plol.org). While open access to law and legal information projects 
might focus more on access to information (and creation of semantic language and metadata) from 
the perspective of the public or practitioners, academic law libraries could partner with these proj-
ects to map ontologies created for practical or public use to a potential ontology that reflects more 
academic approaches to law.
Examples of ontologies related to law more generally can be found in Robert Richards, 
Legal Information Systems & Legal Informatics Resources: Knowledge Representation: Legal (Selected), 
http://www.personal.psu.edu/rcr5122/Ontologies.html,  archived  at  http://www.webcitation.org 
/67XhYEUMx, and Robert Richards, Legal Information Systems & Legal Informatics Resources: 
Knowledge Representation: General Resources with Application to Law (Selected), http://www.personal 
.psu.edu/rcr5122/OntologiesGeneral.html,  archived  at  http://www.webcitation.org/67XhaBTGy. 
Experiments like Jureeka (an add-on for the Firefox browser) permit searchers to find citations in 
such projects, but marking up content appropriately could facilitate more direct connections between 
the primary law and scholarship and annotations related to free sources of law.
  79.  See Manjula Shenoy K et al., Interoperability Using Ontology Mapping, 5 J. comPuTer sci. & 
engineering, Jan. 2011, https://sites.google.com/site/jcseuk/volume-5-issue-1-january-2011.
  80.  James Milles has argued for law schools to devote more resources to developing materials 
for practitioners. James G. Milles, Redefining Open Access for the Legal Information Market, 98 lAw 
libr. J. 619, 2006 lAw libr. J. 37. At the very least, libraries could develop metadata for content that 
is more accessible to public use and interoperable with systems committed to open access, primary 
legal information.
  81.  Ontology  Add-In  for Word,  microsofT  reseArch,  http://research.microsoft.com/en-us 
/projects/ontology, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XhdNrHn.
  82.  Citation parsers break document citations into fielded data. Qing Zhang et al., Parsing Cita-
tions in Biomedical Articles Using Conditional Random Fields, 41 comPuTers biology & meD. 190 
(2011). FreeCite, brown univ., http://freecite.library.brown.edu, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/67XhhKLLH, and PArsciT, http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/parsCit, archived at http://www.web Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 401
Such work could also facilitate valuable metrics among journals beyond citation 
tools that are restricted to use in proprietary services (such as Web of Science, Sci-
Verse, KeyCite, Shepard’s, and HeinOnline’s ScholarCheck), or contain unstable 
metadata and source data like Google Scholar and Microsoft Academic Search.83
¶45 In addition to helping journals develop content formatted to enable cita-
tion extraction, libraries could help them develop ways to track statistics about 
downloads of their content from their own interfaces, if they are not already using 
a product that provides that functionality. A project called PIRUS2 has developed a 
service to allow repositories and publishers to create standards for repository statis-
tics.84 These are similar to the COUNTER standard developed for e-journal and 
database vendors85 and could result in some “ubermetric” across repositories of 
scholarly content. Libraries can also help journals learn about tools to measure use 
of their web content, particularly if such advice is not available from a central IT 
department hosting the page(s).86
¶46 Librarians can educate online journals (or those that do not use commer-
cial composition services) about the perils of stray metadata lurking in documents. 
While there has been a great deal of discussion of this topic in the legal practice 
arena,87 there has not been as much discussion in the areas of journal publishing 
and repositories. In addition to consulting on the creation of descriptive metadata, 
librarians could raise awareness of metadata that are sometimes unintentionally 
included. Journals should understand that underlying metadata may be generated 
in the production process, particularly for online-only journals that post PDFs to 
their web sites without professional production or formatting. Journals that use a 
citation.org/67XhjLufs, are examples of applications for parsing citations. Parsers may be used for 
footnote/citation extraction. SSRN recently launched its CiteReader project, which extracts refer-
ences automatically, after which they are manually proofread. Gregg Gordon, SSRN’s CiteReader 
Project Update, ssrn: Tomorrow’s blog ToDAy, Apr. 26, 2011, http://ssrnblog.com/2011/04/26/ssrns 
-citereader-project-update, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/68H7GQ5RN.
  83.  As journals move to a web-publishing environment and standards improve for marking up 
content for the web, mining and citation analysis might become more precise. See Kayvan Kousha & 
Mike Thelwall, Google Scholar Citations and Google Web/URL Citations: A Multi-Discipline Exploratory 
Analysis, 58 J. Am. soc’y info. sci. & Tech. 1055 (2007) (comparing citations in traditional citation 
sources (Web of Science) to Google Scholar and to citations found via web searches). See also Fred R. 
Shapiro & Michelle Pearse, The Most-Cited Law Review Articles of All Time, 102 mich. l. rev. 1483, 
1508–20 (2012) (discussing new forms of citation metrics).
  84.  The  Pirus2  ProJecT,  http://www.cranfieldlibrary.cranfield.ac.uk/pirus2/tiki-index.php, 
archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67Xhq0EUP.
  85.  counTer: counTing online usAge of neTworkeD elecTronic resources, http://www 
.projectcounter.org (last visited May 29, 2012).
  86.  Librarians can also make students mindful of the downside of using services like Google 
Analytics, which exposes visitors’ data to Google for its own use.
  87.  See, e.g., Emily N. Litzinger, The Ethical Dilemma of Scrubbing Metadata: The Pathway to a 
Better Approach, 36 n. ky. l. rev. 611 (2009); Note, Adam K. Israel, To Scrub or Not to Scrub: The 
Ethical Implications of Metadata and Electronic Data Creation, Exchange, and Discovery, 60 AlA. l. rev. 
469 (2009); Metadata Ethics Opinions Around the U.S., http://www.americanbar.org/groups/depart 
ments_offices/legal_technology_resources/resources/charts_fyis/metadatachart2.html,  archived  at 
http://www.webcitation.org/68JCPvFcG; Jim Calloway, Metadata—What Is It and What Are My Ethi-
cal Duties?, llrx.com, Jan. 5, 2009, http://www.llrx.com/features/metadata.htm, archived at http://
www.webcitation.org/67Xi2KzCe.402 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
composition/production service such as Christensen most probably have metadata 
scrubbed out during the formatting process.88 But journals that publish on their 
own should know that metadata might remain in Word documents and ultimately 
PDFs if not removed and that this information could ultimately be indexed and 
accessible through search engines.
Preservation of At-Risk Cited Sources
¶47 In addition to helping journals address the risk level of their own content, 
libraries should educate journals about the volatility of the web sites referenced in 
the footnotes in their articles.89 There are various ways libraries could help journals 
deal with this problem, depending on the resources available and scope of the 
library’s activities.90 Libraries could suggest that journals investigate using a service 
like WebCite, which journals (and authors) may use to ensure that a copy of a cited 
web site remains accessible to users.91 Journals could also be encouraged to cite 
stable URLs for documents92 contained in resources such as the Chesapeake Proj-
ect93 or the Internet Archive.94 For items in the public domain (or to which the 
copyright is owned), there is a tool called Zotero Commons with which users can 
contribute documents to the Internet Archive.95 For certain types of resources that 
fall within the scope of a library’s collection development policy, the library might 
  88.  According to Gayle Smith of Joe Christensen, Inc, “If [we] perform[] the formatting of 
journal text in our composition software, we extract from the journal file only the data we need in 
order to put ink on paper.  Our internal working file will not contain any of the metadata from the 
journal-submitted file.” E-mail from Gayle Smith to author Pearse (June 12, 2012, 5:30 P.m.) (on file 
with author). The same may be true for other commercial journal publishers.
  89.  See sources cited supra note 30.
  90.  Libraries are also in a position to educate journals about the copyright complexities of pre-
serving information on another web site.
  91.  WebCite allows individual authors and journals to “freeze” web pages they use as references. 
It takes a snapshot of a cited webpage and stores a copy of the html including images (or any other 
files, for example pdf) on the webcitation server.
The caching (archiving) process can be initiated prospectively (before publication) by the 
author or the editor, copyeditor or publisher at the time he/she authors, edits, or publishes the 
citing document.
WebCite Consortium FAQ, webciTe, http://www.webcitation.org/faq (last visited May 28, 2012). Web-
Cite also has the capacity to crawl and permit retrospective, postpublication archiving if an author 
or journal submits an XML file of the published article. According to WebCite’s list of members, 
only two law journals are members. WebCite Consortium Members, webciTe, http://www.webcitation 
.org/members (last visited May 28, 2012). It is unclear how well this service works with dynamic web 
pages and how stable the service is. Based on the experience of archiving web pages on WebCite for 
this article, its replication accuracy is dependent on how the original web page is coded. If a web site 
prohibits web crawlers, then WebCite will not archive the page.
  92.  Services like Memento allow people to look for archived web pages in several sources. See 
memenTo: ADDing Time To The web, http://www.mementoweb.org, archived at http://www.web 
citation.org/67XiAN2SI.
  93.  The Chesapeake Digital Preservation Group, legAl info. Archive, http://cdm16064.content 
dm.oclc.org/cdm/ (last visited May 29, 2012).
  94.  inTerneT Archive, http://archive.org (last visited May 29, 2012).
  95.  Zotero Commons, zoTero, http://www.zotero.org/support/commons (last visited June 2, 
2012).Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 403
want to consider archiving the sources and adding them to its collection if it is 
already providing web archiving services. Finally, librarians could work with editors 
of the Bluebook to develop further guidance on Rule 18.2(h) (and Rule 18 gener-
ally) for best practices.96
Facilitating Journal Inclusion in Traditional  
Bibliographic and Indexing Systems
¶48 Law libraries could become more proactive in facilitating inclusion of their 
journals in traditional indexes, full-text databases, and other traditional biblio-
graphic tools used by libraries and researchers. Some journals do not have central 
offices to help them manage administrative matters, and changes in the staffing 
each year make protracted activities difficult to track. Libraries could help ensure 
consistency and completion of such tasks. At present, there is often a delay in get-
ting journals into such services, and policies about inclusion of online-only jour-
nals (or web-only companion content for print journals) are sometimes inconsis-
tent or unclear.97
¶49 Law journals should be guided in registering copyright and registering for 
an International Standard Serial Number (ISSN).98 For open access journals, the 
journal should be encouraged to contribute its metadata and contents to the Direc-
tory  of  Open Access  Journals  (DOAJ).99  Registering  existence  of  the  content 
through a service beyond a general aggregator like HeinOnline can drive traffic to 
the journal’s web site. With their extensive knowledge of research sources, librarians 
are also well positioned to help identify both traditional legal and interdisciplinary 
full-text and indexing/abstracting databases that might be interested in the jour-
nal’s content.
¶50 Inclusion in these systems facilitates inclusion in knowledge bases for  
vendor-provided tools such as web scale discovery systems and open URL link 
resolvers.100 Libraries could support use, reference, and promotion of journal con-
  96.  Rule 18.2(h) encourages journals to print out copies of web sources, specifically noting that it 
is not necessary to indicate the location of an archival copy in the citation. The bluebook: A uniform 
sysTem of ciTATion, supra note 35, at R. 18.2(h). Some libraries keep these print files for the journals 
at their institution. Libraries could work with editors of the new edition of the Bluebook to enumer-
ate trusted repositories with stable DOIs for archived copies in lieu of printing copies. While the 
Internet Archive’s URL is included in the Bluebook rule’s example, encouragement of the use of these 
permanent URLs and links from trusted repositories could be included in the rule. See also Cheryl 
Nyberg, Cite-Checking and Library Research, gAllAgher lAw librAry (Feb. 14, 2007), http://lib.law 
.washington.edu/ref/citecheck.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XiEdXxz (raising the 
issue of permanent URLs and commenting on a previous version of rule 18).
  97.  See Xiaotian Chen, Web-Exclusive Articles in Traditionally Print Periodicals, 33 seriAls rev. 
224 (2007); Edward T. Hart, Indexing Open Access Law Journals . . . or Maybe Not, 38 inT’l J. legAl 
info. 19 (2010).
  98.  Existence of an ISSN is important for inclusion in many bibliographic tools because it serves 
as the journal’s primary identifier.
  99.  About DOAJ, DirecTory of oPen Access JournAls, http://www.doaj.org/doaj?func=load 
Templ&templ=faq, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XiMMiU1.
  100.  See Sarah Glasser, Broken Links and Failed Access: How KBART, IOTA, and PIE-J Can 
Help, 56 libr. res. & Tech. servs. 14 (2012). “An OpenURL link resolver accepts links from library 
citation databases (sources) and returns to the user a menu of choices (targets) that include many 404 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
tent in other information areas. For example, they could work with vendors such 
as Amazon, Bowker, and other bibliographic services to see if their journal’s book 
reviews could be listed with information about the book. Libraries could also facili-
tate swift cataloging in OCLC/WorldCat and help journals partner with OCLC and 
table of contents services to include their content.101
Distributing Content Through Social Media
¶51 Many law journals have already experimented with social media, such as 
blogs, Facebook, and Twitter. Participation in such channels is increasingly impor-
tant as some argue that social media metrics may impact citation metrics.102 In 
addition to supporting law journals’ attempts to create their own social media pres-
ence, librarians are well situated to know which Web 2.0 channels are ideal venues 
for marketing journals or individual articles. They can also encourage coverage of 
online  companions  and  blogs  in  the  traditional  literature.103  Libraries  might 
become partners in helping journals use these social media tools most effectively.
Optimizing for Mobile-Friendly Web Sites and Mobile Applications
¶52 As Internet users become increasingly mobile, journals are well advised to 
publish their content in ways that make it consumable on mobile devices. Librar-
ians can teach them how to use services such as Google Analytics to see what kinds 
of mobile devices are being used to visit their sites. As libraries grapple with the 
question of whether to develop a mobile web site or a “mobile app” for their own 
content and deal with issues surrounding offering licensed content on mobile 
links to full-text, the library catalog, and other related services . . . .” Cindi Trainor & Jason Price, 
Rethinking Library Linking: Breathing New Life into OpenURL, libr. Tech. reP., Oct. 2010, at 6.
  101.  For information on OCLC’s services, see Press Release, OCLC, More Databases and 
Collections from Around the World Added to WorldCat Local (July 12, 2011), http://www.oclc.org 
/news/releases/2011/201141.htm,  archived  at  http://www.webcitation.org/67XiQ9WEI.  Table  of 
contents services that are potential partners for law journals include Ingentaconnect and the Current 
Index to Legal Periodicals.
  102.  See Shapiro & Pearse, supra note 83, at 1517–18. A recent editorial from the medi-
cal research literature suggests that highly tweeted scholarship leads to increased citation. Gunther 
Eysenbach, Can Tweets Predict Citations? Metrics of Social Impact Based on Twitter and Correlation 
with Traditional Metrics of Scientific Impact, 13 J. meD. inTerneT res. e123 (2011), http://www.jmir 
.org/2011/4/e123/, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XiUA9wa. But see Claire Bower, Twim-
pact Factors: Can Tweets Really Predict Citations?, bmJ web DeveloPmenT blog (Jan. 6, 2012), http://
blogs.bmj.com/bmj-journals-development-blog/2012/01/06/twimpact-factors-can-tweets-really 
-predict-citations, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XiVjAUH (noting critiques of Eysen-
bach’s article). In the sciences, a new project powered by Mendeley called “altmetrics” has evolved 
for “the creation and study of new metrics based on the Social Web for analyzing and informing 
scholarship.” About, AlTmeTrics, http://altmetrics.org/about, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/681tyOmIT.
  103.  For the past few years, the AALL Committee for Indexing of Periodical Literature has 
been pursuing inclusion of such content in the LegalTrac database. See Am. Ass’n of lAw librAries, 
inDexing of PerioDicAl liTerATure comm., AnnuAl rePorT 2010–2011, available at http://www 
.aallnet.org/main-menu/Leadership-Governance/committee/cmte-annual-reports/2010-2011/c-ipl 
.pdf, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XjJrPeF.Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 405
devices, librarians can help journals make similar assessments about their own 
content and figure out how best to optimize their web sites and content.
¶53 As experts in new modes of publishing and purchasing content, librarians 
should be able to provide advice to journals regarding what modes are most benefi-
cial. If librarians are able to provide focus group services to traditional publishers, 
they should be able to offer similar feedback to their own journals. Recently, an 
open source project called Yāna was developed which allows any journal to make a 
mobile-friendly version of its content.104 Some journals are also making their con-
tent available as downloads on Amazon’s and Apple’s distribution platforms.105 
While law school information technology and communications departments may 
also provide expertise in these areas, libraries can offer insight on how researchers 
use these options in their research or scholarship.
Supporting Audiovisual Beyond Repository Hosting
¶54  Journals  will  increasingly  be  offering  nontextual  content,  particularly 
audiovisual content. As law continues to be influenced by other disciplines and new 
students and scholars expect information to be available in a variety of formats, 
authors, journals, and researchers will be looking for media-oriented formats.106 
Many journals are already very active in hosting conferences for which they pro-
duce audio and video. Libraries are well qualified to grapple with the special issues 
involved in presenting and preserving video,107 but they could be more actively 
involved in marking it up for the web to make it more discoverable and connected 
with other content. Such services could include transcription and captioning ser-
vices to help facilitate access.108 Many journals have already begun offering their 
  104.  About  the  Project, yānA,  http://osc.hul.harvard.edu/yana,  archived  at  http://www.web 
citation.org/67XjLcMe6.
  105.  Alan Childress, Stanford Law Review Goes Ebook . . . in Kindle, Nook, and iPad Edi-
tions,  legAl  Profession  blog  (Feb.  5,  2011),  http://lawprofessors.typepad.com/legal_profession 
/2011/02/stanford-law-review-goes-ebookin-kindle-nook-and-ipad-editions.html, archived at http://
www.webcitation.org/67XjQnJJk. The Harvard Law Review, the Yale Law Journal, and the Univer-
sity of Chicago Law Review also have e-book editions, linked to from the journals’ web sites. hAr-
vArD lAw review, http://www.harvardlawreview.org/index.php, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/687xnLlJu; yAle lAw JournAl, http://yalelawjournal.org, archived at http://www.webcitation 
.org/687xk4lJn; univ. of chicAgo lAw review, http://lawreview.uchicago.edu, archived at http://
www.webcitation.org/687xhi8L2.
  106.  For  an  example,  see  Yale Visual  Law  Project, yAle  lAw  school,  http://yalevisuallaw 
project.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XjVIp3M. An example from the hard sciences 
is the Journal of Visualized Experiments. Jove, http://www.jove.com, archived at http://www.web 
citation.org/67XjWVovy.
  107.  While it is possible to store video on repository systems, it is unclear how various 
repositories are dealing with the longer term needs of preserving audiovisual material, which usu-
ally requires some reformatting and migration to ensure accessibility. Plug-ins have been developed 
for publishing platforms such as OJS to offer multimedia content. Kathie Gossett et al., Kairos-OJS 
Plugin Project: Author, Editor, and Reader Tools for Scholarly Multimedia, PkP scholArly Publishing 
conference 2011, http://pkp.sfu.ca/ocs/pkp/index.php/pkp2011/pkp2011/paper/view/287, archived 
at http://www.webcitation.org/67XjaEGI6.
  108.  For  example,  YouTube  offers  a  transcription  service.  See  Adding  and  Editing  Cap-
tions/Subtitles, youTube, http://support.google.com/youtube/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=100077, 
archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XjcUUoK. There are also tools that can be used for creating 406 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
podcasts and videos through iTunes and YouTube (sometimes through the law 
school’s account).109 As libraries find ways to distribute their own content through 
these services, they could become more engaged in identifying these alternative 
content outlets and advising journals on the best way to market their content. 
Libraries are natural partners for law school media services and communications 
departments that also grapple with the dissemination and stewarding of audiovi-
sual material.
Supporting “Futuristic” Thinking About the Law Journal/Article
¶55 What we think of as the “journal” or “journal article” is continuing to 
evolve and will probably be very different in years to come.110 Some libraries are 
already engaged in advising on web site production for journals. Taking a cue from 
the developments in other disciplines and in the e-book realm, journals will be 
exploring dynamic and flexible ways for users to view and use their content.111 By 
providing additional assistance in metadata creation and encouraging availability 
of data sets, libraries could be more engaged in experimenting with journals on 
innovative interfaces, such as visualizations of data and mashups.112 Libraries can 
also encourage journals to publish in open formats that make them easy to harvest 
and consume.113
transcription files. See, e.g., Transcribing Speech in Video with Adobe Premiere and After Effects, reAl-
eyes (Mar. 5, 2010, 5:14 P.m.), http://www.realeyes.com/blog/2010/03/05/caption/, archived at http://
www.webcitation.org/681uQLZ0Q.
  109.  Some examples of law schools with journals that offer podcasts and videos through 
YouTube and iTunes include, on iTunes: DePaul College of Law, UC Davis Law, University of North 
Carolina School of Law, and Northwestern University School of Law; on YouTube: University of 
Virginia School of Law, Duke Law School, Wayne State University Law School, University of San 
Francisco School of Law, and Stanford Law School.
  110.  Nicholas W.  Jankowski  et  al.,  Enhancing  Scholarly  Publishing  in  the  Humanities  and 
Social Sciences: Innovation Through Hybrid Forms of Publication, PkP scholArly Publishing confer-
ence 2011, http://pkp.sfu.ca/ocs/pkp/index.php/pkp2011/pkp2011/paper/view/326/185, archived at 
http://www.webcitation.org/681uaxXBD. Discussions of the Durham Statement also acknowledge 
the changing nature of the journal and publication. Danner, Leong & Miller, supra note 9; Miller, 
supra note 9.
  111.  See  Jennifer  Howard,  New  Forms  of  Reading  and  Publishing  Take  Center  Stage  at 
ITHAKA  Conference,  chron.  higher  eDuc.  (Sept.  21,  2011),  http://chronicle.com/article/New 
-Forms-of-Reading-and/129104, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XjkXgFJ.
  112.  Owen Stephens, Mashups and Open Data in Libraries, 24 seriAls 245 (2011). Libraries 
could facilitate mashups of journal content with data, primary law, and other research sources. Book 
review articles could be mashed up with content related to the reviewed books.
  113.  See  Miller,  supra  note  9,  at  [2].  Libraries  and  law  journals  could  work  together  to 
develop a unified search interface across journals, beyond what is offered by the American Bar Asso-
ciation or Google. This search engine could facilitate production of table of contents services across 
open access journals. With the proper support, hosting, and open source journal publishing options 
like OJS and WordPress (especially with Annotum, a free platform using WordPress), libraries could 
collaborate to offer a free publishing platform for law journals, particularly in institutions that are 
not able to invest in repositories or that lack the technical staff to implement open source solutions 
themselves. See AnnoTum, http://annotum.org, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67XjrZq5B.Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 407
¶56 The publisher Elsevier recently presented its Article of the Future project 
for various disciplines.114 Librarians could help lead a similar project for law jour-
nals (perhaps through AALL or participants in the Durham Statement). Students 
and libraries could share innovative thoughts and best practices about producing 
scholarship. While this type of information sharing happens at various meetings,115 
consistent, coordinated efforts to discuss these issues would be very beneficial and 
could provide support and inspiration for law journals that do not have substantial 
technical and staffing resources.
¶57 Libraries will have to help journals deal with the preservation issues inher-
ent in these new dynamic formats.116 In contemplating future forms of legal schol-
arship, libraries should also be forward-thinking about how to preserve new “con-
tainers” for traditional article content and how to preserve dynamic new forms of 
content. While  institutional  repositories  handle  traditional  article  format  and 
content very well, they do not necessarily handle nontraditional content, nor do 
they create alternative representations and incorporation of video or data, or facili-
tate ways of rethinking how articles are presented beyond the current linear presen-
tation in issues and volumes.117 Libraries have used web archiving tools to capture 
“ancillary” content like blogs (often separately from traditional journal content), 
but they also need to partner with journals to develop their ancillary and dynamic 
content in ways that facilitate preservation, as opposed to trying to capture such 
content after its publication.
Conclusion
¶58 Law libraries (and librarians) are uniquely situated to help academic law 
journals evolve and flourish in a world where modes of publication are changing at 
a rapid pace. If we broaden our roles as their partners in publishing and think cre-
atively and futuristically about what a law journal is, we can help ensure the integ-
rity, accessibility, and relevance of this important area of legal scholarship. We 
should look to other disciplines (especially the sciences) and the university press–
library partnership model for inspiration and explore concrete ways in which we 
can realize these goals. Many law libraries have embraced repositories, but it is 
questionable whether repository systems are presently fully equipped to deal with 
the changing, dynamic needs of journals.118 While some law libraries have already 
  114.  Article  of  the  Future,  elsevier,  http://www.articleofthefuture.com,  archived  at  http://
www.webcitation.org/67Xju1jLp.
  115.  See, e.g., Implementing the Durham Statement, supra note 9.
  116.  See Michael Kelley, Potential Crisis May Be Brewing in Preservation of E-Journals, The 
DigiTAl shifT (Feb. 23, 2012), http://www.thedigitalshift.com/2012/02/preservation/potential-crisis 
-may-be-brewing-in-preservation-of-e-journals, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/681ugbOVM.
  117.  See, e.g., Article of the Future, supra note 114.
  118.  The LOCKSS (Lots of Copies Keep Stuff Safe) program recently received an Andrew 
W. Mellon Foundation Grant to enable it to “develop new techniques for collecting dynamic digital 
content from modern publishing platforms, and ensuring its long-term preservation.” Press Release, 
LOCKSS, LOCKSS Program Receives Andrew W. Mellon Foundation Grant (Apr. 18, 2012), http://
www.lockss.org/news-media/news/lockss-program-receives-andrew-w-mellon-foundation-grant, 
archived at http://www.webcitation.org/67Xk33dwW.408 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
been experimenting with additional services and partnerships in publishing, there 
is ample room for more libraries to expand their services and implement new ways 
of facilitating and supporting forward-thinking publishing infrastructures for law 
journals.Vol. 104:3  [2012-28] HOW LIBRARIANS CAN HELP IMPROVE LAW JOURNAL PUBLISHING 409
Appendix
Checklist for Librarians Working with Law Journals
3Publication agreement
Author retains copyright?
Nonexclusive or temporary license?
Allows authors to self-archive?
Distribution rights/venues
3Version reference
Clear policy on article version/terminology
Clear marking of own faculty members’ digital deposits
 Collaborate on standards to be used by journals and law library    
  community
3Use of persistent identifiers/DOIs
3Plagiarism (or duplicate publication) detection procedures and policies
3Policies and procedures for empirical work
 Review by peers or those knowledgeable about research methods/   
  statistics
Author submission/deposit of data for replication
Repository service for storing data (e.g., Dataverse)
Data markup/metadata
Licensing/terms of data use
Visualization/presentation options for data
Data citation standards
3Metadata for journal
OAI-PMH compliant
Standards for other web-based content
Accessibility for visually impaired
Taxonomies/ontologies
Author add-in options/author-contributed metadata
Technical formatting in footnoting/text for parsing
Hidden metadata to be scrubbed
Metrics/statistics
RSS available?
3Preservation of at-risk cited sources
Service (e.g., WebCite)
Proper web archiving by institution
Consistent use of or reference to particular sources
Collaboration with Bluebook on Rule 18
3Coverage in traditional bibliographic/indexing systems
International Standard Serial Number
Directory of Open Access Journals
Table of contents services
Full-text and indexing/abstracting databases (HeinOnline, LexisNexis,   
  Westlaw, Bloomberg Law, LegalTrac, Index to Legal Periodicals    
  and Books, nonlegal databases, etc.)410 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 104:3  [2012-28]
OCLC/WorldCat
Coverage of book reviews
Coverage of companion content
3Social media presence
3Optimized for mobile devices
Apps?
Visible on all devices?
Kindle?, iTunes?
3Audiovisual content
Distribution channels (iTunes, YouTube, etc.)
Metadata/markup
Transcription/captioning
Linked with text and other sources
Partnering with media services and communications offices
3Holistic preservation—Is there content not being captured?