The Action Principle in Market Mechanics
anhire
J. T. M
TexasA&MUniversity,CollegeStation,Texas
Abstract
Thispaperexploresthepossibilitythatassetprices,especiallythosetradedinlargevolumeon
publicexchanges,mightcomplywithspeciﬁcphysicallawsofmotionandprobability. Thepaper
ﬁrstexaminesthebasicdynamicsofpricedisplacementsinﬁnancialmarketsandﬁndsonecan
modelthisdynamicasaharmonicoscillatoratlocal“slices”ofelapsedtimeviaahomogeneous
coordinatesystem. PriceandtimecoordinateshereareWignerinvariantmeetingthethreshold
ofmathematicallawdiscoveryinmarkets. Basedonthisﬁnding,thepapertheorizesthatprice
displacements are constrained, meaning they have extreme values beyond which they cannot
gofordeﬁnedperiods. Byshowingthatpricedisplacementsalsocomplywiththeprincipleof
stationaryaction,thepaperexploresamethodformeasuringspeciﬁcprobabilitiesoffutureprice
displacementsbasedonpriorhistoricaldata. Testingthistheorywithlimitedmarketssuggestsit
canmakeforecastsconsistentwithhistoricaldataastoconstraintsonextremepricemovements
duringmarket“crashes”andprobabilitiesofspeciﬁcpricedisplacementsatothertimes.
ntroduction
1. I tion about market movements is represented
insuchawayastobeanalogoustoagraphof
The goal of this paper is to share a new motionovertime. Tothisend,thepaperseeks
way of looking at ﬁnancial markets as toapplyknowledgeandtechniquesfoundin
physical systems. It explores the pos- theoreticalphysicsspeciﬁcallytoﬁnancialmar-
sibility that asset prices for ﬁnancial markets, kets to test the consequences of Landauer’s
especiallythosetradedinlargevolumeonpub- propositioninthisarea.
licexchanges,mightcomplywithspeciﬁc(even This is by no means the ﬁrst such attempt
ifanalogous)physicallawsofmotiongivena toanalyzeeconomicsystemswithtoolsofthe
speciﬁccoordinateperspectiveofelapsedtime, physicalsciences. Manyeconomistsintheearly
displaced price, and displaced phase in the 20th century borrowed almost term for term
complexplane. the classical physics of the 1880s [2]. Others
In 1991, Landauer proposed that informa- havewrittenspeciﬁcallyonﬁnancialmarkets
tion is physical, especially information that throughthelensofphysicsinthelate20thcen-
is ﬁxed in some tangible medium [1]. Such tury[3],andtheeconophysicsschoolcontinues
media can include ink on paper, impressions examiningﬁnancialmarketswiththetoolsof
inclaytablets,orevenorganizedbinarycode statisticalmechanics[4]. Still,thispaperclaims
in electronics. This leaves one to ponder, “If to be the ﬁrst to imagine the physical system
theinformationﬁxedinatangiblemediumis itselfinthisparticularway.1
physical,towhatextentdoesthatinformation
1Theauthorissensitivetothegeneralrebukethat“eco-
complywithphysicallaws?” nomicsisnotphysics.”[5]Yet,thegoalhereisnotphilo-
sophical;itissimplytoseewhereLandauer’sproclamation
Looking at something as basic as a stan-
leadsifonetakesitliterallyandfollowsittoitslogical
dardstockchart,onecanseehowtheinforma- conclusions.Ifthoseconclusionsendupbeingconsistent
12 J.T.MANHIRE
Aninitialpostulatefollowsfromanobvious oftheactionprincipletotheasset’smovement
implicationofthepaper’sobjective: throughthepricedimension. Section5derives
I. By analogy, ﬁnancial markets comply with, probability measures from the dynamics dis-
even if they are not necessarily subject to, certain cussed. Section 6 attempts to test the theory
physicallaws. bycomparingresultsobtainedfromtraditional
If one does not assume this, the entire enter- analyses with those obtained solely from the
prisewouldbewithoutlogicalmotivation. theoreticalmodel. Initialcomparisonswithhis-
MantegnaandStanley[6]deﬁneaﬁnancial toricalassetpricedataappearpromising. Sec-
market as a system fueled by a large number tion 7 closes the paper with a brief summary
of interactions between buyers and sellers in andrecommendationsforfutureresearch.
perpetual search for an appropriate price for
anasset. Brokendownfurther,thisdeﬁnition
ocal ystems
2. L S
explainsthataﬁnancialmarketisasystem,the
mechanics of which relate solely to changes
Webeginwithﬁrstprinciplesbyobservingﬁ-
inpriceandthesoledriversofthesemechan-
nancialmarketdataﬁxedinatangiblemedium
ics are the interactions of buyers and sellers.
and asking, “What can we deduce about the
Theremainingtwopostulatesfollowfromthis
mostfundamentalaspectsofamarket’schange
deﬁnition:
in price over some elapsed period?” The an-
II.Observedmarketmechanicsaretheresultof
swer seems clear. The price of an asset—the
localsystemsthatcanbedeﬁnedbytheirrespective
objectofthesystemwecallaﬁnancialmarket—
changesinpriceandtime.
goes up, down, or stays the same when com-
III.Theonlyphenomenonthatdirectlyaffectsan
paring the asset’s ﬁnal and initial prices over
asset’spricedisplacementistheneteffectgenerated
someperiod. Seenthisway,it’sreasonableto
bythetradingactivitiesofbuyersandsellersateach
talk about the asset as moving through price
instanceofelapsedtime. overtime.2
Fromthesepostulates,thepaperattemptsto
Imagine a single dimension of an inertial
followlogicalconclusionstoatheoreticalend.
frame of reference for an asset. This is not a
As shared in the ﬁnal section, the theoretical
spatialdimensioninthetraditionalsense,but
resultsfromtheseassumptionsareconsistent
rather a dimension of price. An asset moves
with historical data—at least for the few as-
through this price dimension consistent with
setsagainstwhichthetheoryhasbeentested.
ourthirdpostulate.
Whileeveryattemptismadethroughoutthis
Let’s explore the basic dynamics of an as-
papertoclearlyconveytheprocessthatleads
set’smovementthroughthispricedimension,
fromobservationtotheory,thereisnotattempt
thatis,itspricedisplacement. Displacementin-
attruemathematicalrigor.
volvesmovingsomethingfromonepositionto
Thepaperispresentedinsevensections,the
anotheroversomeelapsedperiod. Therefore,
ﬁrstbeingthisintroduction. Section2explores
to arrive at the most basic dynamic of an as-
thebasicdynamicsofanasset’spricedisplace-
set’s price displacement we must ﬁrst try to
ment at each instance in time. Section 3 in-
understandthemostbasicinstanceofelapsed
vestigates the forces that drive this price dis-
time.
placement. Section4explorestheapplication
2Wecanalsotalkaboutthepricemovingaroundthe
withhistoricalmarketdatathenperhapsthereismorehere assetifwewish.Afterall,doestheshipmovethroughthe
forotherstoinvestigateandphilosophicalquestionswith waterordoesthewatermovearoundtheship?Intheend,
whichotherscangrapple. thechosenreferenceframeseemsmoreintuitive.THEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 3
A. ElapsedTime Since we can arbitrarily deﬁne the period
t (e.g., one year, one month, one week, one
Assume some elapsed period t, where t de-
day,onehour,onesecond,etc.) itissufﬁcient
notes a change in time from t to t , or
A B to set t = 1 as an arbitrary temporal unit as
t := t −t . Ifwedividethisperiodbysome
B A
long as we are clear on the deﬁnition of that
integer n weget n-numberoftimeslices,each
unitinpracticeandconsistentthroughoutour
of which we’ll call τ. If n is very large then
examination.
eachtimesliceisverysmall. Theseslicesneed
Consequently,wecandiscussthemechanics
not be precisely equal intervals, but for our
of a ﬁnancial market for any slice using that
purposeswewillassumetheyare.
sliceasaunitoftime. Althoughwegetmulti-
Wecanidentifyeachtimesliceaccordingto
pleunitsifwesumuptheunitslices,wecan
an index (cid:101) that runs from the states A to B
alwayscovertthatsumitselfintoanotherunit
suchthat
sliceaslongasourtermsarewell-deﬁned. Ac-
(cid:101) ∈ {A =1<2< ··· < n−1< n = B}. cordingly,aslongaswearealwayscomparing
thesameelapsedperiods(e.g.,one-weekperi-
The identiﬁer τ indicates the time slice that odsfrom1January1980to31December2016,
(cid:101)
beginsatthestate(cid:101);thatis,τ = τ = t → t , one-minuteperiodsfrom1January1980to31
A 1 1 2
τ = t → t ,τ = t → t ,etc.,untilweﬁnally December 2016, etc.), we can regard each pe-
2 2 3 3 3 4
get τn−1 = tn−1 → tn = tB. riodasasingleunitforpurposesoftheelapsed
Theslice τ shouldnotbeconfusedwiththe time,or t =1.
notionof dt. Theformerisaperiodofelapsed
timethatcanbearbitrarilysmallbutneverbe B. DisplacedPrice
zero. The latter is the change in time as the
Thequestionthenbecomes,“Whatisthemost
period dt approaches zero. We can make n
basic displacement dynamic occurring over
sufﬁcientlylargetousethetoolsofcalculusto
each time slice τ?” From an observation of
accurately approximate results, but in doing
assets traded on public exchanges it appears
sowemustrememberthat τ neverapproaches
that the most basic displacement dynamic at
zerotothepointwhereabeginningandend-
eachtimesliceisthattheassetiseithermoving
ingtimecannotbedistinguished(i.e., t (cid:54)= t
A B
upordowninpricetovaryingdegrees.4
forthesameperiodnomaterhowsmall). Each
Let’scallan“up”movementinpricepositive
timeslicenomatterhowsmallhasabeginning
anda“down”movementnegative. Theseare
and an end time with some relevant mean-
arbitrarybutintuitivedirectionalassignments.
ing to our examination of a ﬁnancial market.
Again, as an asset moves in this way it trav-
Therefore,anyactivity,includingthe τ-related
elsnotthroughtraditionalspacebutthrough
derivativesofprice,willendupbeingaverages
the dimension of price. Let’s call this price
from t(cid:101) to t(cid:101)+1.3
displacement x deﬁnedasthechangeinprice
Fromthisweseethat t = nτ ifallslicesare
fromtheasset’sstartingprice x toitsending
equalininterval. Iftheintervalsarenotequal A
price x .
then B
B Yet, it would be insufﬁcient to deﬁne the
∑
t = τ .
(cid:101) pricedisplacement x merelyas x −x aswe
B A
(cid:101)=A
3Toberigorouswouldrequirespecialnotationtode- 4Itcanalsohavenonetmovement.Sincedirectionmat-
notetheseaverages,suchas(cid:104)·(cid:105),however,suchnotationis ters,pricedisplacementandallfunctionsofitarevector
unnecessarilycumbersomegiventhisclariﬁcationofwhat quantitieseventhoughweusescalarnotationthroughout
wemustconsideranaverageandwhy. withdirectionsigniﬁedbypositiveornegativesigns.4 J.T.MANHIRE
did with time since doing so would leave us identical.
with a lack of homogeneity for ﬁnancial mar- Therefore,inordertomaintainhomogeneity
kets. Generally, elapsed time and price dis- wemustmeasurepricedisplacementinterms
placementsarehomogeneouseventhoughob- of the ratio of the change in price from t to
A
jective time and prices are not. There is ar- t totheobjectivepriceat t . Forthisreason,
B A
guablyarelevantdifferencebetweenthedates we will deﬁne the change in price x as (x −
B
14 March, 18 March, 25 November, and 29 x )/x ,orforanytimeslice
A A
November. Yet,theﬁve-dayperiodbetween14
Marchand18Marchischronologicallyidenti- x(τ ) := x(cid:101)+1(τ(cid:101))−x(cid:101)(τ(cid:101)) = (cid:18)x(cid:101)+1(τ(cid:101)) −1(cid:19)
(cid:101) x (τ ) x (τ )
caltotheﬁve-dayperiodbetween25November (cid:101) (cid:101) (cid:101) (cid:101)
and 29 November. This also applies to years,
insteadof x = x −x only.
B A
months, weeks, hours, minutes, seconds, etc.
Notethattheclosingpricefor τ isalsothe
(cid:101)
Therefore,elapsedtimeishomogeneouseven
opening price for τ(cid:101)+1. This is from the ob-
thoughspeciﬁctimesmightbedistinguishable.
servation that ﬁnancial markets leave off and
The same is true for changes in price, al- pick up in the exact same spot during a pe-
thoughherewemustbemorecarefulthanwith riod of exchange closure. One might argue
our examination of changes in time. There thatthepriceatthe“openingbell”isthetrue
is a signiﬁcant difference between $100 and openingprice,butthisisinconsistentwithour
$50. The two are distinguishable in relevant conception of time as a series of slices. The
waysandare,therefore,inhomogeneous. Yet, closingpriceforτ maintainsitsvalueuntilthe
(cid:101)
there is no difference between the displace- exchangere-opensfortrading. Attheopening
ments (xA1 = $90,xB1 = $100) and (xA2 = bell,anypriceisnottheopeningprice,butthe
$40,xB2 = $50). In both instances the price ﬁrstpriceafter τ(cid:101)+1 hasbegun.
displacements are x = x −x = $10. In all
B A For this reason, the price displacement in
relevantwaysthetwodisplacementsappearin- terms of reported price is always x(τ ) =
(cid:101)
distinguishableand,therefore,homogeneous. x(cid:101)+1(τ(cid:101))−x(cid:101)(τ(cid:101)),withthepricedisplacement
Yet, we are concerned with changes in price
ratiocomputedasalreadydiscussed. Hereafter,
of a ﬁnancial market for all times. It appears
anydiscussionofthe“pricedisplacement”will
changes in price alone end up being inhomo-
be synonymous with “price displacement ra-
geneousoverextendedperiods.
tio”forthesakeofconcisionunlessotherwise
For example, the S&P 500 Index in the speciﬁed.
UnitedStateshasdatagoingbackdecades. If
oneweretotakedatafrom,say,1980through
C. HomogeneousCoordinates
2017,a$10changeinpricein1980wouldnot
beequivalenttoa$10changeinpricein2017 If we imagine a coordinate system with t as
sincethechangefrom1980camefromaninitial the abscissa and x as the ordinate we get a
priceverycloseto$100whilethechangefrom standard-lookingstockchartwithtimerunning
2017 came from an initial price very close to from left to right and the price running up
$2,500. Theextremelylow(orforsomemarkets and down. A consequence of this coordinate
high)valuesofearlydatacanexcessivelyskew representationisthatpricedisplacementscan
the results so as to leave price displacements bethoughtofasfunctionsofelapsedtime,or
formorecurrentperiodsinhomogeneouswith x(t).
respecttopricedisplacementsforearlierdata Therefore, the changes in price and time as
even if the actual monetary displacement is discussedin§§2Aand2BareinvariantunderTHEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 5
translation,eventhoughpricesandtimethem- conventionalunits. Becauseofthis,wewillre-
selvesarenot. Ifthechangesinpriceandtime fertoourcoordinatesystemofchangesintime
arehomogeneousthentheyarealsoisotropic, and price that sets t = x = 0 and t = 1 as
A A
meaningtheyareinvariantunderrotation. a“homogeneouscoordinatesystem,”although
Forthesereasons,wecanalwaysmakeboth thereadershouldbeawarethatothersmight
t and x equivalent to t and x, respectively, deﬁnethistermdifferentlyintheliterature[9].
B B
if we regard t and x as zero in relation
A A
to tB and xB, respectively, for any time slice. 3. External Forces
Therefore, in this coordinate system, we can
assumefourprice-timeprinciples: (1)transla- Atthispointweshouldbeabletoimaginethe
tionalinvariance,(2)rotationalinvariance,(3) pricedisplacementofanassetastheneteffect
timetranslationalinvariance,and(4)Galilean oftheinteractionsofbuyersandsellers. Infact,
invariance(therulesapplyequallytoallassets basedonourpostulates,theseinteractionsare
evenifeachisinitsowncoordinatesystem).5 theonlysourceofanet“force”thatmovesthe
These principles are important because they assetthroughthepricedimensionoveratime
are the four invariances Wigner claims neces- slice τ.
saryforthediscoveryofmathematicalrulesof Aretheseinteractionssometimestheresult
asystem[7]. Withouttheseinvariances,math- of traders reacting to external events such as
ematicalrulesmightexistforasystem,butwe a signiﬁcant terrorist attack or news of a ma-
wouldbehardpressedtorootthemout. The jor corporate scandal? Of course, but neither
perceivedlackoftheseinvariancesineconomic the attack nor the scandal directly affect the
systems is a common criticism for applying mechanics of this system we call a ﬁnancial
physical laws, even if by analogy, to ﬁnancial market. It might be the individual reactions
markets[8]. oftraderstotheseeventsthatintheaggregate
Asaconsequence,wecanrepresenttheend affect the direction of the price displacement
state of any elapsed period with the coordi- oversomeelapsedperiod,butitisimportant
nates (t,x) andthatshouldbesufﬁcienttode- torememberthatﬁnancialmarketshaveonly
scribetheremainingdynamicsoccurringover one“primemover”whenweexaminethesys-
thetimeintervalintermsoftimeandprice. tem qua system. That mover is the net force
Theonlydifferenceinthecoordinatesisthat generatedbytheinteractionsoftraders. There
twillalwaysbepositivesincetimeonlymoves isnoothersourceofdirectforceinthistheory.6
inonedirectionforourpurposeshere,while x We use the term “force” here only by anal-
mightbepositive,negative,orzerosinceprices ogy; however, we will assume the net force
moveup,down,orexperiencenochange. to have the same properties and produce the
Inthisway,ourcoordinatesystembecomes same effects on an asset in the dimension of
oneofnetchangesfromstate AtostateBsince priceasaphysicalforcehasonanobjectinthe
wecanalwaysset(cid:101)to Aand(cid:101)+1to Bforany dimensionofspace. Recallthatweassumeﬁ-
slice τ regardlessoftheactualelapsedtimein nancialmarketscomplywithcertainprinciples
ofphysics,evenifweagreethatﬁnancialmar-
5ItiswellknownthatNewton’sSecondLawisinvariant
kets are not subject to all physical laws (e.g.,
underaGalileantransformationsoweneednotprovethis
again here. By the end of this paper it should be clear gravity).
thatthepricedisplacementofanyassetissubjecttothe
samerulesregardlessofitsindividualcoordinatesystem 6Thistheorydoesnotdisregardtheuniquenessofeach
withtheinertialcoefﬁcientbeingthemaindeterminant individual agent’s behavior. The difference is in focus.
ofpricedisplacementmagnitudegivenequalnettrading Instead of focusing on the individual agent, this theory
interactions. focusesontheinteractionofindividualagents.6 J.T.MANHIRE
We know from experience that buyers and activitieswouldhavecausedseparately.
sellers interact with an asset and each other Wecanalsoassumethatsomething“carries”
foreachtimeslice τ thatanexchangeisopen theseforcestoproducetheobservedpricedis-
for trading.7 Let’s call a buyer’s activity α placement of an asset. For now, we will refer
since the activity is physically manifested in to this net “carrying thing” as ψ, where ψ is
what’s called an “ask” and a seller’s activity the result of the superposition of the “carry-
β sincetheactivityisphysicallymanifestedin ingthing”ofthebuyers’forceandthatofthe
what’scalleda“bid.” Becausewe’vedecidedto sellers’.
maketheupdirectionpositiveandthedown Let’sreturntoourproportionalassumption
direction negative, we can notate a buyer’s that F ∝ x. Since both F and x are time func-
activityas +α andaseller’sactivityas −β. tions,weknowperNewton’ssecondlawthat
We assume that the price displacement for F = mx¨,where m canbethoughtofasaniner-
some period τ is proportional to the sum of tialcoefﬁcientuniquetoeachassetand x¨ isthe
thebuyers’andsellers’activities,or second time derivative of the price displace-
ment. Thisleavesuswith mx¨ ∝ x.
x ∝ α+(−β) = α−β,
If mx¨ displacestheassetinthepricedimen-
sion over, let’s say, the period τ it means the
sincethesearetheonlyactivitiesthataffectthe 1
equivalentoft ist andtheassetmovesfrom
asset’smovementthroughthepricedimension. A 1
price x toprice x at t .Forthesakeofargu-
Consequently,if α = β thentheactionscancel, 1 2 2
ment let’s assume the displacement over this
producingapricedisplacement x =0forthat
slice is in the positive direction. Yet, at pre-
period. However, if α > β then x > 0, and if
cisely t the price x that was the close price
α < β then x <0. 2 2
forthepreviousslice τ becomestheopening
Morespeciﬁcally, wecanthinkoftheinter- 1
price for the next slice τ . Our homogeneous
active dynamic α−β as generating some net 2
coordinate system is such that t and x can
force that is solely responsible for the price A A
alwaysbeconsideredzerosincewecareonly
displacement we witness for the period. In
about the net displacement over the period.
other words, the net force is proportional to
For this reason, when x goes from being the
thechangeinprice,or F ∝ x. 2
closingpricefor τ tobeingtheopeningprice
Here, Fisthenetforceresultingfromthesu- 1
for τ the asset must reclaim the value zero
2
perpositionof F and F where F ispositively
α β α
sinceweregardthestartingpriceforanyslice
directedand F isnegativelydirected,or
β
aszero.
F = F +(−F ) = F −F . By doing this, one of two things happen
α β α β
(both of which are equivalent): either the as-
The system as we have deﬁned it appears in set moves from the price x2 = x2 at the end
allrespectstobelinear. Therefore,itisappro- of τ1 to the price x2 = 0 at the start of τ2, or
priate to assume that the net response of the the coordinate system moves to set x2 = 0 at
systemtotheinteractionsoftradersisthesum the start of τ2. Either way, the price displace-
of the responses that the buyers’ and sellers’ mentfortheﬁrstslice,x(τ1),mustbetraversed
againinfull,butintheoppositedirection,so
7Some“penny”stocksmightgoforlongperiodswith-
that x = 0 for the start of τ . This means if
outbuyerorselleractivity.Themarketsweexaminehere 2 2
arethosewithhightradevolumesforallrelevanttimes. mx¨ is the net force that displaces the asset in
Theonlyreasonfortheretonotbeatradeinthesemarkets
thepositivedirectionover τ ,theremustbea
wouldbethattheexchangeisclosedsotheinteractions 1
cannotoccur. negatively-directed force of equal magnitudeTHEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 7
returning price x to zero for the start of τ . sothatthepositivetime-axisisheadingintothe
2 2
We’llexpressthisnegatively-directedforceas page,thepositive (cid:60)-axisispointingtothetop
kx. ofthepage,andthepositive (cid:61)-axisispointing
Thisturnsourproportionalstatement mx¨ ∝ to the right of the page. We’re now observ-
x into ing only the two dimensions of the complex
mx¨ = −kx. (1) plane. Thisconﬁgurationisslightlyunconven-
tional, but it maintains the visual of positive
Sincemx¨isapositively-directedforceandkxis
pricechangesgoing“up”andnegativechanges
anegatively-directedforceofequalmagnitude,
going“down.”
wemustaddanegativesignto kx sothatthe
We ﬁnd a complex solution for Eq. (1) in
twosidesoftheequationbalance.
QuadrantIofthecomplexplane(upperright)
Thisisaveryfamiliarequation. Itdescribes
inthefollowingform:
the motion of a simple harmonic oscillator.8
Thisisconsistentwithobservationsofaﬁnan- (cid:32) (cid:114) (cid:114) (cid:33)
k k
cialmarketfromtheperspectiveofthehomo- ψB = R cos t+isin t , (2)
m m
geneous coordinate system we have created.
Ateachtimeslice τ thebasicdynamicisthat where R isthemodulusof ψ .
B
theassetmovesthroughthepricedimensionin
The principal value of the argument of the
onedirectionandthenmustreturn(ortheco- complex number ψ at t , or arg(ψ ), is φ .
B B B
ordinatesystemreset)totheequilibriumpoint
Let’s call φ the phase of system, where the
(cid:101)
for the next slice thereby covering the same
phaseisdeﬁnedgeometricallyinthecomplex
distanceinprice. planeastheanglefromthepositive(cid:60)-axistoa
Sofarourcoordinatesystemhasthedimen- vectorrotatedtowardthe(cid:61)-axis. Inourcoordi-
sions of time and price. Yet, there are well-
natesystem,thismeansthephaseispositively
known solutions to Eq. (1) in the complex directedifitmovesclockwisefromthe+(cid:60)-axis
plane. Ifasolutiontoanequationofmotionde- towardsthe +(cid:61) axis.9
rivedfromourobservationsofhowaﬁnancial
Reviewing the complex solution for Eq. (1)
marketmovesinpriceresidesinthecomplex
we hold that the phase φ is equivalent to
√ (cid:101)
plane,wemustassumethatthecomplexplane
t k/m. Let’s denote the change in the phase
isanecessarycomponentofthelensthrough
from t to t as
A B
whichweobservethisrealphenomenonevenif
itendsupbeinganintermediatemathematical φ := ∆φ = φ −φ .
(cid:101) B A
contrivance.
To observe this solution we must add one Deﬁned this way, at t = 0 where x = 0,
A A
moredimension—animaginarydimension—to φ mustalwaysequal π. Thismeans
A 2
ourcoordinatesystem. Thisthirddimensionis
π
representedbytheimaginary-axis (cid:61),thereby φ = φ − .
B
2
makingourpricedimensionequivalenttothe
real-axis (cid:60). Let’srotatethecoordinatesystem Thus, we see that the principle value of the
phase displacement φ is always the comple-
8Moregenerally,thesystemcanbeexpressedasaVan
ment of the principle value of the phase at
derPolequationx¨−γ(1−x2)x˙+x=0withtheconstant
γ at or very near zero keeping the limit cycle close to
circularsince,asweshallseein§4,thetheoryrelieson 9Most conﬁgurations in the literature have the
eitherthetotalorveryneartotalconservationofenergy positively-directedphasemovingcounterclockwise.Thisis
withanynetenergyintroducedintothesystemwholly simplyaresultofhowonechoosestosetupthecoordinate
convertedtomotioninthepricedimension. system,sothevariationisirrelevantforourexamination.8 J.T.MANHIRE
φ . In Quadrant I, the phase displacement Asfascinatingastheimplicationsofthisap-
B
φ is always negatively directed (rotates coun- proach might be, there is an explanation be-
terclockwise) with the only exception being sidesthatofalingeringhiddendimensionthat
φ = φ =0. is just as mathematically legitimate; one that
B A
If we span all quadrants for each τ we see regards the imaginary elements of the com-
that the range of φ is {−π,π} from its zero plexplaneasameremathematicaltooltohelp
B
pointalongthe (cid:60)-axis,consistentwithEq. (2), us understand the reality we see, but not as
and the range of φ is {−π,π} from its zero a physical reality itself. Let’s examine an ap-
2 2
pointalongthe (cid:61)-axis. Again, φ isalways π proach that yields the same result as Eq. (4)
A 2
alongthe (cid:61)-axis. for an asset’s price displacement without ad-
Thephasedisplacementcanbeconsidereda mitting a lingering hidden dimension in our
functionalofthepricedisplacement,or φ[x(t)]. physicalreality.
Thissimplymeansthatthephasedisplacement So far we have only discussed ψ as the so-
isanumber,thevalueofwhichisentirelyde- lution for Eq. (1). Mathematically, there also
pendent on the price displacement, which is existsasolutionforEq. (1)inQuadrantII(up-
afunctionwithelapsedtimeasitsparameter. perleft)thatisthemirrorimageof ψ reﬂected
As we shall see later in our discussion of the aboutthe (cid:60)-axis:
action (which is also a functional of the price
displacement), the price derivative for which ψ∗ = R(sinφ−icosφ).
the functional derivative is always zero is an
Thisisthecomplexconjugateof ψ.
extremum.
Since ψ∗ is a mirror reﬂection of ψ, we can
Fromthiswecanexpressthecomplexnum-
assume both have the same phase displace-
ber in Eq. (2) in terms of the phase displace-
ment magnitude of φ. Therefore, we can con-
ment φ withthefollowing:
sider the price displacement x to be the one-
ψ = R(sinφ+icosφ). (3) dimensionalmedianbetween ψ and ψ∗ inthe
B
complexplane. Becausethedistributionofpla-
TherealsolutionforEq. (3)(thepricedisplace- nar area is symmetric between ψ and ψ∗, we
mentweactuallyobserve)becomes canexpressthismedianas
x = Rsinφ. (4) x = 1(ψ+ψ∗). (5)
2
Therealsolutionforthepricedisplacement
We can say the same for x in the negative di-
in Eq. (4) is typically a result of our solving rectionusing −ψ and −ψ∗.
Eq. (1)andignoringtheimaginarypartsofthe
Given our deﬁnitions of ψ and ψ∗ we see
complexsolutionψinEq. (3). Takenasaphys-
that
icaldescription,thisapproachimpliesthatwe ψ+ψ∗ =2Rsinφ.
onlyobserveonepartofamuchricherphysical
reality,theimaginarypartofwhichsomehow Notethattheimaginarytermsicosφ in ψ and
still lingers in existence but beyond our abil- −icosφinψ∗ cancelwhenadded. Substituting
ity to observe it. Such an approach certainly thissumintoEq. (5)werecoverEq. (4).
stirstheimaginationtoconceiveofa“hidden By thinking of the price displacement
dimension”thatexistsbeyondoursensesyet as the one-dimensional median of the two-
isstillresponsibleforthephenomenaweexpe- dimensional region between the wave func-
rienceinreal-worldﬁnancialmarkets. tion and its complex conjugate, we arrive atTHEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 9
the same solution using a mathematical con- superpositionofthingsthatcarrytheforcesof
trivance that cancels the imaginary terms in- buyersandsellerswitharesultingamplitude
steadofadmittingalingeringdimensionthat of ±R. Thisisconsistentwithourassumption
physicallyexistsbutwhichwesimplyignore. that some “carrying thing” is responsible for
Itisnotmerely“morecomplete”toregardthe transporting the net force generated by the
pricedisplacementthisway,it’snecessary. Sim- tradinginteractionsofbuyersandsellersthat
ply ignoring the imaginary parts deprives us ultimately effects a price change for an asset.
ofafullerunderstandingofhowthepricedis- Aswithmanythingsinthephysicalworld,the
placement,theprobabilitiesofthesedisplace- thingthatcarriestheforceinourtheoryisakin
ments,andtheactionrelatetooneanother. toawave,oratleastitsanalog.10
Becausewearedealingwithasinusoidwe Throughoutthispaperweareultimatelyin-
can deﬁne the average frequency ν in cycles terestedinthepricedisplacement x,whichwe
perunitofelapsedtimeandtheaveragephase knowisequivalentto xB giventhat xA canal-
displacement per unit of elapsed time from ways be considered zero. Yet, ψA cannot be
states A to B as ω,where considered zero since ψA = iR, so ψ (cid:54)= ψB.
Still,wewilluseψtodenoteψ fortheremain-
B
φ
ω = =2πν. (6) derofthispaperwiththeclearunderstanding
t
that when we use ψ hereafter we are really
We will return to these terms later in our dis- talking about the complex number ψ at state
cussionofprobabilitiesandourapproximation B andnotthechangeinthecomplexnumbers
fortheextremepricedisplacements ±R. fromstates A to B.
We now have the elements of our three- Looking at our solution for the price dis-
dimensionalhomogeneouscoordinatesystem: placementinEq. (4)wecanmaketworelated
elapsed time, displaced price, and displaced observations. The ﬁrst is that there exists a
phase,or(t,x,φ).Fromthesethreecoordinates uniquephasedisplacementmeasureφforeach
wecandetermineallrelevantdynamicsofthe possiblepricedisplacementoverperiod t. The
ﬁnancial market that occur over the period t. secondisthatthenetmovementinpriceover
Note that the price displacement is a func- period t issomemaximumabsolutemeasure
tion of elapsed time and the phase displace- multipliedbyafunctionthatoscillatesbetween
mentisafunctionalofthepricedisplacement. −1 and +1. In other words, xmin = −R and
This gives us the homogeneous coordinates xmax = +R.
(t : x(t) : φ[x(t)]),witheachcoordinatehaving Thishassigniﬁcantimplicationsforourthe-
someproportionalitytoaunitofelapsedtime, oryofmarketmechanicsasitsuggeststhereis
or somenetpricedisplacementmeasurebeyond
(cid:18) (cid:19)
t x φ
: : . whichanassetcannotgoforadeﬁnedperiod.
t t t
Theabsolutepricedisplacementcanbegreater
Since we can regard t = 1 with our unit than R foraperiodlessthan t (e.g., tn−j−tA
assumption, we can reduce this to a two- where j is a positive, non-zero integer); how-
dimensionalcoordinatesystemwithnolossin ever, it cannot be greater than R for t −t .
B A
generality. Thisgivesusthesimpliﬁedhomo- This means an asset’s net price movement is
geneouscoordinates(x : φ)thatbecomeequiv- constrainedforaspeciﬁedperiod,notbysome
alenttothe“speed”ofthemarket’smechanics
overeachunitofelapsedtime,or (x˙ : ω). 10Althoughitismoreaccuratetorefertotheseaswave-
likefunctions,forthesakeofbrevitywewillcallthemwave
Setupthisway,ψ = ψA+ψB isthecomplex functionsthroughout.10 J.T.MANHIRE
external regulation, but by the properties of Alternatively, the Lagrangian is often de-
theassetitself. Wewillcoverthismorefullyin ﬁnedasthedifferencebetweenthekineticterm
alatersection. K and the potential term V of a system, each
measured at t , since K expresses a property
(cid:101)
4. The Action Principle in terms of x˙(cid:101) and V in terms of x(cid:101). There-
fore, L = K −V .12 It is well known that
(cid:101) (cid:101)
Ournextendeavoristoexaminewhetherthe in any physical system the observable path
motionofanassetthroughpriceisconsistent of an object (the trajectory the object actually
with the principle of stationary action, mean- takes through conﬁguration space over time)
ing we will investigate whether the action of minimizesthisdifferential L overtime.13 This
the market system is stationary under small is where the term “principle of least action”
perturbations along its path from x at t to comesfrom.
A A
x at t ,atleasttoaﬁrstorderapproximation Still speaking analogously, recall from the
B B
[10][11]. third postulate that this theory posits that an
Wewouldberemissifwedidnotacknowl- asset contains none of its own “force” and,
edge that the discussion in this section of a therefore, none of its own “energy.” Any dis-
ﬁnancial market as a system with “energies” placement of the asset in price is a result of
(evenadiscussionbyanalogy)understandably workdoneontheasset,whichisequaltothe
appearsasaSamuelsoniannightmareforsome netexternalforceovertheamountofanydis-
readers[12]. Pleasekeepinmindthat,perour placement. Thetheoryfurtherholdsthatthere
ﬁrst postulate, we use these concepts analo- isonlyoneaggregatesourcethatgeneratesthis
gously but hold that the analogous concepts netexternalforceandintroducesittotheasset:
mighthelpusbetterunderstandthedynamics the net effect of buyers’ and sellers’ trading
ofthemarketmechanicsweobserve. interactions.
Wedonotmakethisexaminationforitsown From the previous sections we see that at
sake. We will use the calculated value of the each time slice τ the asset moves linearly in
market’sactiontoderiveamethodforapprox- price. Asappliedhere,theprincipleofstation-
imating the constraints of the system’s price ary action holds that for each elapsed time t
displacementforanytimeslicethatareacon- the “path” taken by an asset (i.e., the curve
sequenceofitsoscillatingmechanics. tracedoutintherelativeconﬁgurationspaceof
thepricedimension)betweentimes t and t
A B
istheoneforwhichtheactiondoesnotchange
A. TheActionandtheLagrangianGenerally
(i.e.,isstationary)undersmallchangesinthe
TheLagrangianisawayofdescribingaﬁnan-
relativeconﬁgurationoftheassetrelatedtothe
cial market as a function of the conditions at
relativepricedimension.
t (or any initial time for a slice τ) relating to
(cid:101) Sincethepricedimensionisourverticalco-
thepriceatthebeginningofthetimeslice(x )
(cid:101) ordinateaxis,wecangofurtherandstatethat
and the ﬁrst derivative of that price (x˙ ). It
(cid:101) such a path is a straight line in either the up
containsthecompleteinformationofboththe
ordowndirection,althoughunderrotationwe
system and the effects of forces acting upon
cangeneralizeitasthepositiveornegativedi-
thesystem.11
12Note that the kinetic term is simply the integral of
11DiracwouldmostlikelyconsidertheLagrangiannot theleft-handsideofEq.(1)andthepotentialtermisthe
asafunctionoftheasset’sinitialcoordinatesanditsﬁrst negativeintegraloftheright-handside,bothwithrespect
derivative,butinsteadasafunctionoftheasset’spriceat topricedisplacement.
timet(cid:101)anditspriceattimet(cid:101)+1,i.e.,asendpoints[13]. 13ThisisshownbytheEuler-Lagrangeequation.THEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 11
rection. Thisisconsistentwiththeoscillating Dirac’sapproach[13]and,later,Feynman’sdef-
dynamicexpressedearlier. inition [14]. Observe, however, that the price
Itisimportanttonotethisisonlyconsistent displacementisnotonlyaresultofthephase
withobservedmarketmechanicswhen t = τ; displacement of ψ. It is also a result of the
thatis,theassetmovesstrictlyupordownin phasedisplacementbelongingtothecomplex
priceonlyatlocaltimeslices. Whatis“local?” conjugateof ψ∗,whichwe’lldenotehereas φ∗
Well,thatdependsonwhatmeasurewewishto to avoid confusion.15 In fact, both φ and φ∗
givenandourdeﬁnitionofatemporalinterval contribute in equal measure to x since, as we
unit. showedearlier,acomplexnumberanditscom-
plexconjugatesharethesame (cid:60)-axisvalue x ,
Thoughtofanotherway,theaction—again, B
whichinourhomogeneouscoordinatesystem
thetimeintegraloftheLagrangian—overany
is equivalent to the price displacement x. So
region of our price-time coordinate system
if the Lagrangian for each time slice τ makes
must be stationary for any small changes in
some contribution to the total price displace-
the coordinates in that region. If we keep di-
ment x measured between t and t so does
vidingtheregionsuntilwegettoacollection A B
twicethephasedisplacementforthattimeslice,
of time slices, we observe this stationary ac-
whichwe’lldenoteasafunctionaloftheprice
tion as the binary “up-down” oscillations of
displacementforthatinterval τ,or2φ[x(τ)].
typicalmarketmechanicsateachtimeslice τ,
whichagainistheelapsedtimefromt(cid:101) tot(cid:101)+1. SincethelocalelementsofEq. (7)sumtothe
Therefore,foreachtimesliceinourprice-time totaltimeintegraloftheLagrangianbetween
coordinate system there exists a Lagrangian tA and tB, and therefore the total action, we
that is a function of its coordinates and their canstatethateachelement (cid:82)t(cid:101)+1L dt ≡ dS (if
t(cid:101)
ﬁrstderivativeswithrespecttotime. n is sufﬁciently large) and that each element
isminimizedundertheprincipleofstationary
Does this mean we can’t determine the ac-
tionbetween t and t whentheelapsedtime action.
A B
isnotlocal? No,infact,quitetheopposite. It
simply means we must ﬁrst examine the spe-
B. MeasuringtheAction
ciﬁcdynamicsateachslice τ between t and
A
tB andthensumoverallperiodsτ toﬁndmea- Webeginmeasuringtheactionbyexamining
surable results that match observed data. In the potential and kinetic terms of the system.
otherwords,theactionS fromtA totB isequal Anypositively-directedforcecanbeexpressed
tothefollowingseriesoftimeslices: as the negative spatial derivative of the sys-
tem’s potential. Thus, by analogy, we can ex-
(cid:90) tB (cid:90) t1 (cid:90) t2 (cid:90) tn
Ldt = Ldt+ Ldt+···+ Ldt, pressthenegatively-directedforce kx fromEq.
tA t0 t1 tn−1 (1) as the positive price derivative of the po-
(7)
tential (or its analog) of the system we call
where τ(cid:101) = t(cid:101)+1−t(cid:101) just as on a larger scale
a ﬁnancial market. This potential V then be-
weﬁnd t = t −t .14
B A
comes
The Lagrangian over each time slice τ(cid:101) in V = 1kx2. (8)
ourprice-timecoordinatesystemmakessome 2
contributiontothetotalpricedisplacement x
measuredbetweent andt . Thisissimilarto 15Technically,thecomplexwavefunctionψhasthecon-
A B jugateψ∗andbothhaveidenticalphasedisplacementsφ,
althoughtheyareoppositelydirected;however,it’seasier
14Ofcourse,wecanalwayssetttoτ(cid:101),tBtot(cid:101)+1,andtA totalkaboutthephasedisplacementsattributedtoeach
tot(cid:101)ifwechoose. bydenotingthem,forthemoment,asφandφ∗.12 J.T.MANHIRE
Note that the potential term of the asset is themovementoftheassetthroughthepricedi-
simplythepriceintegraloftheright-handside mension. Inotherwords,W =V(cid:101) = K(cid:101)+1. For
of Eq. (1). The kinetic term should then be this to be true, V(cid:101)+1 and K(cid:101) must equal zero,
thepriceintegraloftheleft-handside,which withV andK“tradingoff”measuresovereach
becomes elapsedperiodbutthesumofV and K always
1
K = mx˙2. (9) equalingW forthattimeslice.
2
Sotheanswertothequestion,“Whatisthe
Atthispointweshouldalreadybegintosus- potentialofthesystem?” dependsentirelyon
pectanequivalencebetweenthepotentialand whenweaskthequestionovertheelapsedtime
kinetictermsinﬁnancialmarketssincebothare slice τ.Forthisreason,itbecomesimpossible
resultsofpriceintegralsofthebalanceofthe to express the potential and kinetic terms in
netinteractionofbuyersandsellersexpressed any way except as averages over τ. The only
inEq. (1). Still,wewilldivemoredeeplyinto exceptionsareexpressionsofthepotentialand
thisoverthecomingpagesinordertobesure. kinetictermsattheendpointst(cid:101)andt(cid:101)+1ofthe
The next question becomes, “What is the generic slice τ . Since K = 0, the Lagrangian
(cid:101) (cid:101)
measure of this action, and by extension, the becomes
measure of the phase displacement?” We at-
tempt to answer this by again examining the L = K(cid:101)−V(cid:101) =0−V(cid:101) = −V(cid:101).
dynamicsateachtimeslice.
We’vemadeabitofprogress. Wenowknow
Ateachsliceτthenetexternalforcecausesa
that the Lagrangian is the negative initial po-
tinyamountofworktobedonewithrespectto
tentialgeneratedbytheinteractionsofbuyers
atinydisplacementinprice, especiallywhen
n is very large, or F(τ ) = dW . To ﬁgure and sellers for any time slice τ(cid:101). But what is
(cid:101) dx(τ(cid:101)) themeasureofthispotential? Weknowitmust
outthetotalamountofworkdoneontheasset
be the same as the average measure of work,
over the period we take the price integral of
thenetexternalforce,orW = 1Fx. which is equal to 12Fx. We also know from
2 Newton’ssecondlawthat F = mx¨ = mx since
TheworkW isequivalenttothetotalpoten- t2
x¨ = x/t2 whentakenasanaverage. Therefore,
tial necessary to be introduced into the asset
from the net interactions of buyers and sell- 1 mx mx2
Fx = x = .
ers in order to make the asset move in price. 2 2t2 2t2
Sincetheassetneitherhasnorstoresanyofits
But this is the same as the measure of the
own“energy,”anypotentialusedtomovethe
averagekinetictermofasystemsincetheav-
assetthroughthepricedimensionmustcome
erage x˙ is always x/t. It seems, therefore,
fromthenetpotentialintroducedintotheasset
that K = V . Since K implies that
bytheseexternalinteractions. Inotherwords, max max max
V = 0, V implies that K = 0, and
the kinetic term K resulting from any price min max min
V ≡V ,wecanconcludethat
displacementmustcomefromanexternalpo- (cid:101) max
tential V. This means the ﬁnal kinetic term
kx2 mx2
must equal the initial potential as measured V(cid:101) = 2 = 2t2
overanyelapsedperiod.
Consequently, we can hold that the total as an average measure for t = τ(cid:101).16 Conse-
work performed on the asset equals the to- quently, wecanexpresstheLagrangianofan
talpotentialinitiallyintroducedintotheasset.
16There are some who might argue that if we are ex-
Thisisalsoequaltotheﬁnalkinetictermfrom pressingtheaveragekinetictermwhereτissmallwemustTHEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 13
assetas termovertheperiod τ asanaverage,weget
(cid:101)
mx2
L = −V = − .
(cid:101) 2t2 (cid:16)mx(cid:17)(cid:16)x(cid:17) mx2
S = = ,
2 t 2t
Because the action is deﬁned as the time
integraloftheLagrangian,wecanexpressthe whichisthesamevaluewederivedoriginally.
actionas Recallthesolutionfortheasset’spricepath
for any elapsed period is x(t) = 1/2(ψ+ψ∗).
(cid:90) tB mx2 mx2
S = − dt = . (10) Wenextwanttoknowiftheactionalongthis
tA 2t2 2t path x(t) is stationary, or more speciﬁcally,
minimized.
Wecanalsoﬁndthemeasureoftheactionby
Assumex(t)istheactualpaththeassettakes
calculatingitfromthetheoreticalLagrangian.
throughthepricedimensionfromt tot ,and
Expressedthisway,theactionbecomes A B
ξ(t) issomearbitrarypathitcantakebetween
S = m (cid:18)(cid:90) tB x˙2− k x2 dt(cid:19). the two temporal endpoints. We’ll introduce
2 tA m thetermη(t)assomevariationfromtheactual
path x(t), where η(t) := η(t ) = η(t ) = 0.
A B
Integratingbypartsgivesusthefollowingre-
Wecanthendeﬁnethearbitrarypathasξ(t) :=
latedtothekineticterm:
x(t)+η(t).
(cid:90) tB x˙2 dt = (cid:90) tB x˙x˙ dt = |xx˙|tB . SincetheLagrangianisquadraticin x and x˙,
tA tA tA theactionforthearbitrarypath ξ(t) becomes
Since x¨ = −kx,weget S(ξ) = S(x+η) = S(x)+S(η),
m
(cid:90) tB x˙2 dt = |xx˙|tB + k (cid:90) tB xx dt. whichisvalidforanoscillatingsystem. There-
tA tA m tA fore, S >0when η(tA) = η(tB) =0.
The action of the arbitrary system then be-
Theactionthenbecomes
comes
S = m2 (cid:20)|xx˙|ttBA + mk (cid:90)tAtB xx dt− mk (cid:90)tAtB xx dt(cid:21), S(x)+S(η)+m (cid:18)(cid:90) tB x˙η˙ dt− k (cid:90) tB xη dt(cid:19).
2 tA m tA
whichsimpliﬁesto
Ifwerewritethetermx˙η˙ intermsofη,weﬁnd
S = m |xx˙|tB = m(x x˙ −x x˙ ). thattheintegratedtermsdisappearsinceη =0.
2 tA 2 B B A A Therefore, S(η) = 0 meets the condition that
Becauseweset xA =0inourhomogeneousco- S >0when η(tA) = η(tB) =0.
ordinatesystem,the x termsdisappear. Fur- We can also deﬁne the action as stationary
A
ther,becausewecanonlytalkaboutthekinetic if there is no change in S in the ﬁrst approx-
imation. In general, if we have a minimum
quantity of a function then any perturbation
dosoas m(cid:18)x(cid:101)+1−x(cid:101) · x(cid:101)−x(cid:101)−1(cid:19) awayfromthatminimumintheﬁrstorderwill
2 t(cid:101)+1−t(cid:101) t(cid:101)−t(cid:101)−1 onlyhaveadeviationinthesecondorder. At
notas m·(cid:0)x(cid:1)2ifthemeanvalueofthesquareoftheprice anyotherplacebesidestheminimumasmall
2 t
displacementisdtinsteadofdt2.Whilethisexceptionis perturbationwillshowupintheﬁrstorder,but
noted,thenotationusedinthispaperseemsadequatefor
at the minimum any small perturbation will
purposesofexaminingthepricedisplacementofﬁnancial
markets. makenodifferenceintheﬁrstapproximation.14 J.T.MANHIRE
We can examine this by looking at the ac- absolutevalueofthephasedisplacementisin
tion as a series. The action S = mx2 can be therange [0,π].Itisthesameforanynegative
2t 2
expressedastheinﬁniteseries price displacement. Therefore, if solutions to
|φ| include these two extremes when the par-
∞
∑ 1(t−1)n(cid:104)(−1)nmx2(cid:105) (11) tialderivativeoftheactionwithrespecttothe
2
n=0 phase displacement is equal to zero, we can
reasonablyassumetheactionisstationaryfor
for|1−t| =0,whichiswhatwe’relookingfor
allvaluesofthepricedisplacement |x|.
since we want the action to be stationary for
Recall from Eq. (4) that x = Rsinφ. Thus,
anyunitofelapsedtime. Becauseweonlyneed
we can set the partial derivative of the action
tocalculatethevaluetotheﬁrstapproximation
with respect tothe phase displacement equal
to judge if the action is stationary we can re-
tozerowiththeexpression
strictthisseriesfrom n ∈ {0,∞} to n ∈ {0,1}.
Thisgivesus ∂ (cid:18)m(Rsinφ)2(cid:19)
=0. (13)
∂φ 2t
1 (cid:104) (cid:105) 1 (cid:104) (cid:105)
(t−1)0 (−1)0mx2 + (t−1)1 (−1)1mx2 ,
2 2
Thisbecomes
whichbecomes mR2sinφcosφ
=0, (14)
1 (cid:104) (cid:105) 1 (cid:104) (cid:105) t
(1) (1)mx2 + (t−1) (−1)mx2 .
2 2
which generates two possible solutions: gπ
Thisreducesto andgπ+ π,wheregisanintegerscalar. We’re
2
interestedinsolutionsat g =0sinceallother
mx2
(2−t). (12) solutionsaresimplypositiveornegativeinte-
2
germultiples. Thisleavesuswiththesolutions
Note that at t = 1 this equation is equivalent
π
to Eq. (10). Thus, we see that δS = 0; the |φ| =0 and |φ| = , (15)
2
action remains stationary to the ﬁrst approxi-
mation for any temporal unit. Therefore, we whicharetheextremesoftheabsolutevalueof
can conclude the differential represented by eachphasedisplacementwejustmentioned.
theLagrangianover t isminimized. Accordingly, we can conclude that all pos-
sible paths for the price displacement x will
From Eq. (10) we see that the action is
result in a stationary action to a ﬁrst order
parabolic with regards to the price displace-
approximation. Therefore, the mechanics of
ment. Therefore,wecanlookforsolutionsfor
ﬁnancial markets viewed through the lens of
thepricedisplacementthatmaintaintheaction
ourhomogeneouscoordinatesystemconform
as stationary. One way to do this is to take
totheprincipleofleastactionforallpossible
thepartialderivativeoftheactionwithrespect
pricepaths.
to the price displacement and ﬁnd solutions
whenthepartialderivativeiszero. Ourhopeis
eriving robabilities
5. D P
thattheactionremainsstationaryforallpossi-
blevaluesofthepricedisplacement,meaning
Wenowunderstandthatthereexistsaunique
fromzeroto |R|.
complexnumber ψ anditscomplexconjugate
For any positive price displacement on the ψ∗ for every discrete price displacement x in
complex plane ranging from zero to |R| the the inclusive range x ∈ [−R,R]. We can ex-THEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 15
press ψ asanexponentialfunctionof φ inthe methodfordoingthisbydeﬁningmultiplere-
form gionsandthensplittingthemup,butwecan
ψ =iexp[−iφ]. (16) also view this as a basic probability problem.
Byasking,“Whatistheprobabilityofxhaving
Thisbecomesaprobability(Gaussian)function
the speciﬁc value X?,” we’re essentially ask-
bysimplysquaringtheexponent
ing,“Whatistheprobabilityofﬁndingboth ψ
(cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:104) (cid:105) and ψ∗ eachwithspeciﬁcphasedisplacement
iexp (−iφ)2 =iexp −φ2 (17)
values φ = Φ where Φ is the unique phase
displacement for X?” Formally, this becomes
and it becomes normalized by dividing the
Pr(ψ∩ψ∗).Weknowhowtosolvethissinceit
Gaussianbythesumofallpossiblevaluesof
iswellknownthat
theGaussian
iexp(cid:2)−φ2(cid:3) Pr(ψ∩ψ∗) =Pr(ψ)·Pr(ψ∗)
Pr(ψ) = (cid:82)∞ = Qψ e−φ2, (18)
i exp[−φ2] dφ
−∞ if ψ and ψ∗ are independent events, which
where Q isthecorrespondingnormalization they are since they are unique and separate
ψ
constant for ψ in terms of the phase displace- from each other. Because this is the same as
mentwiththevalue theprobabilityofaspeciﬁcpricedisplacement
since the phase displacements are functions
1
Qψ = √ . (19) (more properly functionals) of the the price
π
displacement,itfollowsthat
WeperformasimilaroperationtogetPr(ψ∗).
Pr(x) =Pr(ψ)·Pr(ψ∗).
Wealsounderstandfromourdiscussionof
theLagrangianinEq. (7)thatforeachunique BecausePr(ψ) ≡Pr(ψ∗),thisgivesus
price displacement x there exist two unique
phasedisplacements φ;oneinQuadrantIand Pr(x) =Pr(ψ)2. (20)
another in Quadrant II of the complex plane
for positive price displacements, and one in
Quadrant III and another in Quadrant IV for Note that we are simply adding the phase
negativepricedisplacements. displacements together. Since the phase dis-
In other words, for any +x there exist 2|φ| placements are in exponential forms we add
andthesameforany−x.Ifwedeﬁnetheabso- bymultiplyingthetwoexponentialfunctions,
luterangeofeach |φ| tobe [0,π] aswedidat whichinthiscaseisequivalenttosquaringthe
2
originalexponentialfunctionbecausePr(ψ) ≡
theendof§4thenforanyabsolutepricedis-
placement |x| thereexist4|φ| since |x| ≡ ±x. Pr(ψ∗). This is because the product of a se-
ries of exponential functions is equal to the
Similarly, we ﬁnd that the probability of
exponentialfunctionofthesumofaseriesof
the unique price displacement x occurring is
exponents,or
a function of both ψ and ψ∗. Since x results
fromthephasedisplacementsassociatedwith (cid:32) (cid:33)
∏ (cid:0) (cid:1) ∑
ψandthephasedisplacementsassociatedwith exp aj =exp aj .
ψ∗,wemustaddthe φ-termsforbothsidesto j j
ﬁnd the probability of a speciﬁc value X, or
Pr(x = X). Determiningtheprobabilityofthepricedis-
Feynman[14]givesamuchmoreelaborate placementhavingthevalue X intermsofthe16 J.T.MANHIRE
actionforeachelapsedperiodthenbecomes 2πν(Φ),where ν(Φ) istheaveragefrequency
atthespeciﬁcphasedisplacementvalueΦ.We
(cid:32) (cid:33)2
iexp[−S] (cid:16) (cid:17)2 canexpressthisas
(cid:82)∞ = Qx e−S (21)
i exp[−S] dx
−∞ Pr(|φ| ≥ Φ) ≡Pr(|φ| ≥2πν(Φ)). (23)
where Q isthecorrespondingnormalization
x
constantforthepricedisplacementintermsof We can also express this equation using the
theactionwiththevalue Gausscomplementaryerrorfunctionas
(cid:114) m erfc(Φ) ≡erfc(2πν(Φ)), (24)
Q = . (22)
x
2πt
whichimplies
This approach implies that the total proba-
bility measure of the absolute price displace- Φ =2πν(Φ) (25)
ment |x| for any region of relative conﬁgura-
tionspacewithboundarycoordinates (|x|,|φ|) or
Φ
istheproductoftwoidenticallysplitregionsof ν(Φ) = . (26)
2π
three-dimensionalrelativeconﬁgurationspace
with elapsed time t = 1. This is because the Let’s next try to express the probability of
probabilities as we’ve constructed them are the absolute price displacement |x| being at
exponentialfunctionsrelatingtotheabsolute leastthevalue|X|intermsoftheactionS.We
phasedisplacement |φ|. Theentireprobability knowthevalueoftheactionfromEq. (10). To
measureisthecombinationoftwoevenly-split ﬁnd the normalized probability of |x| ≥ |X|
regionswithrespectto |ψ| and |ψ∗| alongthe in terms of the action we integrate the action
(cid:60)-axisofourhomogeneouscoordinatesystem as an exponent from |X| to inﬁnity. We then
foreachtimeslice τ. normalizetheresultbydividingbytheintegral
Inshort,wemustsquarethetraditionalprob- ofthesamefromzerotoinﬁnity. Thisgivesus
abilityfunctionfor |ψ| effectivelydoublingthe
absolute phase displacement since there are (cid:82)|∞X|e−Sdx (cid:16)√ (cid:17)
(cid:82)∞ =erfc S . (27)
twopossiblewaysinthecomplexplanewecan e−Sdx
0
get the exact same price displacements for x,
namely, ψ and ψ∗. The same is true for −x But recall that this is only one-half of the me-
with−ψand−ψ∗. Thisapproachdoesnotvio- chanics since it represents the probability in
termsof |ψ| only. Tocompletethepicture,we
latetheprincipleofunitaritysinceprobability
measuresremainbetweenzeroandunity.17 must add the |ψ∗| half, thereby squaring the
entirequotient. Thisresultsin
Recallourexpressionsofthefrequenciesin
Eq. (6)andouruseofanelapsedtimeunit. The (cid:16)√ (cid:17)2
Pr(|x| ≥ |X|) =erfc S . (28)
probabilityofthephasedisplacementbeingat
leastsomevalue Φ isequivalenttotheproba-
Thisimplies
bilityofthephasedisplacementbeingatleast
17Onemightarguethatthisapproachassumesthatprice (cid:18) (cid:114)m(cid:19)2
displacementsinthepositiveandnegativedirectionsare Pr(|x| ≥ |X|) =erfc |X| (29)
2t
symmetric, whichinmostcasestheyarenot. However,
ifweonlymeasuretheprobabilitiesoftheabsoluteprice
displacementsandthecorrespondingabsolutephasedis- from(10).
placements, this asymmetry should not matter for our
purposes. Sincethereexist4|φ|forany|x|,wecanstateTHEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 17
furtherthat an elapsed period and the inertial coefﬁcient
unique to each asset, or φ[x(t),m]. So, too, is
Pr(|x| ≥ |X|) =erfc(4Φ)2 =erfc(8πν(Φ))2. theactionsuchafunctional,whichwealready
(30) surmisedfromEq. (10).
Combiningtheseequationsgivesus
Regardedthisway,theactionofaﬁnancial
market’s one-dimensional (linear) price path
(cid:18) (cid:114) (cid:19)2
m
erfc |X| =erfc(8πν(Φ))2. (31) becomes the square of an analogous notion
2t
oftwo-dimensional(circular)rotationalspeed
in the complex plane. We’ll denote this two-
Thisimpliesthegeneralexpression
dimensionalquantityas u.Therefore,wecon-
(cid:114)
m cludethat
|X| =8πν(Φ). (32)
2t S = u2. (39)
If|X| = |R|then|Φ| = π.FromEq. (26)we Wewillnextapplythesetheoreticalexpres-
2
sionstohistoricaldatafromvariousﬁnancial
seethat
(cid:16)π(cid:17) 1 markets and see to what extent the historical
ν = . (33)
2 4 andtheoreticalresultsareconsistent.
SubstitutingthisintoEq. (32)weget
(cid:114)m (cid:16)π(cid:17) (cid:18)1(cid:19) 6. Testing the Theory
|R| =8πν =8π =2π. (34)
2t 2 4
Now that we’ve laid the theoretical ground-
This gives us a ﬁnal expression for the mea- work, let’s see if the theory is, at a minimum,
sureoftheextremepricedisplacementforany consistent with certain historical asset prices.
ﬁnancialmarketas Thefollowingdescribesoursimplewaytotest
(cid:114) for conformity with historical data, although
8t
|R| = π , (35) Iamcertainthereareotherswithmuchmore
m
robustmethodstotestthis.
or,since t =1, The ﬁrst part is really the set up where we
comparetheoreticalprobabilitycalculationsfor
8π2
R2 = . (36) theabsolutepricedisplacementbeingatleast
m
itshistoricalvalueforeachperiodagainstthe
relative frequency of that minimum displace-
If we then substitute this value into the
ment occurring over an extended period. If
square of our original solution for the price
theprobabilitieshaveanacceptablecorrelation
displacementinEq. (4)weﬁndthat
value (say, r2 > 0.99) it suggests the theory
8π2 mightnotbeincorrect(whichisquitedifferent,
x2 = sin2φ. (37)
m of course, from suggesting the theory might
be correct). This ﬁrst part will also allow us
Rearranged,wecanexpressthepricedisplace-
toapproximateanaverageinertialcoefﬁcient
mentinEq. (4)intheformoftheaction
foreachindividualmarketthatwewillusefor
S = (2πsinφ)2. (38) ourprimarytest.
The second part of the test for conformity
This implies the phase displacement is both is to predict the extreme price displacements
a functional of the price displacement over forindividualﬁnancialmarketsfromdatacol-18 J.T.MANHIRE
lectedwellinadvanceof,sometimesdecades Thethirdstepistocodethedatawitheither
before,anhistorical“crash”andseeifthepre- a “0” or “1.” A code of 0 means the value of
dicted extreme is violated by the crash many |x| for a particular week w is less than some
years later. If it is not violated, the results arbitrary value |X|. A code of 1 means the
suggest two things: that (1) again, the theory valueof |x| isgreaterthanorequalto |X|.We
might not be incorrect; and (2) each ﬁnancial canthentaketheaverageofallthe0’sand1’s
markethasaninertialcoefﬁcient(oritsanalog) for each |X| and call it the relative frequency
thatisaninternalpropertyofthatasset. ofthemarketmeetingthecondition |x| ≥ |X|.
Limited by time and access to free market Wedenotethisrelativefrequencyfunction ρ.
dataextendingbackmultipledecades,wetest The fourth step is to approximate the aver-
hereonlyafewﬁnancialmarketsfortheunit agevalueoftheinertialcoefﬁcient m foreach
period t = 1 trading week. We use represen- asset,whichwedenoteasmˆ.Wedothisbyem-
tativestockindicesfromAmerican,European, ploying Eq. (29), performing some algebraic
and Asian exchanges, a commodity futures manipulation, and concluding that the value
contract,aforeigncurrencyexchangepair,and of m foraspeciﬁcweek w is
a single publicly-traded company. Each of
thesehassufﬁcienttradingvolumesandfreely (cid:32)erfc−1((cid:112)ρ(|x| ≥ |X|)(cid:33)2
m =2t (40)
accessiblehistoricaldatareachingbackintoat w |x|w
leastthe1990sandsomeintotheearly1970s.
recalling, of course, that t = 1 trading week.
Theapproximationoftheaveragevalueofthe
A. ProbabilitiesandInertialCoefﬁcients
inertialcoefﬁcientforamarketthenbecomes
Theﬁrststepinthistestistoﬁndweeklyhis- the value of mˆ that yields the highest coefﬁ-
toricalpricedatafortheﬁnancialmarketswe cientofdeterminationvaluer2 forthedepen-
wishtoexamine. Thefollowingaretheweekly dent variable Pr(|x| ≥ |X|) and the indepen-
data that are freely available for each market dentvariable ρ(|x| ≥ |X|) where |X| = |x|w.
fromthedatelistedtothepresent:18 The following are the mˆ and r2 values for
eachassetusingthismethodsampledfromthe
• S&P500(U.S.): 15June1980 ﬁrst 100 weeks of the data set with the dates
• DowJones30(U.S.): 10February1985 listed previously (e.g., the S&P 500 sample is
• NASDAQ100(U.S.): 15June1980 fromthebeginningoftheweekstarting15June
• DAX(Germany): 03January1988 1980 to the end of the week starting 16 May
• Nikkei225(Japan): 15January1984 1982):
• WIG20(Poland): 24April1994
• S&P500: mˆ =977.73;r2 =0.9992
• GoldFutures: 27January1980
• DowJones30: mˆ =982.21;r2 =0.9997
• USD/JPY:10January1971
• NASDAQ100: mˆ =683.00;r2 =0.9988
• Johnson&Johnson(JNJ):23March1980
• DAX: mˆ =504.66;r2 =0.9998
The second step is to calculate the change • Nikkei225: mˆ =474.14;r2 =0.9990
inpricefromthepreviousweek’sclosetothe • WIG20: mˆ =355.92;r2 =0.9988
current week’s close (x −x ). We can then • GoldFutures: mˆ =820.35;r2 =0.9994
B A
calculatetheabsolutepricedisplacementratio • USD/JPY: mˆ =2513.76;r2 =0.9977
using |x| = |x /x −1| foreachweek. • JNJ: mˆ =511.80;r2 =0.9995
B A
18Source:www.investing.com. Although we calculate the values of mˆ forTHEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 19
each market, the fact that the coefﬁcient of • Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 1252.72
determinationissohighformostsamplessug- • IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 18years
gests that our method of calculation is very
closetoaccurate. Nikkei225(N225)
• Datafrom: 1984-1986
B. ExtremePriceDisplacements
• CrashWeek: 11October1987
Therealtestforconformityofthetheorywith • Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 6732.38
historicaldataistothenusethevalueof µˆ in • Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 3068.00
ordertopredicttheextremevaluesfor |x| for • IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 1year
anyoneweek. Thistestrequiresthepostulates
and assertions of this theory be accurate. If
WIG20(WIG20)
theresultsareconsistent,itsuggeststhisview
of ﬁnancial markets through the lens of our • Datafrom: 1994-1996
homogeneous coordinate system may be of • CrashWeek: 05October2008
some value in future examinations of market • Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 1107.86
mechanics. • Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 360.54
• IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 12years
S&P500(SPX)
• Datafrom: 1980-1982 GoldFutures(GC)
• CrashWeek: 05October2008
• Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 312.37 • Datafrom: 1980-1982
• Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 200.01 • CrashWeek: 18September2011
• IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 26years • Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 562.18
• Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 174.60
• IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 29years
Dow30(DJI)
• Datafrom: 1985-1987 U.S.DollarJapaneseYen(USD/JPY)
• CrashWeek: 05October2008
• Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 2927.51 • Datafrom: 1971-1973
• Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 1874.19 • CrashWeek: 4October1998
• IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 21years • Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 24.02
• Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 18.90
NASDAQ100(NDX) • IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 15years
• Datafrom: 1980-1982
Johnson&Johnson(JNJ)
• CrashWeek: 09April2000
• Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 1511.81 • Datafrom: 1980-1982
• Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 1125.16 • CrashWeek: 05October2008
• IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 18years • Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 25.99
• Actual |x| forCrashWeek: 10.31
DAX(GDAXI) • IntervalfromPred. toCrash: ≈ 26years
• Datafrom: 1988-1990 Note that in all cases the data used to ap-
• CrashWeek: 05October2008 proximatetheextremevalueofamarketcrash
• Predicted |R| forCrashWeek: 2292.98 wasfromyearsandsometimesdecadesprior20 J.T.MANHIRE
tothecrashitself. Thisimpliesthateachmar- dataforthoseperiods.
ketmighthaveitsownuniquepropertiesthat What are some of the implications of this
affecttheprobabilityofitspricedisplacement theoryandthepreliminaryresultswe’veseen?
anditspricedisplacementextremes. Theﬁrstisthatassetpricedisplacementsmight
We call the property mˆ an “inertial coefﬁ- complywithcertainphysicallaws. Weshowed
cient” by analogy only, but it appears to act heretheoretically,andthehistoricaldatadonot
muchthesamewayanobject’smasswouldin contradicttheconclusion,thatassetpricedis-
thephysicalworld. Anassetwitharelatively placementsareperhapsconstrainedbyextreme
high inertial coefﬁcient is less likely to move positive and negative values beyond which
asfarinpriceasanassetwitharelativelylow wheycannotgoforspeciﬁedintervalsoftime.
inertialcoefﬁcient. Thismarketpropertyis,at Mightthistheoreticaldiscoveryactasasort
aminimum,consistentwithcertainbehaviors of“BlackSwan”predictor[15],atleastinmag-
ofobjectsweexperienceinthephysicalworld. nitude? While there is nothing in this theory
thatwouldtelluswhenalow-probabilityevent
onclusions wouldoccursuchasthemarketcrashduring
7. C
theweekof5October2008,thetheorydidac-
Asset prices move either up or down during curatelypredictthemagnitudeoftheconstraint
some period of elapsed time. This up-and- ofthepricedisplacementforanytradingweek,
down motion, by deﬁnition, is linear for the including the ﬁrst week of the October 2008
speciﬁedperiod. Linearmotioninonedimen- crash.
sion, in this case the dimension of price, is Anotherwayforresearcherstotestthisthe-
the result we would expect if the asset’s me- oryistolookatthecorrelationbetweenprice
chanicscomplywiththeprincipleofstationary displacementsandthenettradingvolumefor
action. Yet, linear motion in one dimension appropriate samples of periods t. If one ex-
is also achievable through circular motion in aminesthecorrelationbetweenthetotaltrad-
two dimensions. If the single dimension we ingvolumeandthepricedisplacementforthe
observe is “real” and the unobserved second sampleoneshouldﬁndlittletonocorrelation.
dimension “imaginary,” then circular motion There should be a sense of randomness. Yet,
in the complex plane can explain the observ- if one examines the net trading volume (i.e.,
ablelinearmotionofassetsthroughtheprice thevolumeattributedto α lessthevolumeat-
dimension. tributed to β) one should ﬁnd a fairly strong
Given this construct, the phase displace- correlation. Your author’s guess is that the
ment of the complex wave function and the strongestcorrelationwillbenonlinear.
phase displacement of its complex conjugate Hopefully this theory also inspires a bet-
are equally likely to produce an observable terunderstandingofmarketmechanicderiva-
price displacement. The square of the wave’s tives,especiallyassetandoptionspricingthe-
phasedisplacementisthenresponsibleforany ory. While this paper does not explore these
observable linear motion, and therefore, the areas it seems only natural that other work
stationaryaction. Asaresult,weholdthatthe speciﬁcallyexaminingassetandoptionspric-
squareofafunctionofthephasedisplacement ing might beneﬁt from this different point of
is equal to the action of the asset, or S = u2. view.
Applying the action principle to deﬁned pe- Lastly, even though these results seem
riodsproducespricedisplacementresultsfor promising,weshouldrememberthatthemenu
assetsthatareconsistentwithhistoricalprice isnotthemealandthemapisnottheterrain.THEACTIONPRINCIPLEINMARKETMECHANICS 21
Simplybecausetheresultsofemployingsuch [6] R.N.Mantegna,H.E.Stanley,AnIntroduction
amodelsuggestthatﬁnancialmarketsmight toEconophysics: CorrelationsandComplexity
comply with certain physical laws assumed inFinance,CambridgeUniv.Press,2000.
in the model does not mean that this is an [7] E.P.Wigner,SymmetriesandReﬂections,Univ.
exact explanation of phenomena we witness ofIndianaPress,Bloomington,1967.
in everyday market mechanics; that is, these [8] J.L.McCauley,ResponsetoWorryingTrends
verywellmightnotbethe“actualdescriptions inEconophysics,PhysicaA371(2006)601-609.
of the forces and interactions at hand [16].”
[9] R. Casse, Projective Geometry: An Introduc-
Furthermore, this theory might only explain
tion,NewYork,OxfordUniversityPress,2006.
macro-market movements and might not be
[10] W. R. Hamilton, First Essay On a General
asapplicabletoallindividualassets. It’spos-
MethodinDynamics,Phil.Trans.RoyalSoc’y
sible that not all individual ﬁnancial markets
(1835)95.
havethesamemechanicalpatterns. Again,fur-
[11] W. R. Hamilton, Second Essay On a General
ther research is need to ﬁnd the limits of this
MethodinDynamics,Phil.Trans.RoyalSoc’y
theory’sapplication.
(1835)247.
Isincerely appreciatethehelp, review, and
[12] P.A.Samuelson,MaximumPrinciplesinAna-
advice of my dear friend Joseph R. Hanley,
lyticalEconomics,in: A.Lindbeck(Ed.),Nobel
myfatherDr. JohnT.Manhire,andProfessors
Lectures, Economics 1969-1980, World Scien-
JamesMcGrath,LisaRich,SaurabhVishnubkat,
tiﬁcPublishingCo.,Singapore,1992,p.68.
andNunoGaroupaatTexasA&M.Ialsowish
to thank Andrew P. Morriss for our catalytic [13] P. A. M. Dirac, The Lagrangian in Quantum
discussionsduringtheearlystagesofthiswork Mechanics,Physik.ZeitschriftderSowjetunion
andhiscontinuedsupportthereafter. Mostof 3(1933)64.
all, I thank (and apologize to) my wife, Ann,
[14] R.P.Feynman,Space-TimeApproachtoNon-
andourninechildrenwhohaveenduredinor-
Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, Rev. Mod.
dinateneglectduringtheperiodthisproblem
Phys.20(1948)367.
hasconsumedtheirhusbandandfather.
[15] N.N.Taleb,TheBlackSwan: TheImpactofthe
CollegeStation,Texas. jmanhire@tamu.edu. HighlyImprobable,2nded.,RandomHouse,
NewYork,2010.
eferences
R [16] M.Gallegati,S.Keen,T.Lux,P.Ormerod,Wor-
ryingTrendsinEconophysics,PhysicaA370
[1] R.Landauer,InformationIsPhysical,Physics (2006)1-4.
Today44(1990)23.
[2] P.Mirowski,Physicsandthe’MarginalistRev-
olution,’CambridgeJ.Econ.8(1984)361.
[3] M.F.Osborne,TheStockMarketandFinance
fromaPhysicist’sViewpoint, CrossgarPress,
1977.
[4] V. Gontis, S. Havlin, A. Kononovicius, B.
Podobnik, H. E. Stanley, Stochastic Model of
Financial Markets Reproducing Scaling and
MemoryinVolatilityReturnIntervals,Physica
A462(2016)1091.
[5] L. von Mises, Social Science and Natural Sci-
ence,J.Soc.Phil.&Jur.7(1942)240-245.