 
 
Originally published in the American University International Law Review 26 no. 4 (2011): 1107-1123. Posted with permissions. 
 
PRESENT AT THE RESURRECTION: ISLAMIC 
FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW 
HAIDER ALA HAMOUDI* 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................... 1107 
I. PROFESSOR FRANK VOGEL AND THE NATURE OF 
ISLAMIC LAW ....................................................................... 1112 
II. DR. KILIAN BÄLZ AND BROADER LESSONS FOR 
ISLAMIC LAW ....................................................................... 1116 
III. PROFESSOR MAHMOUD EL GAMAL AND THE 
NEGLECTED MUSLIM POOR ............................................. 1119 
CONCLUSION ............................................................................. 1122 
INTRODUCTION 
Of all the recent attention given to the subject of Islamic law, 
perhaps  the  most  unremarked  upon,  and  yet  also  uncontested, 
observation is the extent to which the basic source material of the 
law, the vast compendia of norms and rules developed by medieval 
Muslim jurists—herein referred to as shari’a1—have been rendered 
 
  *   Assistant Professor of Law, University of Pittsburgh School of Law. My 
gratitude  and  thanks  extends  in  particular  to  Frank  Vogel,  Kilian  Bälz,  and 
Mahmoud  El  Gamal  for  their  stimulating  presentations,  which  provided  the 
inspiration for this modest essay. As the essay is my own creation, I take full 
responsibility for all characterizations and errors present herein. 
  1.  I am (intelligently and thoughtfully) criticized for often defining this vast 
and contradictory body of norms and rules developed by medieval jurists as 
shari’a, rather than fiqh. See, e.g., Patrick S. O’Donnell, Divine Law (Shari’ah) 
and Jurisprudence (Fiqh) in Islam, RATIO JURIS: LAW, POLITICS, PHILOSOPHY (A 
MEMBER  OF  THE  JURISDYNAMICS  NETWORK)  (June  26,  2009,  10:58  AM), 
http://ratiojuris.blogspot.com/2009/06/divine-law-shariah-jurisprudence-fiqh.html. 
It is true that the latter term is often used to describe the substantive rules derived 
by such jurists. See FRANK E. VOGEL & SAMUEL L. HAYES III, ISLAMIC LAW AND 
FINANCE: RELIGION, RISK AND RETURN 23-24 (1998) (distinguishing  between 
shari’a as the immutable Divine Law and fiqh as human efforts to capture that law 
through  scholarly  interpretation).  Yet  at  the  same  time  my  own  realist 
predispositions lead me to the conclusion that if shari’a is meant to refer to nothing 
beyond a perfect and immutable Divine Law separate and apart from any human 
1107  
1108  AM. U. INT’L L. REV.  [26:4 
obsolete by modernity.2 To be sure, this is not the case in all positive 
law in the modern Muslim nation state. Much to the chagrin of the 
portion of Muslim society enamored with modern conceptions of 
women’s rights, both family law and the law of inheritance remain 
firmly based in shari’a discourse in most Muslim majority nations.3 
 
effort to understand that law, then almost as a matter of epistemological necessity 
it means precisely nothing that can be known and is of no value to lawyers. Shari’a 
is not advanced even in American academic circles in such abstract terms, hence 
the insistence of Professor Feldman, for example, that the Iraqi constitution urges 
its legislature to “deploy the shari’a,” a statement that is meaningless unless 
shari’a  is  in  some  way  humanity’s  concretization  of  the  Divine.  See  Noah 
Feldman, Response to Hamoudi, 2 MIDDLE E. L. & GOV’T J. 104, 105 (2010). This 
is to say nothing of the manner in which shari’a is used in modern Muslim 
discourse, where it absolutely includes references to some legal content. See, e.g., 
CLARK  LOMBARDI,  STATE  LAW  AS  ISLAMIC  LAW  IN  MODERN  EGYPT:  THE 
INCORPORATION OF THE SHARI’A INTO EGYPTIAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 180 (2006) 
(quoting Case no. 7/1993/Supreme Constitutional Court (Egypt)). Finally, and 
most  appropriately  for  our  purposes,  the  ubiquitous  references  to  “shari’a-
compliant  .  .  .  financ[e]”  confers  upon  shari’a  a  binding  set  of  rules,  not 
unknowable aspects of the Divine. Joseph DiVanna, Guest Column, FIN. TIMES 
(Dec. 13, 2010, 11:42 PM), http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/fb0eab76-064b-11e0-976b-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz1BVCMVkld. Accordingly, I find my own definition of 
shari’a, while admittedly contestable, nevertheless the most appropriate one to 
describe the corpus of the positive rules commonly referred to as “Islamic law,” 
particularly in the area of Islamic finance. 
  2.  See  BERNARD  G.  WEISS,  THE  SPIRIT  OF  ISLAMIC  LAW  188  (1998) 
(describing the adoption of civil, criminal, commercial, and other legal codes in 
Muslim countries, as a result of European colonialism, that modified or replaced 
traditional  Islamic  law);  Lama  Abu-Odeh,  The  Politics  of  (Mis)recognition: 
Islamic Law Pedagogy in American Academia, 52 AM. J. COMP. L. 789, 791-92 
(2004) (pointing to a scholar’s flaw in applying traditional Islamic criminal law to 
contemporary situations when the courts of Islamic countries have adjudicated 
cases based on European criminal law for centuries); Haider Ala Hamoudi, The 
Death of Islamic Law, 38 GA. J. INT’L & COMP. L. 293, 295-97 (2010) (indicating 
that Islamic states commonly adopt and apply laws transplanted from Western 
societies even though Islamist rhetoric insists that the law should be Divine rather 
than man-made). 
  3.  WEISS, supra note 2, at 188; see Hamoudi, supra note 2, at 297 (contrasting 
Islamists’ willingness to adopt man-made law in corporate law, contracts, and torts 
with Islamists’ adamant obstruction of amendments or developments to family 
law, where they believe Divine law is necessary); see also Abu-Odeh, supra note 
2, at 792 (referencing liberal use of Islamic law in family law matters). But see 
JUDITH E. TUCKER, WOMEN, FAMILY AND GENDER IN ISLAMIC LAW 65-83 (2008) 
(acknowledging changes to traditional Islamic family law as reformists attempt to 
reconcile  a  Qur’an-based  view  of  marriage  with  modern  marriage  ideals); 
Baudouin Dupret, What is Islamic Law?: A Praxiological Answer and an Egyptian 
Case Study, 24 THEORY, CULTURE & SOC’Y 79, 88-90 (2007) (acknowledging that 2011]  ISLAMIC FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW  1109 
Beyond this, the record is far more mixed, with some states adopting 
portions  of  shari’a  in  an  otherwise  thoroughly  modern  criminal 
code,4  or  recognizing  the  continuation  of  the  Islamic  religious 
endowments known as the waqf.5 
It is in the area of private law beyond family law and inheritance, 
however, where shari’a suffered the most dramatic decline.6 In the 
vast majority of Muslim nations, shari’a rules of contract, tort, and 
most  particularly  partnership  (including  corporate  law)  were 
displaced by transplanted European law to such an extent that most 
Muslim lawyers in the Muslim world probably do not understand the 
medieval system in the slightest, much less be able to practice within 
any system that remotely resembled it.7  
These  core  facts  provide  pivotal  context  to  understand  the 
relatively recent surge of interest in Islamic finance.8 While interest 
 
modern judges applying family law are thoroughly bureaucratized administrative 
officials of a modern nation-state who apply a particular version of shari’a that is 
tied to a set of procedural rules and professional responsibilities, leading them to 
approach their tasks entirely differently than a traditional Islamic judge from 
another era). 
  4.  See generally RUDOLPH PETERS, CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN ISLAMIC LAW: 
THEORY AND PRACTICE FROM THE SIXTEENTH TO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY 
155-73  (2005)  (detailing  the  history  of  the  movements  and  legislation  that 
incorporated Islamic law into the criminal codes of Libya, Pakistan, Iran, Sudan, 
and northern Nigeria, or applied Islamic law alongside secular criminal laws). 
  5.  See Haider Ala Hamoudi, Baghdad Booksellers, Basra Carpet Merchants, 
and the Law of God and Man: Legal Pluralism and the Contemporary Muslim 
Experience, 1 BERKELEY J. MIDDLE E. & ISLAMIC L. 83, 107 (2008) (illustrating 
that the definitions of certain legal entities are rooted in shari’a, such as the 
“waqf,” which can be translated as a Muslim charitable trust). 
  6.  See Hamoudi, supra note 2, at 323-25 (asserting that Islamists neither 
challenged the promulgation and application of civil and common law nor insisted 
on the use of shari’a for private law matters, most specifically in the commercial 
law context). 
  7.  See id. at 311 (calling attention to the fact that the legal education of the 
judiciary in Islamic states encompasses the civil and common law and not the 
shari’a). But see id. at 309-10 (suggesting that even though shari’a is becoming 
less  relevant  in  private  law,  some  Islamic  concepts  continue  to  survive  the 
transplantation of European law—most specifically the shari’a concept of the 
waqf, or land trust, which continues to remain in the modern Civil Code). 
  8.  See Kenneth Silber, The Rise of Islamic Finance, RESEARCH MAG. (Sept. 1, 
2008), http://www.advisorone.com/article/rise-islamic-finance (noting the rise of 
interest in Islamic finance among Muslims and non-Muslims, particularly when 
lenders can employ certain methods to overcome shari’a’s prohibition on interest); 
see also IBRAHIM WARDE, ISLAMIC FINANCE IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY 1 (2000) 1110  AM. U. INT’L L. REV.  [26:4 
in  shari’a  as  it  concerns  private  law  (beyond  family  law)  has 
generally declined within the broader Muslim polity to the point that 
the rules are not only obsolete, but also largely unknown, Islamic 
finance  stands  as  a  stark  exception.  It  is  an  area  of  growing 
importance and relevance, and one that purports to be an application 
and modern resurrection of shari’a.  
Admittedly, it is in large part a voluntary adherence to shari’a 
rather than a state-mandated one, as Islamic finance transactions in 
all but a handful of countries are not required by state law but rather 
ensured through a form of voluntary compliance, in a manner that 
will be addressed later in this essay.9 However, that solution hardly 
resolves  the  difficulty.  Even  positing  that  the  practice  is  to  be 
voluntary, how does one go about crafting rules and limitations to 
govern  a  deeply  and  fundamentally  contemporary  practice  using 
source material that is medieval in its origin? This is not, after all, 
some sort of effort to revert to shari’a in all private law matters—
that would preclude any notion of legal personality, corporate limited 
liability, or general theory of contract.10 Islamic banks rely on every 
single one of these concepts of modernity and it seems obvious to 
say that they could not survive otherwise. The rise of Islamic finance 
is instead an effort to create sensible rules of application for modern 
financial institutions on the basis of particular medieval rules that 
 
(noting that the first Islamic banks did not exist until the 1970s, but have since 
expanded operations to over seventy countries and have forty times the assets they 
did in the early 1980s). 
  9.  See, e.g., Kristin Smith, The Kuwait Finance House and the Islamization of 
Public Life in Kuwait, in THE POLITICS OF ISLAMIC FINANCE 168, 182 (Clement M. 
Henry & Rodney Wilson eds., 2004) (illustrating how the Kuwait Finance House, 
the second largest bank in Kuwait, adheres to shari’a by maintaining a voluntary, 
rather than mandatory, system of complying with the Kuwait Central Bank, even 
though this voluntary scheme entails a number of institutional drawbacks); see also 
Edna Fernandes, Sharia Law UK: Mail on Sunday Gets Exclusive Access to a 
British Muslim Court, DAILY MAIL (July 4, 2009, 9:57 PM), http://www.daily 
mail.co.uk/news/article-1197478/Sharia-law-UK--How-Islam-dispensing-justice-
side-British-courts.html# (illustrating the rare changing tide in the United Kingdom 
to  move  from  voluntary  compliance  with  shari’a  court  rulings  on  financial 
disputes,  to  mandatory  compliance  by  enforcing  the  shari’a  court  judgments 
through the state’s civil courts). 
  10.  E.g., Hamoudi, supra note 2, at 309 (pointing out the substantive legal 
problems with the Mecelle (Ottoman Civil Code) operating as a continental civil 
code, given its lack of “any concept of legal personhood” or notion of limited 
liability companies). 2011]  ISLAMIC FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW  1111 
hardly seem relevant to modernity.11 Ultimately, what the practice 
purports  to  do,  its  entire  justificatory  framework,  lies  in  the 
resurrection of (selectively decided upon) rules of shari’a applied in 
a commercial and economic environment that bears no resemblance 
to that which existed at the time the rules were developed.12  
To say that this challenge raises any number of thorny theoretical 
questions difficult to resolve is an understatement. The most obvious 
is the irony of the selectivity. For example, why may an Islamic bank 
enjoy legal personality in derogation of shari’a but may not take 
interest on a loan? This question, however, is a debate for another 
time and place, as it involves considerations well beyond those of 
Islamic finance alone.13 
More to our purposes, precisely what is the Islamic methodology 
that is to be applied so as to glean, from disparate sets of juristic 
compendia spanning hundreds of years, a set of methodologically 
sound  principles  that  might  become  the  bedrock  of  a  modern 
financial practice? More centrally, who will be entrusted to apply 
those principles to develop the relevant rules? Finally, will whatever 
hybrid  creature  that  emerges  from  this  primordial  soup  of  rules, 
sacred texts, and purposes serve as an example for any attempt to 
resurrect other areas of Islamic law, either in terms of methodology 
or the location of institutionalized authority?  
These questions are not easy to answer, and it is a testament to 
their difficulty that they are still being grappled with. Fortunately, the 
July  27,  2010  plenary  session  of  the  XVIIIth  Congress  of  the 
International  Academy  of  Comparative  Law,  the  subject  of  this 
 
  11.  See Haider Ala Hamoudi, The Muezzin’s Call and the Dow Jones Bell: On 
the Necessity of Realism in the Study of Islamic Law, 56 AM. J. COMP. L. 423, 436 
(2008)  (“A  modern  legal  code  cannot  truly  be  made  from  hundreds  of 
contradictory juristic texts spanning over a thousand years, particularly when, as in 
matters of commerce and finance, the texts deal largely with material that is either 
irrelevant or deeply offensive to modern sensibilities . . . .”). 
  12.  See Haider Ala Hamoudi, Jurisprudential Schizophrenia: On Form and 
Function in Islamic Finance, 7 CHI. J. INT’L. L. 605, 610 (2007) (describing the 
shortcomings of the methodology of the modern jurisprudence in developing a 
uniform set of rules). 
  13.  I have discussed elsewhere the rather odd selectivity of legal areas in which 
Islamist groups appear to engage. Some obvious departures from shari’a are 
ignored (such as the universal modern prohibition against slavery), while others are 
deemed indispensable (such as money interest on a loan).  1112  AM. U. INT’L L. REV.  [26:4 
essay,  provided  an  ideal  opportunity  to  explore  such  matters  in 
greater depth and included a panel of speakers that was as diverse as 
it was distinguished.14 While each speaker spoke to his own area of 
interest and expertise, and each focused on a disparate aspect of 
Islamic finance, what united the presentations can be brought back to 
what might be called a core aspect of modern Islamic finance—what 
is  its  relationship  to  the  shari’a,  and  who  gets  to  decide  core 
questions of Islamicity? This essay shall explore each presentation in 
more  detail  to  highlight  the  ways  in  which  these  ideas  manifest 
themselves in different aspects of Islamic finance and its alternatives. 
I. PROFESSOR FRANK VOGEL AND THE NATURE 
OF ISLAMIC LAW 
Professor  Vogel’s  initial  contribution  framed  the  question 
presented in this essay with far more historical nuance and with 
reference to the substance of the shari’a itself. Professor Vogel’s 
primary  task  was  to  narrate  the  manner  in  which  Islamic  law 
developed positive rules and the manner in which those rules might 
be used to construct, or in this case to resurrect, a framework of 
regulation.15  
As would be appropriate in any exposition on law in a foreign 
context, Professor Vogel centers the conversation squarely on the 
matter of authority. In other words, and to expand on his ideas in a 
manner  relevant  to  this  essay,  Muslims  consider  that  under  core 
theological principles, Islam’s holiest texts arise from God and are 
provided  to  humanity  in  the  form  of  Revelation  to  the  Prophet 
Muhammad.16 Without more, under this reduced paradigm, the only 
source material of the law is the Revealed Book of God, the Qur’an, 
and the example of the Prophet himself in the form of his deeds, 
 
  14.  The  XVIIIth  International  Congress  of  the  International  Academy  of 
Comparative  Law,  INT’L  ACAD.  COMP.  L.,  http://www.iuscomparatum.org/141 
_p_4109/washington-congress-2010.html (last visited July 1, 2011). 
  15.  Frank Vogel, Former Dir., Islamic Legal Studies Program, Harvard Law 
School,  Remarks  at  the  Islamic  Finance  Plenary  Session  of  the  XVIIIth 
Proceedings of the International Academy of Comparative Law (July 27, 2010) 
[hereinafter  Vogel  Presentation]  (transcript  on  file  with  American  University 
International Law Review). 
  16.   M.  Cherif  Bassiouni  &  Gamal  M.  Badr,  The  Shari’ah:  Sources, 
Interpretation and Rule-Making, 1 U.C.L.A. J. ISLAMIC & NEAR E. L. 135, 147-48 
(2002) (describing core conception of revelation in the Islamic tradition).  2011]  ISLAMIC FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW  1113 
words,  and  utterances,  known  as  the  Sunna.17  Following  this 
paradigm, without elaboration, any number of Muslims reflexively 
and seemingly un-contemplatively “hurl”18 pieces of the Sunna at 
one another to demonstrate the obvious truth of some principle or 
other, in a manner entirely disassociated from any political context or 
any ethical framework. 
As  a  historical  matter,  and  among  Muslims  who  take  their 
doctrinal traditions seriously, the matter is not such an “exegetical 
free-for-all,”19 and the question Vogel chooses to focus on is not 
what  the  source  material  of  the  law  should  be,  nor  even  the 
methodology used to interpret the source material (though that is of 
some  importance),  but  rather  who  will  be  entrusted  with  its 
interpretation? In short, who may undertake the effort, referred to in 
Arabic as ijtihad, to derive the rules from the source material?20 
Professor  Vogel  then  initiated  the  analysis  and  began  with 
Schacht’s  well-known  statement  that  Islamic  law  represents  an 
“extreme case of a ‘jurists’’ law.”21 Stated more fully, as the shari’a 
developed, its substance was not decided by a political authority, 
such as a caliph, nor by state officials, such as a judiciary, nor by any 
other sort of state sanctioned body,22 but rather by particular schools 
 
  17.  See JOSEPH SCHACHT, THE ORIGINS OF MUHAMMADAN JURISPRUDENCE 2 
(1950)  (defining  the  Sunna  as  the  behavior  and  traditions  of  the  Prophet 
Muhammad and stating that the two recognized sources of Islamic law are the 
Qur’an and the Sunna); Russell Powell, Zakat: Drawing Insights for Legal Theory 
and Economic Policy from Islamic Jurisprudence, 7 PITT. TAX REV. 43, 50-51 
(2007) (describing the various canonical texts of Sunna in the Sunni tradition that 
are used to interpret the Qur’an and that supply a large body of legal precedent in 
Islamic law). 
  18.  See KHALED ABOU EL FADL, THE GREAT THEFT: WRESTLING ISLAM FROM 
THE  EXTREMISTS  90  (2005)  (using  Ghazali’s  metaphor,  made  famous  in  the 
English  language  by  El  Fadl,  to  refer  to  the  attempts  of  particular  modern 
fundamentalists,  untrained  in  legal  theory  and  analysis,  to  apply  the  law  by 
“hurling traditions at their opponents to score cheap points”). 
  19.  ANDREW F. MARCH, ISLAM AND LIBERAL CITIZENSHIP: THE SEARCH FOR 
AN OVERLAPPING CONSENSUS 68 (2009) (using the phrase to describe the process 
of  examining  religious  rules  without  considering  a  religion’s  doctrinal 
underpinnings). 
  20.  See  Bassiouni  &  Badr,  supra  note  16,  at  153  (describing  ijtihad  as 
developing a legal opinion based on the sources of law). 
  21.  JOSEPH SCHACHT, AN INTRODUCTION TO ISLAMIC LAW 209 (1982). 
  22.  See LOMBARDI, supra note 1, at 49-54 (presenting the Islamic argument for 
a revival of the theory that a political authority can promulgate rules for the greater 1114  AM. U. INT’L L. REV.  [26:4 
of thought entirely divorced from state control. Ultimately, four such 
schools  emerged  in  the  Sunni  tradition,  described  accurately  as 
guilds  by  the  late  Professor  George  Makdisi  because  of  their 
institutional  similarity  to  that  Western  medieval  institution.23 
Individual jurists within each guild developed vast compendia of 
rules derived within their respective schools, and it is the sum corpus 
of these contradictory, varying, and immense compendia that form 
the substance of the rules from which Islamic law is derived. 
The problem is that, with the advent of the colonial era, the juristic 
schools lessened in importance and ultimately disappeared in large 
parts of the Muslim world.24 To compound the difficulty, with the 
rise of the nation-state  came not  only transplanted law, but  also 
transplanted political institutions and bureaucratic and administrative 
procedures. This process began as late as the end of the eighteenth 
century,25 and was therefore long complete by the creation of the first 
Islamic banks near the end of the twentieth century. 
So then, what is an emerging “Islamic” financial practice to do in 
order to make determinations respecting the shari’a compliance of 
its activities? There appears to be at least three options. First, one 
could adopt the ideas of one particular school of thought. However, 
such an approach is fundamentally limiting in terms of acceptable 
rules that may be derived, and it appears antiquated because the 
schools, as vibrant rulemaking institutions, no longer exist. Second, 
 
public good, thus enabling the state to enact positive law while shari’a retains a 
function within the state). But see Hamoudi, supra note 2, at 328-32 (questioning 
whether states can sensibly and with internal consistency retain a role for shari’a 
in the Islamic state, while also enacting positive law that may contradict shari’a, 
such as legislation that promotes women’s rights). 
  23.  See  SHERMAN  A.  JACKSON,  ISLAMIC  LAW  AND  THE  STATE:  THE 
CONSTITUTIONAL JURISPRUDENCE OF SHIHĀB AL-DĪN AL-QARĀFĪ 103-04 (1996) 
(explaining and critiquing Professor Makdisi’s claim that the Sunni’s madhhabs, or 
schools  of  legal  thought,  satisfied  the  criteria  for  guilds  because  they  were 
professional, took up a specific economic sector, strictly regulated who could 
receive  licenses  to  teach  and  give  legal  opinions,  were  independent  from 
government, used a hierarchical structure, and were led by a headman). 
  24.  See  EL  FADL,  supra  note  18,  at  35-37  (detailing  the  systematic 
nationalization, secularization, and limits to legal education imposed upon shari’a 
schools that led to the schools closing or producing only religious ministers rather 
than jurists). 
  25.  See  id.  at  26  (explaining  that  the  process  began  with  the  “age  of 
colonialism”).  
2011]  ISLAMIC FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW  1115 
some fusion of the four schools could be undertaken. But, would 
such an approach even be defensible, given that each school, at least 
in  theory,  developed  rules  according  to  a  distinct  set  of 
methodological doctrinal principles, not susceptible of being stitched 
together artificially after a period of centuries to address modern 
concerns? Third, perhaps an entirely fresh approach is warranted. 
The  original  sacred  text  could  be  reinterpreted  in  a  way  that 
derogates from earlier juristic rules—a process Abduh referred to as 
the reopening of the gates of ijtihad?26  
Professor Vogel has indicated that the approach of Islamic finance 
has generally chosen the second of the three options above. That is, 
finance rules are selected from among all four schools on largely 
functional principles, favoring rules that operate best under modern 
circumstances.27  Elsewhere  Professor  Vogel  indicated  that  this 
functional drive is balanced against a need to not de-contextualize 
individual rules or “patch” them together in a manner that deprives 
the Islamic system of what he refers to as its “internal logic.”28 The 
qualification is necessary, for it would not be difficult to create from 
the disparate fabric of over a millennium of juristic rules a set of 
principles that satisfy any interpreter, whether he is Vladimir Lenin, 
Milton  Friedman,  or  Osama  Bin  Laden.  The  solution  lies  in  the 
putative balance of logic on the one side and utilitarian selection on 
the other. 
However, the idea of adopting rules from four schools on the basis 
of the methods described above does leave open the very question of 
authority with which his presentation began. That is to say, in the 
absence of juristic schools, one might well ask who will be entrusted 
with this task of determining what is legitimate functional choice and 
what is irresponsible patching together of de-contextualized rules. 
This would be a problem regardless of which rules were adopted, but 
 
  26.  See Haider Ala Hamoudi, Muhammad’s Social Justice or Muslim Cant: 
Langdellianism and the Rise of Islamic Finance, 40 CORNELL INT’L L.J. 89, 127-28 
n.225 (2007) (illustrating the broad scope of reforms that may be needed in order 
to resurrect the development of legal rules, such as the “expansive use of reason” 
to promote Islamic “solutions to the problems of modern society”). 
  27.  Vogel Presentation, supra note 15. 
  28.  VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 1, at 37-38 (cautioning against constructing 
legal  rules  that  are  replicas  of  Western  legal  rules  by  picking  and  choosing 
preferred rules in a de-contextualized fashion). 1116  AM. U. INT’L L. REV.  [26:4 
when the methodology is to synthesize disparate sets of rules into a 
whole  that  never  previously  existed,  the  problem  becomes 
particularly acute. 
The point, to be clear, is not that such determinations will not be 
subject to criticism by academics who will claim that they are less 
reflections on sacred text than responses to external economic and 
ideological stimuli operating in the relevant social space, though that 
is an assertion I have made in other contexts.29 Rather, the point is 
that perceptions of legitimacy within the community will certainly 
depend on the extent to which those doing the interpreting, and the 
synthesizing of rules from among the four schools, are deemed to be 
authentic. 
This was not a question that Professor Vogel sought to answer, nor 
should  it  have  been.  His  remarks  were  not  designed  to  provide 
solutions, but only to raise the proper questions in Islamic finance, a 
matter he undertook with considerable success. 
II. DR. KILIAN BÄLZ AND BROADER LESSONS 
FOR ISLAMIC LAW 
Dr.  Bälz  picked  up  with  the  very  question  of  authority  that 
Professor Vogel left open.30 To Dr. Bälz, this question of authority in 
Islamic finance, and the matter of who determines Islamicity, is the 
central question with which to grapple.  
In  this  context,  the  voluntary  nature  of  Islamic  finance  is  of 
fundamental importance because it removes the state, the judiciary, 
and the jurists as the agents  of legal  change or as the authority 
responsible for interpreting shari’a.31 The practice is not based on 
state  law,  as  the  contracts  pursuant  to  which  Islamic  finance  is 
 
  29.  See Hamoudi, supra note 11, at 437-38 (criticizing “internal logic” in 
shari’a as merely a confirmation of a particular preexisting set of ideological and 
normative commitments). 
  30.  Kilian Bälz, Partner, Amereller Legal Consultants, Remarks at the Islamic 
Finance Plenary Session of the XVIIIth Proceedings of the International Academy 
of Comparative Law (July 27, 2010) [hereinafter Bälz Presentation] (transcript on 
file with American University International Law Review). 
  31.  See generally ABDULLAHI AHMED AN NA‘IM, ISLAM AND THE SECULAR 
STATE: NEGOTIATING THE FUTURE OF SHARI‘A 293 (2008) (positing that enforcing 
mandatory compliance of shari’a is not within the duties of the state because 
shari’a is inherently diverse where state authority is uniform). 2011]  ISLAMIC FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW  1117 
organized are governed by foreign law (often New York or English 
law),  marginalizing  the  role  of  state  officers  to  make  many 
determinations about the content of Islamic law. This is doubly so 
because of the frequency of arbitration clauses rendering the judge’s 
role an exceedingly marginal one.32 
There is a reason that this has been undertaken, and state influence 
has been minimized. The driving concern among practitioners is not 
that  state  courts  and  state  officials  will  ignore  shari’a,  but  that 
shari’a will be given undue attention. There is a clear fear that if a 
particular financial structure is carefully established by practitioners 
and agents of Islamic finance, and a court is given an opportunity, it 
may gleefully dispute the Islamicity of the structure and declare it 
invalid under core Islamic principles. This problem is particularly 
acute in the Islamic finance context given the approach the practice 
has  undertaken,  as  described  effectively  by  Professor  Vogel,  to 
develop its rules of practice. If, after all, what we have in Islamic 
finance  is  a  rather  artificial  synthesis  of  disparate  rules  of  four 
medieval Islamic schools patched together by some sort of internal 
logic,  it  would  not  be  difficult  for  a  judge  to  reach  an  entirely 
different  conclusion  on  how  the  synthesis  should  have  been 
undertaken, and to disallow a structure that violated that judge’s own 
vision.  
The  prospect  that  this  may  occur,  and  the  dangers  it  creates 
respecting enforceability, were described by Dr. Bälz appropriately 
as  “shari’a  risk,”  meaning  that  the  invocation  of  shari’a  is  the 
perceived bar to enforceability, not the mechanism by which it will 
be enforced.33 The danger is considerable enough that not only is 
New York law chosen (so as to ensure that the contract is enforced 
according to its terms), but also there is an increasing proliferation of 
what Dr. Bälz referred to as “Waiver of Shari’a Defense” clauses, 
which prevent the parties from being able to assert in court that the 
transaction in question is not compliant with shari’a as a defense to 
enforceability.34 This concept led Dr. Bälz to characterize Islamic 
finance not so much as a legal practice, but as one derived from 
ethics.  
 
  32.  See Bälz Presentation, supra note 30. 
  33.  Id. 
  34.  Id. 1118  AM. U. INT’L L. REV.  [26:4 
While Dr. Bälz is clearly on to something, this terminology can be 
criticized; ethics are generally understood as standard-driven maxims 
of loose applicability whose purposes are not thwarted by formal 
evasion.35 Islamic finance is replete with formal artifices to avoid 
transactions that would otherwise be prohibited and is designed for 
the specific purpose of rule avoidance, which is hardly characteristic 
of most ethical frameworks.36 The simplest and most controversial 
example is the tawarruq, a form of synthetic sale and markup where 
the bank buys a particular item from a straw man and sells it at a 
markup  reflecting  prevailing  interest  rates  to  the  borrower.  The 
balance is to be paid in installments over the course of a particular 
period of time, but well before this, in fact immediately after its 
initial purchase, the item is resold for cash to the original seller for its 
original price, with no time elapsing between the three sales (straw 
man to bank, bank to borrower, and borrower back to straw man). 
The item never leaves its warehouse, and the borrower receives a 
sum certain in cash with an obligation to pay it back to the bank at a 
higher rate that corresponds precisely to market rates.37 One could 
criticize such an artifice as inauthentic or defend it as in keeping with 
formal rules, but it is hard to see precisely how one could argue that 
the  practice  has  very  much  to  do  with  ethics.  Still,  Dr.  Bälz’s 
distinction between reliance on state law and private ordering is an 
apt one. 
As  a  result  of  this  privatization  of  shari’a,  the  main  set  of 
institutions responsible for determining shari’a compliance, or the 
highly disembodied and dissolute authority to apply rules to govern 
financial transactions, are what is known as “shari’a review boards,” 
whose review and approval must be obtained for any transaction.38 
These  are  generally  selected  and  approved  by  the  practitioners 
 
  35.  See IMMANUEL KANT, THE METAPHYSICAL ELEMENTS OF ETHICS 20 (Great 
Books Found. 1949) (1780) (explaining that ethics produces universal principles to 
which every person should strive, and there should be no exceptions to making 
those principles one’s own). 
  36.  See  Hamoudi,  supra  note  26,  at  118  (claiming  that  Islamic  financial 
institutions often depend on the complicated nature of the commercial structures in 
order to confuse Muslim consumers). 
  37.  Id. at 119-20. 
  38.  See Hamoudi, supra note 5, at 101 (explaining the significant role and 
binding  nature  of  the  shari’a  review  board,  as  a  non-state  actor,  in  judging 
compliance with shari’a). 2011]  ISLAMIC FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW  1119 
designing the transaction. Equally important, however, and the true 
source  of  innovation,  are  the  law  firms,  accounting  firms,  and 
investment banking institutions which create vehicles that conform to 
the requirements of the  shari’a review boards and  yet  still meet 
consumer demands.39  
Equally relevant is the fact that this model of private ordering and 
reliance  on  non-state  mechanisms  and  institutions  could  prove 
relevant in areas of private law, ranging from the Islamic law of 
contract (Dr. Bälz’s example) to the law of the family (my example), 
where  Muslims—particularly  in  liberal  states—refer  matters  of 
dispute to the local imam and address any disputes arising internally 
without state assistance or intervention. 
In other words, Dr. Bälz does offer us a solution to the conundrum 
of how to adopt medieval rules into a modern practice, largely by 
leapfrogging over matters of responsible methodology and arriving 
at the more fundamental question of locating a legitimate authority to 
undertake it. To Dr. Bälz, the truly fascinating and innovative aspect 
of Islamic finance is that the authority in question is in fact private 
and  more  intimately  tied  to  the  modalities  of  operation  of 
international finance than any court.40 
III. PROFESSOR MAHMOUD EL GAMAL AND THE 
NEGLECTED MUSLIM POOR 
The one aspect left unaddressed by Dr. Bälz is the legitimacy of 
that  disembodied  and  decentralized  authority  among  the  broader 
Muslim polity. Far from the self-financed guilds of jurists of the 
medieval era, these private actors are hired by the firms looking for 
transaction approval, often on a transaction by transaction basis, are 
paid by those firms, may be discharged by those firms, and generally 
are under confidentiality obligations not to disclose the details of the 
transactions on which they have worked.41 The lack of impartiality is 
obvious—quite  clearly  any  shari’a  review  board  member  who 
developed a reputation for being obstinate or difficult would have a 
hard time finding work, while those who were more willing to be 
flexible and accommodating to the demands of the law firms and 
 
  39.  But see Hamoudi, supra note 26, at 118. 
  40.  Bälz Presentation, supra note 30. 
  41.  Id.  
1120  AM. U. INT’L L. REV.  [26:4 
banks responsible for hiring them would be financially rewarded for 
the same. This is hardly the basis upon which a broadly legitimate 
and independent interpretive authority can be established, a point Dr. 
Bälz did not contest.  
Professor El Gamal spent substantial time offering a critique along 
these  lines.  Professor  El  Gamal  found  no  legitimacy  in  the 
institutions that comprised Islamic finance, and correspondingly, no 
authenticity to their means of deriving medieval rules.42 Professor El 
Gamal has moreover offered elsewhere a thoughtful alternative set of 
ideas to what he views as a more responsible way to understand 
shari’a as developed by the medieval jurists, and how to use the 
principles underlying their rules to create a more sensible system.43 
However, the focus of his presentation, in keeping with the themes of 
the other two participants, focused on the relationship between the 
methodology  and  the  authority,  rather  than  solely  on  matters  of 
hermeneutics.44 
Professor El Gamal maintains that the practice of Islamic finance, 
and thus implicitly the authority underlying it, about which Dr. Bälz 
generally spoke in positive terms,  has failed the broader Muslim 
community.  There  is  always  this  danger  whenever  regulation  of 
lawmaking institutions is left in private hands. While none could 
doubt  that  state  officials  have  their  own  interests  to  protect,  the 
interests of private actors, who stand to profit considerably if some 
interpretations  are  developed  to  the  derogation  of  others,  are 
comparatively larger. The risk that the rules will then be developed 
in  a  way  that  serves  the  interests  of  the  financial  classes  alone 
thereby becomes quite a severe one.45  
 
  42.  Mahmoud El Gamal, Professor of Economics, Rice Univ., at the Islamic 
Finance Plenary Session of the XVIIIth Proceedings of the International Academy 
of  Comparative  Law  (July  27,  2010)  [hereinafter  El  Gamal  Presentation] 
(transcript on file with American University International Law Review). 
  43.  See generally Mahmoud A. El-Gamal, An Economic Explication of the 
Prohibition  of  Ribā  in  Classical  Islamic  Jurisprudence  1-18  (May  2,  2001), 
http://www.ruf.rice.edu/~elgamal/files/riba.pdf (arguing that medieval jurist ’Ibn 
Rushd’s rationale for prohibiting Ribā contains elements of modern economic 
theory, specifically relating to the maximization of economic efficiency). 
  44.  El Gamal Presentation, supra note 42. 
  45.  See Kilian Bälz, Visiting Scholar, Islamic Legal Studies Program, Harv. L. 
School, Sharia Risk? How Islamic Finance Has Transformed Islamic Contract Law 
25 (May 1, 2008) (transcript available at http://www.law.harvard.edu/programs/ 
ilsp/publications/balz.pdf)  (pointing  out  that  market  forces  and  private  actors 2011]  ISLAMIC FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW  1121 
Thus, Professor El Gamal insists, the practice has developed in a 
manner not designed to protect or serve the Muslim public, but to 
maximize profit.46 The transaction must be structured in a manner 
that will appeal to Muslim consumers, but it could never be fairly 
said that shari’a review boards do very much to serve the broader 
Muslim polity or (Professor El Gamal’s focus) the Muslim poor. 
Given that the boards and the innovators of Islamic finance under Dr. 
Bälz’s paradigm are responsible for articulating a modern Islamic 
legal  practice,  the  question  raised  by  Professor  El  Gamal’s 
presentation is whether their disconnection from that polity and their 
intimate  familiarity  with  international  finance  is  not  as  much  a 
hindrance as a benefit to ensure both authenticity and the continued 
viability of Islamic financial practice. 
Professor El Gamal’s solution accepts the reality of the private 
ordering that Dr. Bälz effectively lays out, for it seems inconceivable 
that Islamic finance is likely to be reorganized to serve primarily the 
Muslim  poor.47  Rather,  Professor  El  Gamal  seeks  to  use  private 
ordering as a means to serve the Muslim poor through a form of 
micro-financing that neither contravenes contemporary notions of a 
prohibition on interest, nor adopts for-profit financing mechanisms, 
relying  instead  on  Islam-compliant  commutative  structures  and 
mutual  cooperatives  that  support  economic  development  and  are 
based on organic models in the region.48 
The thrust of the claim is that it works. Perhaps anticipating the 
critique  that  social  justice  financing  initiatives  are  noble  in  their 
intentions but are hardly the basis for a sustained practice, Professor 
El Gamal spent much of his presentation offering a wealth of careful 
empirical information to show that the cooperative was successful, in 
 
determine how Islamic financial law develops even when the state dictates law 
reform generally or implements policies aimed at creating a purely Islamic state). 
  46.  See  id.  at  24-26  (arguing  that  international  commercial  law  heavily 
influences Islamic finance law). 
  47.  See IMTIAZ B. ALI, WAQF: A SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTION 
FOR  MUSLIM  COMMUNITIES  15  (2009),  available  at  http://www.takaafultt.org/ 
images/WAQF_Book.pdf (explaining that the more recently proposed waqf micro-
financing system would likely only succeed in non-Muslim states with a minority 
population of Muslim poor because in states where Muslims are minorities there is 
a stronger need to develop their Muslim communities and protect and promote 
Islam). 
  48.  El Gamal Presentation, supra note 42.  
1122  AM. U. INT’L L. REV.  [26:4 
fact more successful than comparable micro-financing institutions.49 
This achievement possibly is due to its compliance with common 
understandings of shari’a as manifested in the modern world as well 
as its dedication to serving a Muslim underclass largely ignored by 
contemporary Islamic finance.  
CONCLUSION 
Despite nearly half a century of progress and an explosion of 
interest,  Islamic  finance  appears  to  struggle  with  many  of  the 
problems common to most features of reinvigorated shari’a.50 These 
problems  center  around  one  essential  and  indeed  existential 
difficulty. To be relevant and applicable in the modern world, shari’a 
requires reinvigoration of fresh ideas to decide which of the historic 
rules  will  be  used  to  maintain  what  Professor  Vogel  would  call 
Islamic  “internal  logic.”  Yet  for  change  to  occur  in  any  legal 
tradition, much less a religiously based one, it requires a legitimate 
agent. Many of the disputes and disagreements in Islamic finance are 
mere manifestations of this problem. Dr. Bälz located legitimacy and 
authenticity in the private actors that control Islamic finance, where 
Professor El Gamal dismissed them as self-interested, engaged in 
acts of “shari’a-arbitrage” and therefore not the basis of a long-term 
sustainable practice. With shari’a, the problem is not necessarily a 
lack  of  fresh  ideas,  as  evidenced  by  the  speakers’  presentations. 
Indeed, the same might be said of other thinkers in other aspects of 
shari’a—Khaled Abou El Fadl respecting democracy,51 Abdullahi 
An Naim concerning secularism,52 and Andrew March concerning 
liberalism.53 The problem in Islamic finance tends to be the lack of 
an authority that can articulate and apply these fresh ideas to promote 
 
  49.  Id. 
  50.  See generally Hamoudi, supra note 26, at 116-124 (explaining the failures 
of Islamic finance and discussing the dynamic complexities between traditional 
Islamic shari’a principles and modern international commercial law). 
  51.  See generally KHALED ABOU EL FADL, ISLAM AND THE CHALLENGE OF 
DEMOCRACY 65-66 (Joshua Cohen & Deborah Chasman eds., 2004) (encouraging 
a “free society in which all Muslims can debate what constitutes Shari’ah”). 
  52.  See generally AN NA’IM, supra note 31, at 4, 95 (arguing that Muslims will 
be able to voluntarily adhere to shari’a and not be forced to comply with a state-
endorsed artificially narrow conception of shari’a when they are in a secular state). 
  53.  See  generally  MARCH,  supra  note  19,  at  64,  71  (asserting  that  the 
framework of a liberal democracy is not necessarily opposed to Islamic principles 
and arguing a liberal justification for these principles). 2011]  ISLAMIC FINANCE AND ISLAMIC LAW  1123 
a broader  communal  acceptance.54 That  Islamic  finance  rules are 
intensely  criticized  as  formalistic  and  illegitimate,  by  respected 
figures like Professor El Gamal,55 despite the fact that finance rules 
are  among  the  most  successful  efforts  at  shari’a  reinvigoration, 
illustrates how deep the problem runs. 
 
 
  54.  See EL FADL, supra note 51, at 35-37 (showing why there may be a lack of 
modern Islamic legal scholars to promulgate new ideas). 
  55.  See also Hamoudi, supra note 12, at 610 (expressing similar misgivings to 
Professor El Gamal on whether the modern application of shari’a accomplishes 
either the theoretical or practical goals that would help make traditional shari’a 
relevant in modern contexts). 