      Volume 31, Issue 2                                                                                                                                            Page 3 
Advising Faculty on Law Journal Publication Agreements 
Benjamin J. Keele, Reference Librarian 
William & Mary Law Library  
    One of the primary areas of service for academic li- ment, I suggested making explicit that the au-
brarians is faculty support, and one of faculty‘s  thor can post drafts and the published paper in 
primary goals is to publish law journal articles. Librar- SSRN, a standard means of distributing legal 
ians provide a lot of assistance in the pre-submission  scholarship. For the second agreement, I suggest-
phase of an article‘s development—crafting searches,  ed removing a rather unusual clause that asked 
retrieving sources, and compiling statistics. We also  the author to waive all moral rights in the article. 
help journal staff with cite-checking after an article  This provision was strange for two reasons. First, 
has been submitted and accepted. An additional ser- moral rights are more a creation of European 
vice librarians can offer faculty is reviewing journal  than U.S. law, and second, one of the moral 
publication agreements when articles are accepted.  rights is the right to be attributed as the author, 
  which is one of the most desirable rights for 
Why advise faculty on publication agreements?  scholars. 
   
     Very few people enjoy dealing with copyright agree-      Providing advice on copyright agreements is 
ments, but agreements last for a long time and, once  not one of most traditional reference tasks, but I 
signed, are very difficult to change. Thus, it is very im- think it is a natural extension of librarians‘ ex-
portant for faculty to think about what rights they  pertise in two ways. First, academic librarians 
wish to retain and ensure that the agreement reflects  have experience with most parts of the life cycle 
those preferences before signing. Suppose a professor  of an article. They assist with research for articles 
publishes an article without carefully reviewing the  and then collect and retrieve published articles. 
publication agreement. A couple years later, she de- Librarians also tend to know the many avenues 
cides to republish the article in a collection of essays or  for distributing articles and thus the many choic-
make copies for a class course pack. She may then dis- es faculty can make about using their work, if 
cover that the journal‘s copyright policies require spe- they retain the necessary rights. Second, patrons 
cial permission or fees for such uses, a development  look to librarians for guidance on using infor-
that may require more time and energy to resolve than  mation, which often includes some knowledge of 
would have been needed to negotiate a more flexible  copyright and its effect on scholarship. 
agreement.   
  How do we provide this advice?  
     I offer to review journal publication agreements for   
faculty for whom I am the liaison librarian. I do not       One need not be a copyright expert to effec-
offer to review contracts for monographs because  tively review publication agreements for faculty. 
books are made in a more complicated economic mar- A basic grasp of copyright can be obtained from 
ket than law journal articles. For a study on publica- helpful websites or books on copyright and aca-
tion agreements, I examined a number of different  demic publishing (I list a few useful sources at 
journals‘ agreements, so I thought I had a reasonable  the end of this article). One also needs to review a 
feel for which provisions were standard and which  number of different agreements to develop famili-
were outliers.  arity with the issues most agreements cover. A 
  precious few law journals make their agreements 
     So far I‘ve reviewed two agreements and recom-
mended small changes for each. For the first agree- (Continued on page 4)       Volume 31, Issue 2                                                                                                                                            Page 4 
Law Journal Publication Agreements, Cont’d 
(Continued from page 3) 
publicly available. Review those and ask the jour-
nals at your institution for their agreements.  the article, it will generally be less work to reach 
  agreement on the contract language than to rescind 
     Journals tend to copy language from other agree- the offer and revisit the pile of submissions. Every-
ments, and a model agreement issued by the Ameri- one has limits, of course, but professional and rea-
can Association of Law Schools in 1998 has been  sonable contract negotiations are unlikely to dam-
adopted by many journals. This means most agree- age an author‘s relationship with the journal. Some 
ments cover the same issues and differ in only a few  institutions have prepared contract addenda that 
details. Those details, such as an embargo on post- the author can simply attach to the signed agree-
ing the article on a personal or institutional website,  ment. This is a possible solution, but editors might 
may be important to faculty. Once you‘ve seen a  feel they are losing more control (and thus be more 
few agreements and know which issues are most im- reluctant to agree) than if they altered the journal‘s 
portant, you will notice when an agreement contains  agreement. 
a provision that is unusual and warrants further dis-  
cussion with the journal.       Here are the issues I would be sure to check for in 
  a publication agreement. My goal when reviewing 
Crucial Issues  an agreement is to help the author keep whatever 
  rights she may need to use her work effectively in 
     Journals need certain rights to publish articles.  the future, while also giving the journal sufficient 
Many student-edited journals are heavily subsidized  rights to operate. 
by their law schools, but to some extent journals   
need to maintain adequate funding to operate. The  Transfer, Exclusive License, or Non-exclusive License 
goal should be to grant journals the rights needed to 
     The first item to look for in an agreement is the 
operate while giving the author as much flexibility 
language covering copyright transfer or license. Giv-
as possible for future use of their works. Much of the 
en that most academic law journals are non-profit, 
language in any law journal agreement will be non-
educational operations, there is virtually no need for 
controversial. For example, a journal is right to ask 
a journal to acquire full copyright in an article, and 
an author to warrant that her article is original and 
certainly not on a work-for-hire basis (such a desig-
hasn‘t been published in another journal, and an 
nation would make the journal the legal author of 
author should have no trouble agreeing to that. 
the article). The agreement can be written to au-
Language authorizing the journal to load the article 
thorize any form of distribution a journal may wish 
in databases like Westlaw, Lexis, and Hein is also 
to make without taking copyright from the author. 
likely to be acceptable, if not expected. Some provi-
The words ―assign and transfer copyright‖ would be 
sions, however, are worth looking over and negotiat-
an issue I would raise with the author. Many law 
ing if needed. 
journals ask for an exclusive or non-exclusive li-
 
cense. With an exclusive license, the author would 
     While journals will likely present the agreement 
not be able to republish the article elsewhere with-
as standard procedure, a number of editors have in-
out permission. Some journals prefer exclusive li-
dicated to me that they are willing to modify the 
censes to help protect their subscription and data-
agreement at author request. Authors may be con-
base revenue. This seems acceptable as long as the  
cerned about the journal revoking its offer, but once 
editors have invested time and energy in selecting 
(Continued on page 11)       Volume 31, Issue 2                                                                                                                                             Page 11 
Law Journal Publication Agreements, Cont’d 
 
(Continued from page 4) work and thus prefer that the journal run all re-
exclusive license becomes non-exclusive after a cer- print requests by them. Others may not relish the 
tain time. Exclusive licenses I have seen typically  prospect of dealing with permissions paperwork 
run six months to one year. An exclusive license  years after the article has been published. 
lasting over three years would be unusual.   
  Journal Commitments 
 Self-posting 
     I also check for some basic commitments from 
     Next I would check to see if the agreement, re-
the journals. The author should be attributed in 
gardless of type of transfer or license, permits the 
all copies and republications (as the author should 
author to post drafts or the published article on 
credit the journal as the venue of first publica-
personal or institutional websites. Some agreements 
tion). The article should not be published unless it 
will only permit posting to SSRN. This seems over-
is in mutually acceptable form. The author should 
ly restrictive, especially since law schools are begin-
at least receive a digital copy of the published ver-
ning to develop institutional repositories for faculty 
sion, if not free paper copies. If these provisions 
work and many authors have their own profession-
are not present, I would suggest requesting them. 
al websites. If it is not in the agreement, I recom-
 
mend asking to explicitly retain the right to post 
     This is not to suggest that journal editors 
drafts and the published copy on websites under 
would act in bad faith. I think most editors seek 
the author‘s or author‘s institution‘s control. Of 
to treat authors professionally, but in an unfortu-
course, the journal should be credited with first 
nate conflict, the publication agreement will be 
publication and will distribute the article in print, 
the document governing their relationship. Edi-
on its own website, and through databases. 
tors and authors should trust each other to fulfill 
 
their responsibilities, and writing out those re-
      Some journals impose embargoes on posting ar-
sponsibilities will help ensure everyone knows 
ticles, again to protect subscriptions. These can be 
what is expected. 
reasonable, but I would try to negotiate any em-
 
bargo longer than one year. Even a one-year em-
Conclusion  
bargo might unduly limit the online attention the 
 
article receives. Unlimited posting of drafts and a 
     When I began paying more attention to publi-
six-month embargo on posting the published ver-
cation agreements, I thought law professors would 
sion strikes me as a fair compromise. 
carefully examine and negotiate the agreements. 
 
Permissions to Third Parties  In my experience, however, most professors treat 
agreements like credit card agreements or website 
     Be sure to check for what uses the journal wish-
privacy policies. Like the rest of us, they often 
es to control permissions or charge fees. Some jour-
agree to the language that is presented to them 
nals give advance, blanket permission for classroom 
and do not think of it again until a problem arises. 
copying. Journals may want power to decide 
Publishing with a journal, however, is a much 
whether to grant a request, or they may simply for-
more permanent matter; one can cancel a credit 
ward the request to the author for decision. Posting 
card or boycott a website, but it would be quite a 
copies online might be allowed, but republishing 
chore to withdraw an article during production or 
the article in a book may require permission from 
worse, after publication. 
the journal. Here it is helpful to know some of the 
author‘s preferences and future plans. Some         (Continued on page 12) 
authors may want maximum control over their      Volume 31, Issue 2                                                                                                                                             Page 12 
Law Journal Publication Agreements, Cont’d 
(Continued from page 11)  and Information Law 28(2): 217 (2010), available at 
 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1674162.  
     Librarians can help faculty by familiarizing 
 
themselves with basic copyright law and various 
Sample Agreements 
agreements and offering informed review of journal 
contracts. This service will support informed faculty  AALS Model: http://www.aals.org/deansmemos/98-
publishing, encourage access to scholarship (I am  24.html.  
assuming most faculty very much want their work   
Science Commons Model: http://
to be read), and encourage journal editors to adopt 
sciencecommons.org/projects/publishing/oalaw/
author-friendly agreements. 
oalawpublication/. 
 
 
Useful Resources  Duke Law Journal: http://dlj.law.duke.edu/author-
 
agreement/.   
On Author Rights 
 
Michigan Law Review: http://
Bailey, Jr., Charles W., Author’s Rights, Tout de 
www.michiganlawreview.org/information/
Suite (2008), available at http://digital-
submissions/licensing-agreement. 
scholarship.org/ts/authorrights.pdf.  
 
 
University of New Hampshire Law Review: http://
Columbia University, KeepYourCopyrights, http://
law.unh.edu/assets/pdf/unh-law-review-publishing-
www.keepyourcopyrights.org/  (last accessed Jan. 
agreement.pdf.  
10, 2012). 
 
 
© 2012 by Benjamin J. Keele. This article is li-
Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coali-
censed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 
tion, Author Rights, http://www.arl.org/sparc/
License, which permits the unrestricted use, distri-
author/  (last accessed Jan. 10, 2012). 
bution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
 
On Law Journal Publication Agreements  the original author and source are credited. 
Keele, Benjamin J., ―Copyright Provisions in Law 
                   
Journal Publication Agreements,‖ Law Library Jour-  
nal 102(2): 269 (2010), available at http://aallnet.org/
main-menu/Publications/llj/LLJ-Archives/Vol-102/
publljv102n02/2010-15.pdf.  
 
 
Keele, Benjamin J., ―Copyright and Author Agree-
 
ments for Open Access Law Journals,‖ presented at 
the Implementing the Durham Statement Workshop 
 
(2010), available at http://scholarship.law.wm.edu/
libpubs/24/.  
 
                                                                                   
Widener, Michael N., ―Safeguarding ‗The Precious‘: 
Counsel on Law Journal Publication Agreements in 
Digital Times,‖ John Marshall Journal of Computer 
 