Vol. 108:4  [2016-31] KEEPING UP WITH NEW LEGAL TITLES 677
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maranlou, Sahar. Access to Justice in Iran: Women, Perceptions, and Reality. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2015. 263p. $99.
Reviewed by Benjamin J. Keele*
¶92 Sahar Maranlou, a postdoctoral researcher at Oxford University, specializes 
in Iranian studies and Islamic law and gender. Her book, Access to Justice in Iran: 
Women, Perceptions, and Reality, appears to be based on her 2012 doctoral thesis at 
the University of Warwick.22 In my experience, books based on theses and disserta-
tions tend to follow a fairly regimented structure: they have a very thorough litera-
ture review, discuss a discrete research project, and include more academic jargon 
than I would like. Access to Justice in Iran confirms all these expectations; it is a 
valuable piece of research in a neglected field, but it would be most useful to spe-
cialists in Iranian law.
¶93 Maranlou spends about half of the text providing conceptual background 
on different theories of justice. She particularly distinguishes between procedural 
justice, which is concerned with fair processes regardless of the ultimate outcome, 
and substantive justice, which is concerned with just results in each individual case. 
While Western legal systems mostly worry about procedural justice, Maranlou sug-
gests Islamic legal traditions place greater emphasis on substantive justice. How-
 
  *  © Benjamin J. Keele, 2016. Research and Instructional Services Librarian, Indiana University 
Robert H. McKinney School of Law, Indianapolis, Indiana.
  22.  About, sahar maraNlou, http://www.saharmaranlou.com/index.php/about/ [https://perma 
.cc/CH8L-QBLZ].678 LAW LIBRARY JOURNAL Vol. 108:4  [2016-31]
ever, when Maranlou examines the Iranian legal system and the extent to which it 
provides justice to women, she finds it lacking in how it provides procedural or 
substantive justice.
¶94 Despite imperatives for a strong justice system in Islamic legal thought, the 
Iranian legal system Maranlou describes needs substantial reform to achieve those 
principles. Corruption is a major concern, and persistent cultural norms discour-
age women from pursuing legal remedies, especially in family disputes. The Iranian 
judiciary and legal profession is working to establish more robust legal aid pro-
grams, but they are not yet enough or sufficiently well known to women to provide 
adequate access to the courts.
¶95 Maranlou surveyed and interviewed 120 Iranian women in Tehran to learn 
how they perceived the legal system and what recourse they had to it. She concludes 
that Iranian women generally understand their legal rights, but do not know how 
to vindicate those rights in court if need be. She also detects a cultural distrust of 
the courts and a common view that the courts are one of the last places a woman 
should go for help in a dispute.
¶96 Maranlou concludes that the Iranian legal community should empower 
women with more information on how women can protect their rights through 
the legal system, and that cultural taboos against women invoking legal protections 
should be challenged.
¶97 This book will be worthwhile for libraries supporting strong research pro-
grams in women’s rights and Middle Eastern legal issues. It is probably too special-
ized for basic collections on Islamic law.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   