 
Chapter 15 
 
NEOLIBERAL NATIONAL SECURITY: WIELDING COUNTERTERRORISM POWERS TO PROTECT 
ECONOMIC GROWTH 
 
 
 
Sudha Setty 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The last two central administrations in India—both the government led by the Congress Party 
and  the  former  Prime  Minister  Manmohan  Singh  from  2004  to  2014,  and  the  current 
government led by Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Prime Minister Narendra Modi—have 
embraced liberalization and the growing role of multinational corporations as an integral part 
of the Indian economic plan, and the key to the growing influence of India on the global 
economic and political stage. The executive order issued by the Modi government in June 2016 
to open up the Indian economy to foreign business and investment serves as a prime example: 
the ordered rules changes allow for foreign investors to establish 100 percent ownership in 
many types of companies, including those related to defense and security.1 Issuing this order 
was part of Prime Minister Modi’s work toward fulfilling a 2014 campaign promise to increase 
the rate of growth in the Indian economy, and reflected part of the 25 years-long process of 
liberalization, privatization and globalization in India. 
 
Protecting India’s economic interests and the ability of corporations to thrive is of paramount 
importance to the government, even as terrorism has been perceived for many years as posing 
a serious threat to the growth of the Indian economy.2 In March 2016, the External Affairs 
Minister of India, Sushma Swaraj, noted that terrorism posed a major threat to the stability of 
the Indian economy and its growth potential, and that strong and effective anti-terrorism 
measures were necessary to secure India’s current and projected economic growth.3 
 
The link between strong anti-terrorism measures as a predicate for strong economic growth is 
more than just a matter of political rhetoric. Under the 2012 amendments to the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) 1967, the definition of national security includes economic 
security, and the definition of terrorism includes threats or actual damage to public or private 
economic  interests.4  Hence,  anything  deemed  by  the  government  to  threaten  economic 
development can be viewed as a national security threat and, therefore, can be met with the 
anti-terrorism powers that have been accorded to the Central Government. The national 
security powers of the Central Government are remarkably broad and far-reaching, and should 
raise questions  as to  the potential for  government  overreaching  or  abuse. One example 
                                                           
1Geeta Anand and Hari Kumar, Hoping Jobs Follow, India Clears Investors’ Path, NY Times, 21 June 2016, at 
A1.  
2India’s National Security: Internal and External Threats, livemint.com, 27 June 2007, available at 
http://www.livemint.com/Specials/I10fKzf1lcWD6BG2zFuB3H/India8217s-National-Security-Internal-and-
External-Threa.html (discussing how the process of growing and protecting the Indian economy is jeopardized 
by inadequate responses to internal and external national security threats). 
3Terrorism impinging on economic growth: Sushma Swaraj, zeenews.com, 1 March 2016, available at  
http://zeenews.india.com/news/india/terrorism-impinging-on-economic-growth-sushma-swaraj_1861255html. 
4Section 15 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act 2012. 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
1  
 
  
discussed later in this chapter involves the Indian Telegraph Act of 1885, which authorizes the 
interception and storage of telegraph messages by the Central or State Governments in times 
of “public emergency, or in the interest of the public safety”5 if it is deemed necessary or 
expedient to do so in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the 
State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to the 
commission of an offence. Later interpretations and adaptations, such as Indian Telegraph 
Rules of 1951 and their amendments,6 allow for widespread surveillance and data collection 
(both content and metadata) in the name of national security.  The Central Monitoring System 
(CMS) is currently being developed and used by the Central Government to collect enormous 
amounts of data under the authority of these statutes.  Based on the current UAPA definition, 
that surveillance capability can be deployed in any instance in which the government believes 
that a threat to the economic security of India is at stake.  
 
The combination of these three strands—an imperative to protect and grow India’s economy, 
the definition of economic insecurity as a national security threat, and vast powers granted to 
deal with national security—has created a powerful vehicle by which the government can deal 
with perceived threats, but it also has created a potential for abuse that should be addressed and 
limited in order for India to maintain the character of its democracy and adherence to the rule 
of law. This chapter proceeds by first examining how economic security became to be a part 
of what the law considers to be national security. Second, it considers two contexts in which 
the government has used its extremely broad counterterrorism powers to crack down on 
perceived threats in the name of national security.  In each of these contexts, the government 
has painted the picture of a near-existential threat that must be dealt with harshly, regardless of 
the risk of abuse of civil rights and civil liberties.  The government’s actions in terms of 
cracking down on anti-nationalist protest in one instance, and in secretly implementing a broad 
data collection and surveillance regime in another, illustrate the dangers of empowering the 
government to use its vast powers to prevent, curtail or punish those who pose or are perceived 
to pose a threat to the economic security of India. 
 
HOW “NATIONAL SECURITY” CAME TO ENCOMPASS “ECONOMIC SECURITY” 
India has struggled with internal and external national security threats since its independence 
in 1947.7  India’s legal response to those threats has relied on a framework of constitutionally 
and statutorily granted emergency powers, plus non-emergency criminal laws granting broad 
intelligence-gathering and police powers that in many ways operate similar to emergency 
powers.8  This makes it all the more precarious for individuals or organizations labeled as 
“terrorists,” who often find themselves with curtailed protections of civil liberties, and possibly 
subject to a draconian framework that compromises constitutional rights such as access to 
counsel, protection against torture and abuse, and other procedural rights in terrorism-related 
cases.9 From a rule of law perspective, India should be ensuring that the legal definition of 
                                                           
5 Section 5(1) of the India Telegraph Act 1885. 
6E.g., Rule 419(a) of the Indian Telegraph Rules of 1951, Subs, by G.S.R. 193 (E), dated 1.3.2007 (w.e.f. 
12.3.2007). 
7 Anil Kalhan et al., Colonial Continuities: Human Rights, Terrorism and Security Laws in India, vol. 20 
Colum. J. Asian L., p. 93 at 99 (2006) (describing violence related to terrorism as a “chronic crisis of national 
security”). 
8 Articles 352-356 of the Constitution of India amended by The Constitution (Ninety-fourth Amendment) Act 
2006 (stating the emergency powers provisions). 
9 Surabhi Chopra, National Security Laws in India: The Unraveling of Constitutional Constraints, 17OR. REV. 
INT’L L.1, pp. 24-33 (2015) (describing the broad scope of India’s antiterrorism laws, and the sometimes 
abusive effects on individuals within their purview); Sudha Setty, Comparative Perspectives on Specialized 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
2  
 
  
terrorism remains narrowly written and construed so as to avoid the potential for abuse. Yet 
the history of India’s expansive definition of terrorism and its application to a variety of 
conventional  and  unconventional  contexts  suggests  that  the  Indian  Government  is  more 
focused on maintaining broad authority to investigate and prosecute security threats as it sees 
fit to define them, and less concerned with the civil and human rights abuses that may follow. 
 
The evolving definition of terrorism  
In the year after Emergency Rule ended in 1977, political, economic, and security-related 
pressures continued to undercut stability and economic growth in India.  In the early 1980s the 
Punjabi separatist movement fueled fears that anti-nationalist movements throughout India 
would gain strength, motivating Parliament to pass the Terrorist Affected Areas (Special 
Courts) Act of 1984 (TAAA).10 This statute contained the first legislative definition of a 
“terrorist,” which required that a person kills, acts violently, disrupts essential services, or 
damages property; with the purpose of intimidating the public, coercing the government, 
endangering the sovereignty or integrity of India, or “affecting adversely the harmony between 
different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities.”11 This 
definition is relatively broad, although it is tethered to conventional understandings of what 
constitutes terrorism, and is applicable only to designated “affected areas” within India. 
 
Due to political unrest over the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in 1984, the 
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA) was passed in 1985.12  This new 
Act defined terrorism in even broader terms as TAAA, with no geographic restriction to 
“affected areas.”  TADA included as “terrorists” those who acted violently “with intent to 
overawe the Government as by law established or to strike terror in the people or any section 
of the people or to alienate any section of the people or to adversely affect the harmony amongst 
different sections of the people….”13 
 
TADA expired in 1995,14 but the definition of terrorism was broadened further with the 
enactment of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2002 (POTA), which was passed quickly by the 
Indian Parliament after the September 11 attacks in the United States and the attacks on the 
Parliament in Delhi in 2001.  POTA defined a terrorist as one who acts with violence: 
 
[W]ith intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or to 
strike terror in the people or any section of the people does any act or thing by using 
bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable substances or firearms 
or other lethal weapons or poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other 
substances ... of a hazardous nature or by any other means whatsoever, in such a 
manner as to cause, or likely to cause, death of, or injuries to any person or persons 
or loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property or disruption of any supplies or 
services essential to the life of the community…. or detains any person and threatens 
                                                           
Trials for Terrorism, vol. 63 ME. L. REV. p. 131,at 164 at 171 (2010) (discussing rule of law concerns with 
regard to the specialized courts used to try some terrorists in India). 
10 The main objective of Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act of 1984 (TAAA) is “An act to provide for the 
speedy trial of certain offences in terrorist affected areas and for matters connected therewith.” 
11 Section 2(1)(h) of the Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act 1984. 
12 “The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1985, aims to make special provisions for the 
prevention of, and for coping with, terrorist and disruptive activities and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.” 
13  Section 3(i) of TADA.  
14 Kartar Singh v State of Punjab, (1994) 2 SCR 375 (India) (upholding the constitutionality of TADA after 
acknowledging potential problems of overreach). 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
3  
 
  
to kill or injure such person in order to compel the Government or any other person 
to do or abstain from doing any act..15 
 
The POTA definition came under critique for, among other human rights concerns, long-term 
preventive detention of Muslims, poor people, members of tribal groups, protesters and Dalits 
as “terrorists.” It was also criticized for enabling selective prosecution of such marginalized 
groups in special courts with diminished protections for defendants,16 whereas other persons 
accused of the same acts were often not prosecuted at all, or were charged with ordinary 
criminal offenses and were tried in ordinary courts.17 This was not a new phenomenon in the 
time of POTA.  Security policies, regulations, and laws aimed at punishing anti-government 
act have been part of the governance of India since the East India Company established rules 
for dealing with separatists and seditionists in 1793. For over two centuries, various statutes 
and regulations have allowed for selective preventive detention of those perceived to be 
dangerous to society and, therefore, a security risk—even when there were no grounds for trial 
of the suspect. 
 
Selective application of the “terrorist” label  
Perhaps the most graphic recent example of  the selective application of the label of“terrorism” 
occurred after the 2002 train fire in the town of Godhra, Gujarat. In that fire, 59 people, most 
of whom were members of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, a group affiliated with the Hindu 
conservative political party, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), died. A large group of Muslim 
residents of Godhra surrounded the train at the time and were in a contentious argument with 
those on the train. Investigations by the Gujarat State Government concluded that those outside 
of  the  train  were  a  “mob”  that  intentionally  lit  the  fire,  whereas  the  Indian  Central 
Government’s investigators concluded that the fire originated accidentally.18 Violence and 
rioting broke out in numerous areas after the fire, resulting in the killings of approximately 
1,100 people, most of whom were Muslims.19 
 
POTA was used to charge many of the Muslims who were part of the crowd outside of the 
train.  Seventy-nine  such  suspects  were  held  in  POTA-authorized  pre-trial  detention  for 
                                                           
15 Section 3(1)(a) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2002 (POTA), 
16Sudha Setty, Comparative Perspectives on Specialized Trials for Terrorism, vol. 63 ME. L. REV. p. 131,at 164 
at 171 (2010). 
17 Ujjwal Kumar Singh, The State, Democracy and Anti-Terror Laws in India, pp. 165-219 (Routledge 2007) 
(documenting selective prosecution under POTA);  Amos Guiora, Legislative and Policy Responses to 
Terrorism, A Global Perspective, vol.7,  San Diego Int’l L.J. p. 125 at 171 (2005) (noting that some described 
POTA as a “terrorist law [that would be] ... used to terrorise minorities”); Sudha Ramachandran, Filling India’s 
Anti-terrorism Void, Asia Times Online, 23 September. 2004, 
http://www.atimes.com/atimes/South_Asia/FI23Df03.html (noting that while the majority of the 32 
organizations banned under POTA were Muslim, none of the Hindu extremist groups were ever targeted). 
18Compare Report by the Commission of Inquiry Consisting of Mr. Justice G.T. Nanavati and Mr. Justice 
Akshay H. Mehta, Part I, 8th Sept.  2008, at  p. 227 (the Gujarat Government’s commission concluded that the 
train fire was a premeditated crime that was part of a larger conspiracy intended to kill Hindu activists);  Fatal 
'02 Hindu train fire laid to accident, not mob, www. nytimes.com, 18 January 2005, available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/01/17/world/asia/17iht-india html (reporting that the Central Government’s 
investigating concluded that the train fire was an accident).
19Celia W. Dugger, Religious Riots Loom Over Indian Politics, nytimes.com, 27 July 2002, available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/27/international/asia/27INDI.html (describing the heinous ways in which 
many Muslims were killed and injured during the riots). 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
4  
 
  
approximately seven years.20 They were transferred for ordinary criminal processing only in 
early 2009, after the POTA Review Committee found that the designation of “terrorism” was 
inappropriate under the circumstances, and the Gujarat High Court affirmed that the starting of 
the train fire may have been criminal, but was not an act of terrorism.21  Notably, POTA was 
never used to charge any Hindus involved in the violence and rioting.  This disparity led to 
allegations of selective prosecution22 and complicity by law enforcement and government 
officials as to the anti-Muslim violence.23  This disparity also supported the critique that the 
government’s vast counterterrorism authorities, when unchecked and employed freely, often 
led to abusive practices.   
POTA was repealed in 2004 over sustained concern of human rights abuses by the police and 
intelligence community, but even at that time, the bulk of its powers were encapsulated in other 
statutes.24 An expansive definition of terrorism was entrenched further in 2008 after the 
Mumbai terrorist attacks that left more than 160 people dead and hundreds more wounded.25 
Shortly after the attack and with little debate, Parliament passed two pieces of counterterrorism 
legislation: further amendments to the UAPA, and the National Investigation Agency Act 2008. 
Both statutes increased the power conferred on the Central Government to investigate and 
prosecute  terrorist  acts,  with  the  latter  law  also  establishing  the  National  Investigation 
Agency.26 
 
The difference in potential consequences between an ordinary criminal prosecution and that of 
a UAPA case is significant and problematic:27 for example, in 2012 a UAPA-based prosecution 
of a prominent Communist Party leader on charges of impersonation, cheating, forgery, and 
criminal conspiracy for assuming a fake identity and forging documents was dismissed due to 
the failure to follow proper prosecution procedures.  A court ordered the terrorism-related 
charges against the defendant dropped and, as a result, the defendant faced only the possibility 
of charges under the Indian Penal Code.  If he were to have been found guilty under the UAPA 
sentencing guidelines, he would have faced potential life imprisonment; under the Indian Penal 
                                                           
20POTA  not applicable in Godhra riots case: Gujarat HC, thehindu.com, 13 February.  2009, available at 
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Pota-not-applicable-in-Godhra-riots-case-Gujarat-
HC/articleshow/4120487.cms. 
21POTA review panel’s recommendations binding on Gujarat: Supreme Court, thehindu.com, 22 October. 2008, 
available at  http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/pota-review-panels-recommendation-binding-
on-gujarat-supreme-court/article1361671.ece. 
22See Human Rights Watch, We Have No Orders to Save You: State Participation and Complicity in Communal 
Violence in Gujarat, April 2002, available at http://wwwhrw.org/reports/2002/india/. 
23Ibid.. See also Gardiner Harris & Hari Kumar, Stiff Sentence for Former Gujarat Minister, nytimes.com, 31 
Aug.  2012, available athttp://india.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/08/31/stiff-sentence-for-former-gujarat-minister/ 
(describing the decades-long sentences for 32 Gujarat government officials in conjunction with the 2002 riots); 
See Ellen Barry, U.S. Reaches Out to Indian Opposition Leader It Once Rebuked, nytimes.com, Feb. 10, 2014, 
available at http://wwwnytimes.com/2014/02/11/world/asia/us-reaches-out-to-indian-opposition-leader-it-once-
rebuked.html (describing the diplomatic chill between the United States and Narendra Modi as a result of 
Modi’s governance of Gujarat during the 2002 riots). 
24Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Ordinance, 2004, No. 2, § 15, Acts of Parliament, 2004 (India) 
(adopting the POTA definition of terrorism in its entirety). 
25 Somini Sengupta & Keith Bradsher, India Faces a Reckoning as Terror Toll Eclipses vol. 170, N.Y. Times, 30 
Nov..2008, at A1 (questioning whether Indian authorities could have better anticipated the terrorist attack and 
ensured heightened security).   
26 Human Rights Watch, Back to the Future: India’s 2008 Counterterrorism Laws p. 1 (2010). 
27 Repeating the Mistakes of the Past, Human Rights Documentation Center (Jan. 22, 2009), http:// 
wwwhrdcnet/sahrdc/hrfeatures/HRF191.htm (noting that the UAPA definition institutionalizes the worst 
overreaching and missteps from TADA and POTA because it relates not only to counterterrorism policy, but to 
other “disruptive” activities). 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
5  
 
  
Code, he faced a maximum of seven years’ imprisonment.28 
 
Broadening “terrorism” to include economic matters 
Since the effect of being charged under the UAPA is enormous, the rule of law demands 
appropriate safeguards to protect against overly broad use or misuse.  Yet the definition of 
terrorism in the UAPA amendments of 2012 makes clear that the law is moving the opposite 
direction: first, “security” includes “economic security,” which in turn includes “financial, 
monetary and fiscal stability, security of means of production and distribution, food security, 
livelihood security, energy security, ecological and environmental security.”29 Secondly, the 
“person” who can be viewed under the UAPA as engaging in terrorist activity not only includes 
natural persons, but also can be a company; a firm; an organization or an association of persons 
or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not; every artificial juridical person…; and 
any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any person falling within any of the 
preceding sub-clauses.30  Thirdly, the production or smuggling or circulation of high quality 
counterfeit Indian currency is defined as a terrorist act.31 
 
The UAPA definition is not tethered to the commonly understood elements of terrorism, such 
as political violence meant to intimidate a group of civilians, or violence involving serious 
injury or killing, hostage-taking or large-scale destruction.32 This repeated expansion of the 
definition of “terrorism” is particularly noteworthy given the current BJP platform on national 
security,  which  calls  for  increasing  the  counter-terrorism  powers  that  it  claims  were 
“dismantled” under the previous government.33  As of this writing, it is not yet apparent if or 
how the BJP plans to increase the government’s counter terrorism powers and whether those 
powers will be directed against perceived threats to economic security, yet the UAPA’s 
sweeping definition of terrorism provides cause for concern.   
 
HOW BROAD DEFINITIONS OF TERRORISM MAY LEAD TO ABUSE UNDER THE 
GUISE OF MAINTAINING ECONOMIC SECURITY 
The authority of Indian intelligence and law enforcement agencies to combat security threats 
forcefully is long-standing and comes with inadequate limitations and checks.  These particular 
concerns are evident in two recent contexts: first, the government’s willingness to crack down 
on anyone that it believes has an “anti-nationalist” tendency, even if those anti-government 
sentiments could be characterized as unpopular but protected expression.  This treatment of 
unpopular expression as a near-existential security threat raises broader concerns as to what 
actions the government might take if it comes across a perceived threat to the economic growth 
                                                           
28Jiby Katakayyam,  Cops Goofed Up, Ghandy Cleared, thehindu.com, 30 Mar. 2012, available at 
http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-otherstates/cops-goofed-up-ghandy-
cleared/article3260527.ece.  The presiding judge held that sufficient evidence supported charges against the 
defendant under Sections 419 (punishment for cheating by personation), 420 (cheating by dishonestly inducing 
delivery of property), 468 (forgery for purpose of cheating), 474 (having knowing possession of certain forged 
documents and intending their use as genuine), and 120B (punishment of criminal conspiracy) of the Indian 
Penal Code.  Id. 
29Section 2(1)(ea) Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, inserted by Amendment Act of 2012. 
30Section 2(1)(ec), Ibid. 
31Section 15(1)(a)(iiia), Ibid.  These acts have long been criminalized under British colonial and Indian law.  
See Indian Penal Code (1860), sections 465, 468, 489D. 
32 Sudha Setty, What’s in a Name? How Nations Define Terrorism Ten Years After 9/11, vol. 33 U. PA. J. INT’L 
L., p. 1, at 6-17 (2011) (describing the common working definitions of terrorism used at the international level). 
33Bharatiya Janata Party, Election Manifesto 2014, at p. 38, available at 
http://www.bjp.org/images/pdf 2014/full manifesto english 07.04.2014.pdf. 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
6  
 
  
of India, which it may then consider as a national security threat.  Second, the government’s 
efforts to gather, store, and access huge troves of personal and private electronic data in its 
drive to root out any and all terrorist threats that the government itself perceives has corroded 
the rule of law norms by which the government ought to abide.  Such broadly and vaguely 
understood counterterrorism programs, justified by the government as necessary to maintain 
the integrity of the nation, should be held to better transparency and accountability standards.  
If economic security is used in the future as the justification for this or any other similarly 
intrusive counterterrorism effort, the precedent being set now suggests that few controls will 
be readily available to constrain government officials or hold them to account when abuses 
occur. 
 
Cracking down on so-called “anti-nationalists” 
Historically, the government has not hidden the fact that it will crack down on any person or 
group  that  it  deems  to  be  “anti-nationalist”  or  a  security  threat.  Many  critiques  of  the 
government’s abuse of power against anti-nationalists are not new—not only have they existed 
since the time of British colonial rule, but they persisted through the years of Emergency rule 
and in the decades since then.34The events surrounding protests at Jawaharlal Nehru University 
(JNU) in 2016 illustrate a continuation of this zero-tolerance policy toward anti-nationalist 
rhetoric, and they also illustrate the dangers of allowing the government to re-characterize anti-
government opinions and non-violent protest as seditious and, therefore, a threat to national 
security. 
 
In February 2016, students at JNU organized massive and disruptive rallies on campus to 
protest various government policies, including those that led to the 2013 execution of Afzal 
Guru, a Kashmiri separatist convicted of involvement in the deadly attacks on the Indian 
Parliament building in 2001.35  The JNU students involved in the protest were shouting 
comments and slogans that questioned the authority of the government and denigrated the 
fairness of the Indian criminal justice system in its treatment and prosecution of Guru.36  Two 
things occurred in response to the student protests: first, counter-protestors, many of them 
aligned with the governing BJP, simultaneously rallied to try to drown out the message of the 
JNU students.  From a legal perspective, this was not at all problematic or controversial, since 
these counter-protests were a form of protected speech.  The second development, however, 
was more troubling. A spokesman for the BJP said that the JNU student protestors should not 
be protected by India’s constitutional free speech protections,37 since the JNU students were 
arguing that the legal process afforded to Guru was inadequate and that Guru’s execution 
                                                           
34Anil Kalhan et al., Colonial Continuities: Human Rights, Terrorism and Security Laws in India, vol. 20 
Colum. J. Asian L., p. 93 at 99 (2006). 
35Sandeep Joshi & Ashok Kumar, Afzal Guru hanged in secrecy, buried in Tihar Jail, thehindu.com, 10 Feb. 
2013, available at http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/afzal-guru-hanged-in-secrecy-buried-in-tihar-
jail/article4396289.ece. 
36Julie McCarthy, Protests Widen As India Debates When Speech Is Sedition, npr.org, 16 Feb. 2016, available at 
http://www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2016/02/16/466974582/indian-students-say-its-free-speech-government-
calls-it-sedition. 
37Article 19 of the Constitution of India guarantees the “freedom of speech and expression” and the right to 
“assemble peaceably and without arms.” However, under Art 19(2) those free speech rights can be 
constitutionally limited “in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, 
friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court, [or] 
defamation or incitement to an offence.”   
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
7  
 
  
should be more accurately characterized as an act of murder.38 The Home Minister, Rajnath 
Singh, warned that anybody using anti-India slogans at the JNU protests “will not be spared,” 
and  asked  the  police  in  Delhi  to  take  the  “strongest  possible  action”  against  any  anti-
government protestors.39 The Minister for Chemicals and Fertilizers echoed this statement, 
characterizing the JNU protest as a “betrayal to the country” and promising that the government 
would take “strict action” against anyone supporting the protests o on Guru’s treatment.40 
 
In response, the Delhi police arrested a student leader of the protests, Kanhaiya Kumar, and 
other student protestors.41  Kumar was charged with sedition—long a favorite tool of those 
seeking to dispel anti-government rhetoric as a threat to national security—and held for twenty 
days in jail.42 Notably, Kumar was held under the same sedition provision that had been used 
by the British colonial government to arrest and charge Mohandas Gandhi during the 1940s 
independence movement.43At Kumar’s bail hearing, the presiding Delhi High Court judge 
stated that the JNU protests were not protected by free speech provisions of the Constitution of 
India,44 and instead should be considered as “a kind of infection which needs to be controlled,” 
further noting that “if the infection results in infecting the limb to the extent that it becomes 
gangrene, amputation is the only treatment.”45 
 
This zero-tolerance attitude toward speech and protest that questions the wisdom or legality of 
government action is notable in that it both enables harsh treatment of the protester, and also 
characterizes such speech as a near-existential threat to national security.  Such a dynamic 
around the treatment of the JNU protestors bears directly on the continued priorities of the 
Modi Government with regard to liberalization, privatization, and globalization. Liberalization 
and globalization involves winners and losers in terms of economic power and human rights, 
and protests regarding the economic liberalization policies of the Modi government seem likely 
if and when Indian businesses or the human and civil rights of Indian citizens are negatively 
impacted.46 Legally, such protesters may be considered under the UAPA definition of terrorism 
as threats to the economic and national security of the country, and be treated very harshly as 
a result.   
                                                           
38Julie McCarthy, Protests Widen As India Debates When Speech Is Sedition, npr.org, 16 Feb. 2016, available at 
http://www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2016/02/16/466974582/indian-students-say-its-free-speech-government-
calls-it-sedition 
39JNU protests row: Will not spare those who raise anti-India slogans, Rajnath Singh says, timesofindia.com, 
13 Feb. 2016, available at http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/JNU-protest-row-Will-not-spare-those-who-
raise-anti-India-slogans-Rajnath-Singh-says/articleshow/50975823.cms (internal quotations omitted). 
40Ibid. 
41Aneesha Mathur, JNU row: Kanhaiya Kumar gets bail and a lesson on thoughts that ‘infect…(like) gangrene,’ 
indianexpress.com, 3 March 2016, available at http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/kanhaiya-
kumar-bail-jnu-delhi-high-court/. 
42JNU protests row: Will not spare those who raise anti-India slogans, Rajnath Singh says, timesofindia.com, 
13 Feb. 2016, available at http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/JNU-protest-row-Will-not-spare-those-who-
raise-anti-India-slogans-Rajnath-Singh-says/articleshow/50975823.cms (internal quotations omitted). 
43Ibid. 
44 Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India makes free speech a fundamental right, but this may be qualified 
in the “interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State” or other reasons.  First 
Amendment to the Constitution (18 June 1951).See also Indian Penal Code, section 153A (Promoting enmity 
between different groups on grounds of religion, rare, place of birth, residence, language, etc. and doing acts 
prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.) 
45Kanhaiya Kumar v State of NCT of Delhi, W.P. (CRL) 558/2016 & Cri.M.A. Nos. 3237/2016 & 3262/2016 
(Delhi High Court, 2 March 2016) (Rani, J.), at ¶¶ 47-48. 
46Geeta Anand and Hari Kumar, Hoping Jobs Follow, India Clears Investors’ Path, NY Times, 21 June 2016, at 
A1. 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
8  
 
  
Secret surveillance and the possibility of using counterterrorism tools to protect 
“economic security” 
Beyond arrest and potentially being charged with a terrorism-related crime, another example 
of overly broad and poorly constrained counterterrorism powers is the authority of the Indian 
Government to use broad and secret surveillance to build a case against those it perceives as 
threats to economic security. 
 
The authority of the Indian Government to conduct warrantless surveillance and data collection 
is long-standing and broad, and does not include effective checks, judicial or otherwise, to 
control against potential abuse.  Authority for current policies of warrantless wiretapping and 
surveillance, like its sedition laws and many other of India’s counter-terrorism authorities, finds 
its roots in colonial-era legislation that was meant to control the Indian population and prevent 
possible uprisings against the British colonial government.47 
 
The Indian Telegraph Act of 1885 specifically authorizes the interception and storage of 
telegraph messages by the Central or State Governments in times of “public emergency, or in 
the interest of the public safety” if it is deemed necessary or expedient to do so “in the interests 
of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign 
States or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of an offence.”48 This 
permissive language set the stage for over a century of legislation, executive action and judicial 
enabling of broad surveillance of all forms of telecommunications, even in peace time, so long 
as such surveillance has a security-related nexus. 
 
As part of the government’s expansion of counterterrorism powers after the November 2008 
terrorist attacks in Mumbai, Parliament amended the Information Technology Act 2000.  These 
amendments allowed for surveillance of all digital communications of all individuals within 
India, regardless of whether security threats were at issue.49  The amendments also made clear 
that the scope of warrantless surveillance authority includes all types of telephony data and 
internet data.50 By 2009, the government had leveraged the authority granted in 1885 and 2008 
to announce creation of the Central Monitoring System (CMS), a data collection and analysis 
system meant to capture all electronic data throughout India.51  The specific parameters of this 
program remain secret and operate without external oversight, despite efforts by civil society 
organizations to create privacy legislation to curtail the reach of the CMS, to challenge the 
constitutionality of the CMS in court, and to ensure that the broad capabilities of the CMS are 
applied narrowly by the government.52 
                                                           
47Anil Kalhan et al., Colonial Continuities: Human Rights, Terrorism and Security Laws in India, vol. 20 
Colum. J. Asian L., p. 93 at 99 (2006) (examining India’s security and antiterrorism laws from an historic and 
institutional perspective). 
48Section 5(2) of the India Telegraph Act 1885..  
49 Information Technology (Amendment) Act 2008, No. 10, Acts of Parliament, 2009 (India) (authorizing broad 
data collection and analysis regardless of whether such investigation is related to an emergency or national 
security matter). 
50Ibid. 
51Rajya Sabha, Ministry of Communications and Information Technology ,Centralised System to Monitor 
Communications, PRESS INFO. BUREAU(Nov. 26, 2009, 17:50 IST) 
http://pibnic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=54679 (noting that the system was necessary “to strengthen the 
security environment in the country”). 
52HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH, India: New Monitoring System Threatens Rights (7 June 2013), 
http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/06/07/india-new-monitoring-system-threatens-rights (detailing the need for 
greater transparency over the operation of the CMS and proposed privacy legislation to curb the reach of the 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
9  
 
  
 
Few constraints seems likely given the typical deference of the Indian judiciary with regard to 
national security initiatives and the ongoing attacks that have buoyed public support for 
extremely strong counterterrorism powers.  It seems unlikely that the Indian judiciary would 
find a constitutional violation in the type of surveillance authorized under the 2008 amendment 
to the Information Technology Act, or that which is perhaps taking place under the CMS. On 
one hand, the Supreme Court has previously interpreted Article 21 of the Constitution of India, 
which articulates the fundamental right to life, as including privacy of persons and personal 
thought.53 The court has used its interpretation of Article 21 as the basis for inferring the need 
for procedural safeguards against potentially abusive and overly intrusive surveillance.54 On 
the other hand, the Indian judiciary has historically been extremely deferential to legislative 
and executive decision-making on counterterrorism matters, even when human rights and civil 
liberties are at stake.55 The various counter-terrorism statutes enabling broad surveillance to be 
deployed in any instance in which the government believes that a threat to the economic 
security of India is at stake likely would not be struck down by a court. This means that those 
powers will remain intact unless public or political pressure on the Government forces a change 
to the laws such that CMS is limited to reflect India’s commitment to rule of law principles.  
 
CONCLUSION 
Three  strands  are  discussed  in  this  chapter:  first,  the  political  imperative  of  the  Indian 
Government to protect and grow the economy while dealing with the fear that terrorism may 
derail India’s economic development; second, the inclusion of “economic insecurity” in the 
legal definition of a national security threat; and third, the vast powers granted to and used by 
intelligence and law enforcement agencies deal with perceived national security threats with 
little judicial or other external constraint.  These strands should be viewed in conjunction with 
each other to understand the concern surrounding the use of counterterrorism powers to 
preserve neo-liberal goals in the face of criticism and protest. In these strands, we see a 
powerful means by which the government can deal with perceived threats, but also a strong 
potential for abuse.  The exemplars analyzed here—the characterization of anti-nationalist 
protest as a form of sedition that led to the harsh treatment of the JNU protesters, as well as the 
largely secret but extremely broad CMS data gathering and surveillance system—offer some 
insight into the concerns that arise when national security and counterterrorism powers are 
granted broadly and without strong oversight or constraint. 
 
Parliament should reconsider its current authorization of the use of counterterrorism powers to 
deal with potential economic threats, and courts should be willing to look closely at cases in 
which the rights to expression, due process, and privacy are curtailed in the name of economic 
security. If India is to ensure adherence to the rule of law while fulfilling the national priority 
of growing its economy, better transparency and accountability must be insisted upon by the 
Parliament, courts, and the public. 
                                                           
CMS); see also Pranesh Prakash, Can India Trust Its Government on Privacy?, N.Y. TIMES, 11 July 2013, 
http://india.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/07/11/can-india-trust-its-government-on-
privacy/? php=true& type=blogs& r=0. 
53Kharak Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh AIR 1963 SC 1295 (1964)1 SCR 332 (holding that the meaning of 
personal liberty as guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India included a citizen’s freedom from 
encroachments on private life). 
54People’s Union for Civil Liberties v Union of India AIR 1997 SC 568; (1997)1 SCC 301. 
55Mrinal Satish & Aparna Chandra, Of Maternal State and Minimalist Judiciary: The Indian Supreme Court's 
Approach to Terror-Related Adjudication, vol. 21 NAT’L LAW SCH. OF INDIA REV., p. 51 (2009) (assessing the 
Supreme Court’s lack of effectiveness in providing a judicial check on overreaching counterterrorism policies). 
F: Sairam Bhat | LPG – P-3  Ch 13 | 2.01.2017 | R from Author 8-2-2017 | ELH Edit 3 Pf 28-2-2017                                                                        
10  
 
 