 
 
SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM? WHY A ‘RIGHT 
TO AN EXPLANATION’ IS PROBABLY NOT THE 
REMEDY YOU ARE LOOKING FOR 
LILIAN EDWARDS† & MICHAEL VEALE†† 
ABSTRACT 
Algorithms, particularly machine learning (ML) algorithms, 
are increasingly important to individuals’ lives, but have caused a 
range  of  concerns  revolving  mainly  around  unfairness, 
discrimination and opacity. Transparency in the form of a “right to 
an explanation” has emerged as a compellingly attractive remedy 
since it intuitively promises to open the algorithmic “black box” to 
promote  challenge,  redress,  and  hopefully  heightened 
accountability. Amidst the general furore over algorithmic bias we 
describe, any remedy in a storm has looked attractive. 
However, we argue that a right to an explanation in the EU 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is unlikely to present 
a complete remedy to algorithmic harms, particularly in some of 
the  core  “algorithmic  war  stories”  that  have  shaped  recent 
attitudes in this domain. Firstly, the law is restrictive, unclear, or 
even paradoxical concerning when any explanation-related right 
can  be  triggered.  Secondly,  even  navigating  this,  the  legal 
conception of explanations as “meaningful information about the 
logic of processing” may not be provided by the kind of ML 
“explanations” computer scientists have developed, partially in 
response. ML explanations are restricted both by the type of 
                                                      
† Professor of Internet Law, Strathclyde Law School, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, 
UK [lilian.edwards [at] strath.ac.uk]. Research supported in part by the Arts and Humanities 
Research Council (AHRC) centre CREATe, and the Engineering and Physical Sciences 
Research Council (EPSRC) Digital Economy Hub Horizon at University of Nottingham, 
grant number EP/G065802/1. 
†† Doctoral candidate, Department of Science, Technology, Engineering and Public Policy 
(STEaPP), University College London, UK [m.veale [at] ucl.ac.uk]; technical advisor, Red 
Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre. Michael Veale receives support from the EPSRC, grant 
number EP/M507970/1 and the World Bank Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery (GFDRR).  
The authors would like to thank Johannes Welbl, Max Van Kleek, Reuben Binns, Giles 
Lane, and Tristan Henderson, and participants of BILETA 2017 (University of Braga, 
Portugal), the 2017 Privacy Law Scholars Conference (PLSC) and the 2017 Big Data: New 
Challenges for Law and Ethics Conference, University of Ljubljana, for their helpful 
comments. 19                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
explanation sought, the dimensionality of the domain and the type 
of  user  seeking  an  explanation.  However,  “subject-centric" 
explanations (SCEs) focussing on particular regions of a model 
around a query show promise for interactive exploration, as do 
explanation systems based on learning a model from outside rather 
than  taking  it  apart  (pedagogical  versus  decompositional 
explanations)  in  dodging  developers'  worries  of  intellectual 
property or trade secrets disclosure. 
Based on our analysis, we fear that the search for a “right to 
an explanation” in the GDPR may be at best distracting, and at 
worst nurture a new kind of “transparency fallacy.” But all is not 
lost. We argue that other parts of the GDPR related (i) to the right 
to erasure ("right to be forgotten") and the right to data portability; 
and (ii) to privacy by design, Data Protection Impact Assessments 
and certification and privacy seals, may have the seeds we can use 
to make algorithms more responsible, explicable, and human-
centered. 
INTRODUCTION 
  Increasingly, algorithms regulate our lives. Decisions vital to our 
welfare and freedoms are made using and supported by algorithms that 
improve with data: machine learning (ML) systems. Some of these mediate 
channels of communication and advertising on social media platforms, 
search engines or news websites used by billions. Others are being used to 
arrive at decisions vital to individuals, in areas such as finance, housing, 
employment,  education  or  justice.  Algorithmic  systems  are  thus 
increasingly familiar, even vital, in both private, public and domestic 
sectors of life. 
  The public has only relatively recently become aware of the ways in 
which their fortunes may be governed by systems they do not understand, 
and feel they cannot control; and they do not like it. Hopes of feeling in 
control of these systems are dashed by their hiddenness, their ubiquity, their 
opacity, and the lack of an obvious means to challenge them when they 
produce unexpected, damaging, unfair or discriminatory results. Once, 
people talked in hushed tones about “the market” and how its “invisible 
hand” governed and judged their lives in impenetrable ways: now it is 
observable that there is similar talk about “the algorithm,” as in: “I don’t 
know why the algorithm sent me these adverts” or “I hate that algorithm.”1 
Alternatively, algorithms may be seen as a magic elixir that can somehow 
                                                      
1 See, e.g., TANIA BUCHER, The Algorithmic Imaginary: Exploring the Ordinary Affects of 
Facebook Algorithms, 20 INFO., COMM. AND SOC’Y 30 (2015) (a qualitative study of how 
individuals online understand the “algorithms” around them). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  20 
mysteriously solve hitherto unassailable problems in society.2 It seems that 
we are all now to some extent, “slaves to the algorithm.” In his landmark 
book, Frank Pasquale describes this as “the black box society,”3 and the 
issue has become a subject of international attention by regulators, expert 
bodies, politicians and legislatures.4 
  There has been a flurry of interest in a so-called “right to an 
explanation” that has been claimed to have been introduced in the General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)5. This claim was fuelled in part by a 
short conference paper presented at a ML conference workshop,6 which has 
received considerable attention in the media.7 However a similar remedy 
had existed8 in the EU Data Protection Directive (DPD), which preceded the 
GDPR, since 1995.9 This remedy held promise with its updated translation 
                                                      
2  See  Randall  Munroe,  Here  to  Help,  XKCD  (last  visited  May  25,  2017), 
https://xkcd.com/1831/. 
3 FRANK PASQUALE, THE BLACK BOX SOCIETY: THE SECRET ALGORITHMS THAT CONTROL 
MONEY AND INFORMATION (Harvard University Press 2015). 
4  See,  e.g.,  INFORMATION  COMMISSIONERS  OFFICE  (ICO),  BIG  DATA,  ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE, MACHINE LEARNING AND DATA PROTECTION (2017); EUROPEAN DATA 
PROTECTION SUPERVISOR (EDPS), MEETING THE CHALLENGES OF BIG DATA: A CALL FOR 
TRANSPARENCY, USER CONTROL, DATA PROTECTION BY DESIGN AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
[OPINION 7/2015] (2015). ROYAL SOCIETY, MACHINE LEARNING: THE POWER AND PROMISE OF 
COMPUTERS  THAT  LEARN  BY  EXAMPLE.  (2017);  Wetenschappelijke  Raad  voor  het 
Regeringsbeleid [Dutch Scientific Council for Government Policy (WRR)], Big data in een 
vrije en veilige samenleving [Big data in a free and safe society], WRR-RAPPORT 95 (2016); 
Commons Science and Technology Select Committee, Algorithms in Decision-Making 
Inquiry  Launched,  UK  PARLIAMENT  (Feb.  28,  2017)[https://perma.cc/PJX2-XT7X]; 
NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL, PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF AI (2016), 
[https://perma.cc/6CDM-VR3V]. 
5 Regulation (EU) 2016/679, of the European Parliament and the Council of 27 April 2016 
on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the 
free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection 
Regulation), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 1 (hereafter “GDPR”). 
6 Bryce Goodman & Seth Flaxman, EU Regulations on Algorithmic Decision Making and “a 
Right to an Explanation,” 2016 ICML WORKSHOP ON HUMAN INTERPRETABILITY IN ML 
(2016). 
7 See, e.g., Ian Sample, AI Watchdog Needed to Regulate Automated Decision-making, Say 
Experts, THE GUARDIAN, (Jan. 27, 2017), [https://perma.cc/TW2C-MZWX]. 
8 There is a long history of work into explanation facilities, previously referred to as 
“scrutability” in Web Science. See, e.g., Judy Kay, Scrutable Adaptation: Because We Can 
and Must, (2006), in ADAPTIVE HYPERMEDIA AND ADAPTIVE WEB-BASED SYSTEMS (V.P. 
Wade et al. eds., Springer 2006). 
9 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on 
the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, 1995 O.J. (L 281) 31 (hereafter “Data Protection Directive” or 
“DPD”). For earlier discussions concerning what is now referred to as a “right to an 21                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
into the GDPR, yet in the highly restricted and unclear form it has taken, it 
may actually provide far less help for these seeking control over algorithmic 
decision making than the hype would indicate. 
  Restrictions identified within the GDPR’s Articles 22 and 15(h) 
(the provisions most often identified as useful candidates for providing 
algorithmic remedies) include: carve-outs for intellectual property (IP) 
protection and trade secrets;10 restriction of application to decisions that are 
“solely” made by automated systems; restriction to decisions that produce 
“legal” or similarly “significant” effects; the timing of such a remedy in 
relation to the decision being made; the authorisation of stronger aspects of 
these remedies by non-binding recitals rather than the GDPR’s main text, 
leading to substantial legal uncertainty; and the practical difficulty in 
knowing when or how decisions are being made, particularly in relation to 
“smart” environments.11 Given the volume of media and literature attention 
currently being paid to this possible right to an explanation, our interest is 
threefold: what type of remedies currently exist in European law, how can 
they be meaningfully implemented, and are these the remedies one would 
really start from given a free hand. 
  This paper explores explanation as a remedy for the challenges of 
the ML era, from a European legal, and technical, perspective, and asks 
whether a right to an explanation is really the right we should seek. We 
open by limiting our scrutiny of “algorithms” in this paper to complex ML 
systems which identify and utilise patterns in data, and go on to explore 
perceived challenges and harms attributed to the growing use of these 
systems in practice. Harms such as discrimination, unfairness, privacy and 
opacity, are increasingly well explored in both the legal and ML literature, 
so here only highlighted to found subsequent arguments. We then continue 
on slightly less well travelled land to ask if transparency, in the form of 
explanation rights, is really as useful a remedy for taming the algorithm as it 
intuitively seems to be. Transparency has long been regarded as the logical 
first  step  to  getting  redress  and  vindication  of  rights,  familiar  from 
institutions like due process and freedom of information, and is now being 
                                                                                                                       
explanation,” see Alfred Kobsa, Tailoring Privacy to Users’ Needs, in USER MODELING, (M. 
Bauer et al. eds., Springer 2001), doi:10.1007/3-540-44566-8_52; Mireille Hildebrandt, 
Profiling and the rule of law, 1 IDENTITY IN THE INFORMATION SOCIETY 1, 55 (2008), 
doi:10.1007/s12394-008-0003-1. 
10 Rosemary Jay, UK Data Protection Act 1998—the Human Rights Context, 14 INT’L REV. 
OF LAW, COMPUTERS & TECH. 3, 385, (2000) (doi:10.1080/713673366). 
11 Sandra Wachter et al., Why a Right to Explanation of Automated Decision-Making Does 
Not Exist in the General Data Protection Regulation, 7 INTERNATIONAL DATA PRIVACY LAW 
2, 76–99 (2017), doi:10.1093/idpl/ipx005; Mireille Hildebrandt, The Dawn of a Critical 
Transparency Right for the Profiling Era, DIGITAL ENLIGHTENMENT YEARBOOK 2012 
(Jacques Bus et al. eds., 2012).  No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  22 
ported as a prime solution to algorithmic concerns such as unfairness and 
discrimination.  But  given  the  difficulty  in  finding  “meaningful” 
explanations (explored below), we ask if this may be a non-fruitful path to 
take. 
  We then consider what explanation rights the GDPR actually 
provides, and how they might work out in practice to help data subjects. To 
do this, we draw upon several salient algorithmic “war stories” picked up by 
the media, that have heavily characterised academic and practitioner 
discussion at conferences and workshops. It turns out that because of the 
restrictions alluded to above, the GDPR rights would often likely have been 
of little assistance to data subjects generally considered to be adversely 
affected by algorithmic decision-making. 
  This exercise also identifies a further problem: data protection (DP) 
remedies are fundamentally based around individual rights—since the 
system itself derives from a human rights paradigm—while algorithmic 
harms typically arise from how systems classify or stigmatise groups. While 
this problem is known as a longstanding issue in both privacy and equality 
law, it remains underexplored in the context of the “right to an explanation” 
in ML systems. 
  Next,  we  consider  how  practical  a  right  to  a  “meaningful” 
explanation is given current technologies. First, we identify two types of 
algorithmic explanations: model-centric explanations (MCEs) and subject-
centric explanations (SCEs). While the latter may be more promising for 
data subjects seeking individual remedies, the quality of explanations may 
be depreciated by factors such as the multi-dimensional nature of the 
decision the system is concerned with, and the type of individual who is 
asking for an explanation. 
  However, on a more positive note, we observe that explanations 
may usefully be developed for purposes other than to vindicate data subject 
rights. Firstly, they may help users to trust and make better use of ML 
systems by helping them to make better “mental maps” of how the model 
works. Secondly, pedagogical explanations (a model-of-a-model), rather 
than those made by decomposition (explaining it using the innards) may 
avoid the need to disclose protected IP or trade secrets in the model, a 
problem often raised in the literature. 
  After thus taking legal and technological stock, we conclude that 
there is some danger of research and legislative efforts being devoted to 
creating rights to a form of transparency that may not be feasible, and may 
not match user needs. As the history of industries like finance and credit 
shows, rights to transparency do not necessarily secure substantive justice 23                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
or effective remedies.12 We are in danger of creating a “meaningless 
transparency” paradigm to match the already well known “meaningless 
consent” trope. 
  After this interim conclusion, we move on to discussing in outline 
what useful remedies relating to algorithmic governance may be derived 
from the GDPR other than a right to an explanation. First, the connected 
rights-based  remedies  of  erasure  (“right  to  be  forgotten”)  and  data 
portability, in Articles 17 and 20 respectively, may in certain cases be as 
useful, if not more so, than a right to an explanation. However, their 
application to inferences is still unclear and up for grabs. 
  Second, we consider several novel provisions in the GDPR which 
do not give individuals rights, but try to provide a societal framework for 
better privacy practices and design: requirements for Data Protection Impact 
Assessments (DPIAs) and privacy by design (PbD), as well as non-
mandatory privacy seals and certification schemes. These provisions, unlike 
explanation strategies, may help produce both more useful and more 
explicable ML systems. 
  From these we suggest that we should perhaps be less concerned 
with providing individual rights on demand to data subjects and more 
concerned both with (a) building better ML systems ab initio and (b) 
empowering agencies, such as NGOs, regulators, or civil society scrutiny 
organisations, to review the accuracy, lack of bias and integrity of a ML 
system in the round and not simply challenge ML decisions on behalf of 
individuals. US legal literature has begun to explore these options using its 
due process literature and public oversight experiences, with suggestions 
such as “an FDA for algorithms”13 and variants on “big data due process.”14 
However these solutions are currently largely aspirational, partly because 
the US lacks a clear omnibus legal regime around personal data to build on. 
European law, by contrast, provides a panoply of remedies in the GDPR 
that could be pressed into service immediately (or at least from May 2018 
when it becomes mandatory law). Such approaches certainly come with 
their own challenges, but may take us closer to taming and using, rather 
than being enslaved by, algorithms. 
                                                      
12 See, e.g., Kate Crawford & Jason Schultz, Big Data and Due Process: Toward a 
Framework to Redress Predictive Privacy Harms, 55 B.C. L. REV. 1 (2014); Pasquale, supra 
note 3. 
13 See generally Andrew Tutt, An FDA for Algorithms, 69 ADMIN. L. REV. 83, (2017) (on 
how the FDA might take a watchdog function). 
14 See generally Crawford & Schultz, supra note 12; Danielle Keats Citron, Technological 
Due Process, 85 WASH. U. L. REV. 1249 (2008) (on how due process might be extended in 
the Big Data era). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  24 
I. ALGORITHMS, AND HOW WE ARE A SLAVE TO THEM 
  Cast broadly, an algorithm is “any process that can be carried out 
automatically.”15 For our purposes, this definition is too wide to be helpful. 
Software has long been used for important decision-support, and this 
decision support has not existed within a governance vacuum. Such systems 
have received plenty of unsung scrutiny in recent years across a range of 
domains. For example, in the public sector, a 2013 inventory of “business 
critical models” in the UK government described and categorised over 500 
algorithmic models used at the national level, and the quality assurance 
mechanisms that been carried out behind them.16 
  The algorithmic turn17 that has been at the end of most recent 
publicity and concern relates to the use of technologies that do not model 
broad or abstract phenomena such as the climate, the economy or urban 
traffic, but model varied entities—usually people, groups or firms. These 
systems—discussed in detail below—are primarily designed either to 
anticipate outcomes that are not yet knowable for sure, such as whether an 
individual or firm will repay a loan, or jump bail, or to  detect and 
subjectively classify something unknown but somehow knowable using 
inference rather than direct measurement—such as whether a submitted tax 
return is fraudulent or not. 
  Lawyers involved with technology historically have experience in 
this area relating to rule-based “expert systems,” although the substantive 
impact of these technologies on lawyering has been relatively small 
compared  to  grand  early  expectations  of  wholesale  replacement  of 
imperfect  human  justice  by  computerised  judges  and  arbitrators. 
Endeavours to create the “future of law” with expert systems in the ‘80s and 
‘90s, whereby law would be formalised into reproducible rules, have largely 
been regarded as a failure except in some highly specific, syntactically 
complex but semantically un-troubling domains.18 Not all scholars bought 
into this utopian vision uncritically—indeed, law was one of the earliest 
domains to be concerned about the application of ML systems without clear 
                                                      
15 A HISTORY OF ALGORITHMS: FROM THE PEBBLE TO THE MICROCHIP (Jean-Luc Chabert et al. 
eds., 1999) at 2. 
16 HM TREASURY, REVIEW OF QUALITY ASSURANCE OF GOVERNMENT ANALYTICAL MODELS: 
FINAL REPORT 26 (HM Government, 2013). 
17 A variation on the more legally familiar “computational” turn. See generally MIREILLE 
HILDEBRANDT, PRIVACY, DUE PROCESS AND THE COMPUTATIONAL TURN (Routledge, 2008) 
(on the legal implications of a variety of data-driven technologies). 
18 See RICHARD SUSSKIND, EXPERT SYSTEMS IN LAW (Clarendon Press 1989); JOHN 
ZELEZNIKOW AND DAN HUNTER, BUILDING INTELLIGENT LEGAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS: 
REPRESENTATION AND REASONING IN LAW (Kluwer, 1994); see also Lilian Edwards & John 
A.K. Huntley, Creating a Civil Jurisdiction Adviser, 1 INFORMATION & COMMUNICATIONS 
TECHNOLOGY LAW 5 5 (1992), doi:10.1080/13600834.1992.9965640. 25                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
explanation facilities.19 The explanation facilities that were developed in the 
era of expert systems set a high, albeit often overlooked, bar for today’s 
discussions. 
A. The Rise of Learning Algorithms 
  Progress  in  automated  decision-making  and  decision  support 
systems was initially held back by a lack of large-scale data and algorithmic 
architectures that could leverage them, restraining systems to the relatively 
simplistic problems. In recent years, technologies capable of coping with 
more input data and highly non-linear correlations have been developed, 
allowing the modelling of social phenomena at a level of accuracy that is 
considerably more operationally useful. For a large part, this has been due 
to the move away from manually specified rule-based algorithms (such as 
the  early legal systems  noted  above) to ML. In rule-based  systems, 
explicitly defined logics turn input variables, such as credit card transaction 
information, into output variables, such as a flag for fraud. Complex ML 
algorithms are different: output variables and input variables together are 
fed into an algorithm theoretically demonstrated to be able to “learn” from 
data. This process trains a model exhibiting implicit, rather than explicit, 
logics,  usually  not  optimised  for  human-understanding  as  rule-based 
systems are.20 The learning algorithms that make this possible are often not 
blazingly new, many dating from the ‘70s, ‘80s and ‘90s. But we now have 
comparatively huge volumes of data that can be stored and processed 
cheaply, such that the performance of and ability to further research ML 
systems has greatly increased. 
  Two main relevant forms of ML exist, which relate to the type of 
input data we have. “Supervised learning” takes a vector of variables,21 such 
as physical symptoms or characteristics, and a “correct” label for this 
vector, such as a medical diagnosis, known as a “ground truth.” The aim of 
supervised learning is to accurately predict this ground truth from the input 
variables in cases where we only have the latter. “Unsupervised learning” is 
not “supervised” by the ground truth. Instead, ML systems try to infer 
structure and groups based on other heuristics, such as proximity. Here, we 
might be interested in seeing which physical characteristics we could think 
of as “clustered” together, without knowing immediately what such as 
                                                      
19 See, e.g., John Zeleznikow & Andrew Stranieri, The Split-up System: Integrating Neural 
Networks and Rule-based Reasoning in the Legal Domain, PROCEEDINGS OF THE 5TH 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LAW, COLLEGE PARK, 
MARYLAND, USA, MAY 21 - 24 (1995), doi:10.1145/222092.222235 
20 Machine learning techniques that explicitly encode logic are found in natural language 
processing and in bioinformatics, but not focussed on here. 
21 This vector is like a row in a spreadsheet where columns are characteristics. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  26 
cluster might mean.22 Segmentation by market researchers, for example, 
would be a relevant field where unsupervised learning might be fruitfully 
applied since they are interested in finding the most relevant groups for a 
given task. 
  Designers of ML systems formalise a supervised or unsupervised 
learning approach as a learning algorithm. This software is then run over 
historical training data. At various stages, designers usually use parts of this 
training data that the process has not yet “seen” to test its ability to predict, 
and refine the process on the basis of its performance. At the end of this 
process, a model has been created, which can be queried with input data, 
usually for predictive purposes. Because these ML models are induced, they 
can be complex and incomprehensible to humans. They were generated 
with predictive performance rather than interpretability as a priority. The 
meaning of learning in this context refers to whether the model improves at 
a specified task, as measured by a chosen measure of performance.23 
Evaluation, management and improvement of the resulting complex model 
is achieved not through the interrogation of its internal structure, but 
through examining how it behaves externally using performance metrics. 
  ML is the focus of this piece, for several reasons. In our current 
interconnected, data-driven society, only ML systems have demonstrated 
the ability to automate difficult or nuanced tasks, such as search, machine 
vision and voice recognition.  As a result, ML systems are fast becoming 
part  of  our  critical  societal  infrastructure.  Significantly,  it  would  be 
impractical for many of these decisions to have a “human in the loop”; this 
is truer still in complex ambient or “smart” environments. 
  ML uptake is also driven by business models and political goals, 
which have led practitioners to seek more “data-driven decisions.” Cheap 
computation has produced large datasets, often as by-products of digitised 
service delivery and so accruing to the Internet’s online intermediaries and 
industrial giants as well as traditional nation-states. There has been a visible 
near-evangelical compulsion to “mine” or infer insights from these datasets 
in the hope they might have social or economic value. New business 
models, particularly online, tend to offer services ostensibly for free, 
leaving monetisation to come from the relatively arbitrary data collected at 
scale along the  way: a phenomenon  some  commentators refer to as 
“surveillance capitalism.”24 These logics of “datafication” have also lead to 
increasing uptake of ML in areas where the service offering does not 
                                                      
22 Some other types of learning exist, such as semi-supervised learning or reinforcement 
learning, but they do not consider enough relevant current challenges to be considered here. 
23 TOM MITCHELL, MACHINE LEARNING (McGraw Hill 1997). 
24 Shoshana Zuboff, Big Other: Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of an Information 
Civilization, 30 J. INFO. TECH. 1, 75–89 (2015). 27                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
necessarily require it, particularly in augmenting existing decisions with 
ML–based decision-support, in areas such as justice, policing, taxation or 
food safety. 
  In this article, we are aware we are speaking across a wide range of 
very different ML systems—in scope, size, purpose and user—which may 
raise very different legal, ethical and societal issues, and this may lead to 
some misleading generalisations. However, at this early stage of the 
research into ML and the GDPR, a wide scope seems important, and where 
critical differences arise between private and public sector ML systems, we 
have tried to make this plain. 
B. ML and Society: Issue of Concern 
  Aspects of ML systems have raised significant recent concern in the 
media, from civil society, academia, government and politicians. Here, we 
give a high level, non-exhaustive overview of the main sources of concern 
as we see them, in order to frame the social, technical and legal discussions 
that follow. 
1.  Discrimination and Unfairness 
  A great deal of the extensive recent literature on algorithmic 
governance has wrestled with the problems of discrimination and fairness in 
ML.25 Once it was commonly thought that machines could not display the 
biases of people and so would be ideal neutral decision makers.26 This had 
considerable influence on some early legal cases involving Google and 
other online intermediaries and their responsibility (or not) for algorithmic 
harms.27 The  drafting process  of the  1995 European DPD explicitly 
recognised this—the European Commission noted in 1992 that “the result 
produced by the machine, using more and more sophisticated software, and 
even expert systems, has an apparently objective and incontrovertible 
character to which a human decision-maker may attach too much weight, 
thus abdicating his own responsibilities.”28 
                                                      
25 See the useful survey in Brent Mittelstadt et al., The Ethics of Algorithms: Mapping the 
Debate, 3 BIG DATA & SOC’Y 2 (2017), especially at section 7. 
26 See Christian Sandvig, Seeing the Sort: The Aesthetic and Industrial Defence of “the 
Algorithm,” 11 MEDIA-N 1 (2015). 
27 See this “neutrality” syndrome imported by analogy with common carrier status for online 
intermediaries and usefully traced by Uta Kohl, Google: the Rise and Rise of Online 
Intermediaries in the Governance of the Internet and Beyond (Part 2), 21 INT’L. J. L. INFO. 
TECH. 2, 2 (2013). 
28 Amended Proposal for a Council Directive on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to 
the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data, at 26, COM(92) 
422 final—SYN 297 (Oct. 15, 1992). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  28 
  As Mittelstadt et al. put it, “this belief is unsustainable”29 given the 
volume  of  recent  evidence,  mainly  in  the  US  in  relation  to  racial 
discrimination. If ML systems cannot be assumed to be fair and unbiased, 
then some form of “opening up the black box” to justify their decisions 
becomes almost inevitable. 
  Even if, as some argue, “big data” will eventually give us a 
complete picture of society30—we will come to our reservations about 
this—making decisions based on past data is often problematic, as the 
structures that existed in that data often contain correlations we do not wish 
to  re-entrench.  These  correlations  frequently  relate  to  “protected 
characteristics,” a varying list of attributes about an individual such as so-
called race, gender, pregnancy status, religion, sexuality and disability, 
which in many jurisdictions are not allowed to directly (and sometimes 
indirectly31)  play  a  part  in  decision-making  processes.32  Algorithmic 
systems trained on past biased data without careful consideration are 
inherently likely to recreate or even exacerbate discrimination seen in past 
decision-making. For example, a CV or résumé filtering system based only 
on past success rates for job applicants will likely encode and replicate 
some of the biases exhibited by those filtering CVs or awarding positions 
manually in the past. While some worry that these systems will formalise 
explicit bias of the developers, the larger concern appears to be that these 
systems  will  be  indirectly,  unintentionally  and  unknowingly 
discriminatory.33 
  In many cases, protected characteristics like race might indeed 
statistically correlate with outcome variables of interest, such as propensity 
to be convicted of property theft, to submit a fraudulent tax or welfare 
claim, to follow an advert for a pay-day loan, or to fail to achieve seniority 
in certain jobs. While these correlations may be “true” in the sense of 
statistical validity, we societally and politically often wish they weren’t. ML 
systems are designed to discriminate—that is, to discern—but some forms 
of discrimination seem socially unacceptable. The use of gender—and its 
recent prohibition—in the pricing of car insurance in the EU serves as a 
                                                      
29 Mittelstadt et al., supra note 25, at 25. 
30 VIKTOR MAYER-SCHÖNBERGER & KENNETH CUKIER, BIG DATA: A REVOLUTION THAT WILL 
TRANSFORM HOW WE LIVE, WORK, AND THINK (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013). 
31 In relation to the U.K., see Equality Act 2010, c. 15, s. 19; for discussion of US law, 
compare Solon Barocas & Andrew Selbst, Big Data’s Disparate Impact,  104 CALIF. L. REV. 
671 (2016). 
32 For a US discussion in the context of ML discrimination, see Barocas and Selbst, supra 
note 31. 
33 See Toon Calders & Indrė Žliobaitė, Why Unbiased Computational Processes Can Lead to 
Discriminative Decision Procedures, in DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY IN THE INFORMATION 
SOCIETY (Bart Custers et al. eds., Springer 2013). 29                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
recent salient example.34 One way forward is to try to build fair or non-
discriminatory ML systems where these characteristics are not explicitly fed 
into the system, even if they have some predictive value—e.g. by omitting 
the data column containing race or gender. However, this may still not 
result in a fair system as these excluded variables are likely related to some 
of the variables that are included, e.g. transaction data, occupation data, or 
postcode. Put simply, if the sensitive variable might be predictively useful, 
and we suspect the remaining variables might contain signals that allow us 
to predict the variable we omitted, then unwanted discrimination can sneak 
back  in.  On  rare  occasions,  this  happens  explicitly.  A  ProPublica 
investigation uncovered the apparent use of “ethnic affinity,” a category 
constructed from user behaviour rather than explicitly asked of the user, as a 
proxy for race (which had been deliberately excluded as illegal to ask) for 
advertisers seeking to target audiences on Facebook to use.35 
  More  broadly,  cases  around  “redlining”  on  the  internet—
“weblining,” as it was known nearly 20 years ago36—are far from new. A 
spate of stories in 2000 during the heady years of the dot-com bubble 
surrounded racist profiling using personal data on the internet. Consumer 
bank Wells Fargo had a lawsuit filed against it for using an online home-
search system to steer individuals away from particular districts based on 
provided racial classifications.37 Similarly, the online 1-hour-media-delivery 
service Kozmo received a lawsuit for denying delivery to residents in black 
neighbourhoods in Washington, DC, which they defended in the media by 
saying that they were not targeting neighbourhoods based on race, but based 
on high Internet usage.38 
                                                      
34 See Case C-236/09, Association belge des Consommateurs Test-Achats ASBL and 
Others v. Conseil des ministres, 2011 E.C.R. I-00773. 
35 See Julia Angwin & Terry Parris Jr., Facebook Lets Advertisers Exclude Users by Race, 
PROPUBLICA (Oct. 28, 2016), https://www.propublica.org/article/facebook-lets-advertisers-
exclude-users-by-race. While ProPublica subsequently reported (Feb. 8, 2017) that Facebook 
amended their dashboard as to “prevent advertisers from using racial categories in ads for 
housing, employment and credit” and to warn advertisers to comply with the law in other 
categories, a year later the reporters were still able to successfully place adverts excluding 
people on the basis of a wide array of inferred characteristics. See Julia Angwin et al., 
Facebook (Still) Letting Housing Advertisers Exclude Users by Race, PROPUBLICA (Nov. 21, 
2017), https://www.propublica.org/article/facebook-advertising-discrimination-housing-race-
sex-national-origin. 
36 Marcia Stepanek, Weblining: Companies are using your personal data to limit your 
choices—and force you to pay more for products, BLOOMBERG BUSINESS WEEK, Apr. 3, 
2000, at 26. 
37 Wells Fargo yanks "Community Calculator" service after ACORN lawsuit, CREDIT UNION 
TIMES (July 19, 2000), https://perma.cc/XG79-9P74. 
38 Elliot Zaret & Brock N Meeks, Kozmo’s digital dividing lines, MSNBC (Apr. 11, 2000); 
Kate Marquess, Redline may be going online, 86 ABA J. 8 at 81 (Aug. 2000). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  30 
  It is worth noting that in the EU, there have been far fewer scare 
revelations of “racially biased” algorithms than in the US. While some of 
this may be attributed to a less investigative journalistic, civil society or 
security research community, or conceivably, a slower route towards 
automation of state functions, it may also simply reflect a less starkly 
institutionally racist mass of training data.39 Racism is surely problematic 
around the world, yet does not manifest in statistically identical ways 
everywhere. Countries with deeper or clearer racial cleavages are naturally 
going to collect deeper or more clearly racist datasets, yet this does not 
mean that more nuanced issues of racism, particularly in interaction with 
other variables, does not exist. 
  Not all problematic correlations that arise in an ML system relate to 
characteristics protected by law. This takes us to the issue of unfairness 
rather than simply discrimination. As an example, is it fair to judge an 
individual’s suitability for a job based on the web browser they use when 
applying, for example, even if it has been shown to be predictively useful?40 
Potentially,  there  are  grounds  for  claiming  this  is  actually  “true” 
discrimination: because the age of the browser may be a surrogate for other 
categories like poverty, since most such applications may be made in a 
public  library.  Indeed,  is  poverty  itself  a  surrogate  for  a  protected 
characteristic like race or disability? Unfair algorithms may upset individual 
subjects and reduce societal and commercial trust, but if legal remedies 
come into the picture then there is a worry of over extending regulatory 
control. Variables like web browser might, even if predictively important, 
be considered to abuse short-lived, arbitrary correlations, and in doing so, 
tangibly restrict individuals’ autonomy. 
  In the European data protection regime, fairness is an overarching 
obligation when data is collected and processed41 something which is 
sometimes overshadowed by the focus on lawful grounds for processing. 
The UK's data protection authority, the Information Commissioner's Office 
(ICO) published recent guidance on big data analytics which seems to imply 
that ML systems are not unfair simply because they are “creepy” or produce 
                                                      
39 Note the recent report of the ICO, supra note 4, which pays serious attention to issues of 
fairness and bias but cites only US examples of such despite being a product of the UK 
regulator. The German autocomplete cases are cited but referred to interestingly, as questions 
of error or accuracy, rather than discrimination or fairness. See Jones, infra note 79. See also 
National Science and Technology Council, supra note 4, at 30 (specifying that “it is 
important anyone using AI in the criminal justice system is aware of the limitations of the 
current data”). 
40 How might your choice of browser affect your job prospects?, THE ECONOMIST , Apr. 
11, 2013 https://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2013/04/economist-
explains-how-browser-affects-job-prospects.  
41 GDPR, supra note 5, at art. 5(1)(a). 31                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
unexpected results.42 However, they may be unfair where they discriminate 
against people because they are part of a social group which is not one of 
the traditional discrimination categories, e.g. where a woman was locked 
out of the female changing room at the gym because she used the title “Dr” 
which the system associated with men only.43 The ICO report argues that 
unfairness may, on occasion, derive from expectations, where data is used 
for  a  reason  apparently  unconnected  with  the  reason  given  for  its 
collection,44 and from lack of transparency, which we discuss in detail 
below in section I.B.3. 
  Reliance on past data additionally asks fairness questions that relate 
to the memory of algorithmic systems—how far back and with which 
variables should judge people on? Are individuals legally entitled to a 
tabula rasa—a blank slate—after a certain number of years, as is common 
in some areas of criminal justice?45 There is a widely-held societal value to 
being able to “make a fresh start,” and technological change can create new 
challenges  to  this.  Indeed,  common  institutional  frameworks  for 
forgetfulness can be found in bankruptcy law and in credit scoring.46 
 
 
 
                                                      
42 ICO, supra note 4. 
43 ICO, supra note 4 at 20 (referencing Jessica Fleig, Doctor Locked Out of Women's 
Changing Room Because Gym Automatically Registered Everyone with Dr Title as Male, 
THE MIRROR (Mar. 18, 2015), http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/doctor-locked-out-
womens-changing-5358594). This is one of very few reports of algorithmic misbehaviour in 
the ICO report not emanating from the US, and the simplicity of the task means it is very 
unlikely to be ML based. 
44 See the well-known theory of contextual integrity in HELEN NISSENBAUM, PRIVACY IN 
CONTEXT: TECHNOLOGY, POLICY, AND THE INTEGRITY OF SOCIAL LIFE (Stanford Law Books, 
2009). In a perfect, data protection compliant world, all purposes for which data is to be 
used, including re-uses, should be notified in the privacy policy or otherwise. See GDPR art. 
5(1)(b). However, as discussed infra in section V.A, this concept of “notice and choice” is 
increasingly broken. 
45 Under the UK Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, as in many other European countries, 
disclosure of convictions (with some exceptions) is not required as these convictions become 
“spent,” in spheres such as employment, education, housing and other types of applications. 
Whether such convictions would be erased from training set data would not however 
necessarily follow, depending on who maintained the record, legal requirements and how 
training set data was cleaned. Notably, official advice on spent convictions advises job 
applicants with spent convictions to check what is (still) known about them to employers via 
Google and also advises them of their “right to be forgotten,” discussed infra at Section 
IV.B.1, See Criminal Record Checks, NACRO https://perma.cc/GKY4-KHJA. 
46 Jean-François Blanchette & Deborah G. Johnson, Data Retention and the Panoptic 
Society: The Social Benefits of Forgetfulness, 18 THE INFO. SOC’Y 1, 33–45 (2002). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  32 
2.  Informational Privacy 
  Privacy advocates and data subjects have long had concerns relating 
to profiling, which as a general notion, is a process whereby personal data 
about a class of data subjects is transformed into knowledge or “inferences” 
about that group, which can then in turn be used to hypothesise about a 
person’s likely attributes or behaviour.47 These might include the goods and 
services likely to interest them, the social connections they might have or 
wish to develop, medical conditions or personality traits. As the GDPR, 
Article 4(4) now defines it, profiling is: 
[A]ny form of automated processing of personal data consisting of the 
use of personal data to evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a 
natural person, in particular to analyse or predict aspects concerning 
that natural person's performance at work, economic situation, health, 
personal preferences, interests, reliability, behaviour, location or 
movements. 
ML is now the favoured way of deriving such profiles—which are now 
often implicit and relational, rather than clear-cut categories—but profiling 
is wider than ML, and many means of profiling common today remain 
grounded  in  manually  defined  classifications  and  distinctions.  As 
Hildebrandt notes, profiling is what all organisms do in relation to their 
environments, and is “as old as life itself.”48 
  For data subjects, privacy concerns here embrace an enormous 
weight of issues about how data concerning individuals are collected to be 
bent into profiles, how individuals can control access to and processing of 
data relating to them, and how they might control the dissemination and use 
of derived profiles. In particular, ML and big data analytics in general are 
fundamentally based around the idea of repurposing data, which is in 
principle contrary to the data protection principle that data should be 
collected for named and specific purposes.49 Data collected for selling 
books becomes repurposed as a system to sell advertisements book buyers 
might like. Connected problems are that “big data” systems encourage 
limitless retention of data and the collection of “all the data” rather than 
merely a statistically significant sample (contra principles in Article 5(1)(e) 
and (c)). These are huge problems at the heart of contemporary data 
                                                      
47  See  generally,  Mireille  Hildebrandt, Defining  Profiling:  A  New  Type  of 
Knowledge?, in PROFILING THE EUROPEAN CITIZEN 17 (Mireille Hildebrandt & Serge 
Gutwirth eds., Springer 2008). 
48 Hildebrandt, supra note 9. 
49 GDPR, art. 5(1)(b) (referring to “purpose limitation”). 33                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
protection law,50 and we do not seek to review these fully here. We do 
however want to point out where these issues specifically affect ML. 
  First, an exceedingly trite point is that data subjects increasingly 
perceive themselves as having little control over the collection of their 
personal data that go into profiles. As  an example,  the  most recent 
Eurobarometer survey on personal data from June 2015 showed 31% of EU 
citizens as feeling they had no control over the data they provided online 
and a further 50% feeling they had only partial control.51 In the GDPR, 
collection falls under “processing” of data (Article 4(2)) and is theoretically 
controlled by (inter alia) the need for a lawful ground of processing (Article 
6). Most lay people believe consent is the only lawful ground for processing 
and thus defends their right to autonomous privacy management (though 
perhaps not in so many words).52 Yet consent is not the only lawful ground 
under Article 6. It’s quite possible that as much personal data is collected on 
the grounds of the “legitimate interests” of the controller (at least in the 
private sector), or on the grounds that the data was necessary to fulfil a 
contract entered into by the data subject.53 More importantly, consent has 
become debased currency given ever-longer standard term privacy policies, 
“nudging” methods such as screen layout manipulation, and market network 
effects.  It  is  often  described  using  terms  such  as  “meaningless”  or 
“illusory.”54 
  The consent problem is aggravated by the rise of “bastard data,” a 
picturesque term coined by Joe McNamee. He notes that as data is linked 
and transformed it incentivises new data collection. Thus, data “ha[s] 
become fertile and ha[s] bastard offspring that create new challenges that go 
                                                      
50 See discussion in ARTICLE 29 WORKING PARTY (hereinafter “A29 WP”), OPINION 03/2013 
ON PURPOSE LIMITATION, (Apr. 2, 2013); ICO, supra note 4 at 11-12; EDPS, supra note 4. 
51  EUROPEAN  COMMISSION,  DATA  PROTECTION  EUROOBAROMETER,  (June  2015), 
[https://perma.cc/3XLK-VKA6]. 
52 The UK's Information Commissioner recently addressed the prevalence of these beliefs 
head on with a series of “GDPR Myths” blogs addressing what she refers to, tongue-in-
cheek, as “alternative facts.” See Elizabeth Denham, Consent is Not the ‘Silver Bullet’ for 
GDPR Compliance, INFORMATION COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE NEWS BLOG, (Aug. 16, 2017), 
https://iconewsblog.org.uk/2017/08/16/consent-is-not-the-silver-bullet-for-gdpr-compliance/. 
53 GDPR, art. 6. The public sector has separate public interest grounds for processing. 
Policing and national security are exempted from the GDPR, but covered in a connected 
directive. 
54 For a full discussion of the illusory nature of consent in the Internet world, see Lilian 
Edwards, Privacy, Law, Code and Social Networking Sites, in RESEARCH HANDBOOK ON 
GOVERNANCE OF THE INTERNET (Ian Brown ed., Edward Elgar, 2013) at 323; Rikke Frank 
Joergensen, The Unbearable Lightness of User Consent, 3 INTERNET POL’Y REV. 4 (2014); 
Brendan Van Alsenoy et al., Privacy notices versus informational self-determination: 
Minding the gap, 28 INT’L REV. OF LAW, COMPUTERS & TECHNOLOGY 2 185–203 (2014). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  34 
far beyond what society previously (and, unfortunately, still) consider[] to 
be ‘privacy.’”55 Many of these offspring are profiles produced by ML 
systems. Typically, data about people, which are personal, are transformed 
into data which have often been seen as non-personal and therefore fall 
outside the scope of data protection law, perhaps simply because the data 
subject name  or  other  obvious  identifier  has  been  removed.56  Many 
businesses,  particularly  those  operating  online  in  social  networking, 
advertising and search, have regularly argued that their profiles, however 
lucrative, merely involve the processing of anonymised data and hence do 
not fall within the scope of data protection control. In recent times, the 
anonymity argument has been parried on grounds of potential for re-
identification.57 This has become especially crucial in the emerging ambient 
environment deriving from the Internet of Things (IoT), which collects data 
that on first glance looks mundane, but can be used with relative ease to 
discover granular, intimate insights. Data we would once have regarded as 
obviously non-personal such as raw data from home energy meters or 
location data from GPS devices is now, often through ML techniques, can 
be re-connected to individuals, and identities established from it.58 In 
practice,  this  has  meant  that  the  day-to-day  actions  that  individuals 
undertake, especially in “smart” environments,59 leave trails of potentially 
sensitive latent personal data in the hands of controllers who may be 
                                                      
55 Joe McNamee, Is Privacy Still Relevant in a World of Bastard data?, EDRI EDITORIAL, 
(Mar. 9, 2016), https://edri.org/enditorial-is-privacy-still-relevant-in-a-world-of-bastard-data. 
56 “Personal data” is defined at art. 4(1) of the GDPR as “any information relating to an 
identified or identifiable natural person (‘data subject’); an identifiable natural person is one 
who can be identified, directly or indirectly..” Note the debate over “pseudonymous” data 
during the passage of the GDPR, which is defined as data processed “in such a manner that 
the personal data can no longer be attributed to a specific data subject without the use of 
additional information.” Id. at art. 2(5). After some debate, the final text recognises explicitly 
that such data is personal data, although it garners certain privileges designed to incentivise 
pseudonymisation, e.g. it is a form of “privacy by design” and is excluded from mandatory 
security breach notification. Id. at art. 25, 
57 See Paul Ohm, Broken Promises of Privacy: Responding to the Surprising Failure of 
Anonymization, 57 UCLA L. REV. 1701 (2010). In Europe, see A 29 WP, OPINION 05/2014 ON 
ANONYMISATION TECHNIQUES (2014). 
58 See Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye et al., Unique in the crowd: The privacy bounds of 
human mobility, 3 SCIENTIFIC REPORTS (2013); MICHAEL VEALE, DATA MANAGEMENT AND 
USE: CASE STUDIES OF TECHNOLOGIES AND GOVERNANCE (The Royal Society and the British 
Academy 2017).  
59 See MIREILLE HILDEBRANDT, SMART TECHNOLOGIES AND THE END(S) OF LAW: NOVEL 
ENTANGLEMENTS OF LAW AND TECHNOLOGY (Edward Elgar 2015); Lilian Edwards, Privacy, 
Security and Data Protection in Smart Cities: A Critical EU Law Perspective, 1 EUR. DATA 
PROT. L. REV. 28, 28–58 (2016).  35                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
difficult to identify.60 If controllers are not identifiable, data subjects may 
not be able to effectively exercise the data protection rights we discuss in 
sections II and V below even if they overcome the personal data and 
consent hurdles. 
  Profiles assembled via ML or other techniques may be seen as 
belonging to a group rather than an individual data subject. A profile does 
not simply identify the characteristics of individual data subjects, rather 
they are constructed by contrast with the other data subjects in the dataset. 
In a system attempting to target people by their entertainment choices, I am 
not simply someone who likes music festivals, but someone who is 
modelled  as  75%  more  likely  (give  or  take  a  margin  of  statistical 
uncertainty) to attend a music festival than the rest of my cohort. “Persistent 
knowledge” over time links me into this class of interest to the platform that 
holds the data. Mittelstadt argues that big data analytics allow this new type 
of “algorithmically assembled” group to be formed whose information has 
no clear protection in data protection law and possibly not in equality law.61 
  This idea of “group privacy” was an early, albeit marginalised, 
concern in DP, referred to as “categorical privacy” by some authors in the 
late ‘90s,62 and sometimes conflated with discussions of what is personal 
data. As Hildebrandt stated in an early 2008 paper, “data have a legal status. 
They are protected, at least personal data are… [p]rofiles have no clear legal 
status.”63 Hildebrandt argues that protection of profiles is very limited, as 
even if we argue that a profile becomes personal data when applied to an 
individual person to produce an effect, this fails to offer protection to (or, 
importantly, control over) the relevant group profile. A decade later, the 
GDPR refines this argument by asserting that if a profile can be used to 
target or “single me out”64—for example, to deny me access to luxury 
services or to discriminate about what price I can buy goods at—then the 
                                                      
60 On the practical difficulties for data subjects to identify data controllers, see Max Van 
Kleek et al., Better the Devil You Know: Exposing the Data Sharing Practices of Smartphone 
Apps, in CHI’17 (2017), doi:10.1145/3025453.3025556. 
61 Brent Mittelstadt, From Individual to Group Privacy in Big Data Analytics, __ PHILOS. 
TECHNOL doi:10.1007/s13347-017-0253-7. See also Anton Vedder, KDD: the Challenge to 
Individualism, 1 ETHICS & INFO. TECH. 4, 275 (1999); Alessandro Mantelero, From 
GroupPrivacy to Collective Privacy: Towards a New Dimension of Privacy and Data 
Protection  in  the  Big  Data  Era,  in  GROUP  PRIVACY:  NEW  CHALLENGES  OF  DATA 
TECHNOLOGIES (Linnet Taylor et al. (eds.), Springer 2017). 
62 Vedder, supra note 61. 
63 Hildebrandt, supra note 59. 
64 See GDPR, recital 26. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  36 
profile is my personal data as it relates to me and makes me identifiable.65 
This  approach  however  remains  emergent  and  will  be  applied  with 
hesitation even in some parts of Europe, given it is founded on a recital not 
a main text article.66 
  A final key issue is the ability of such systems to transform data 
categorised as ordinary personal data at the time of collection into data 
perceived as especially sensitive.67 In European data protection law, special 
categories of data (known as “sensitive personal data” in the UK) receive 
special protection. These are defined as restricted to personal data relating 
to race, political opinions, health and sex life, religious and other beliefs, 
trade union membership and (added by the GDPR for some purposes) 
biometric and genetic data.68 Protected characteristics in other domains or 
jurisdictions often differ—in US privacy law, no general concept of 
sensitive data applies but there highly regulated statutory privacy regimes 
for health, financial and children’s data.69 
  A relevant and well-publicised “war story” involves the American 
supermarket Target profiling its customers to find out which were likely to 
be pregnant so relevant offers could then be targeted at them. A magazine 
piece, now urban legend, claimed a teenage daughter was targeted with 
pregnancy related offers before her father with whom she lived knew about 
her condition.70 In data protection law, if consent is used as the lawful 
ground for processing of special categories of data, that consent must be 
                                                      
65 This discussion is important as whether a profile is seen as the personal data of a person 
also determines if they have rights to erase it or to port it to a different system or data 
controller. See discussion infra Sections IV.B.1, IV.B.2. 
66 GDPR recital 26. See discussion of the status of recitals below, in addition to Klimas and 
Vaicuikaite, infra note 132. This approach to personal data has however been championed by 
the A29 WP for many years. See, e.g., ARTICLE 29 WORKING PARTY, OPINION 4/2007 ON THE 
CONCEPT OF PERSONAL DATA 01248/07/EN WP 136, at 13. 
67 See Emannuel Benoist, Collecting Data for the Profiling of Web Users, in PROFILING THE 
EUROPEAN CITIZEN 169, 177 (Mireille Hildebrandt & Serge Gutwirth eds., Springer 2008). 
68 GDPR, art. 9; see also Case C-101/01, Bodil Lindqvist, 2003 E.C.R. 1-12971. 
69 See HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996), Pub. L. No. 
104-191, 110 Stat. 1936; Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (also known as the "Public Company 
Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act"), Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745; 
COPPA (Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998), 78 C.F.R. § 4008 (2013). 
70 Charles Duhigg, How Companies Learn Your Secrets, The NEW YORK TIMES MAGAZINE 
(Feb.  16,  2012),  http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/19/magazine/shopping-habits.html; 
Kashmir Hill, How Target Figured out a Teen Girl Was Pregnant Before Her Father Did, 
FORBES (Feb. 16, 2012), https://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2012/02/16/how-target-
figured-out-a-teen-girl-was-pregnant-before-her-father-did/. 37                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
“explicit.”71  But  if  ordinary  data  about  purchases  are  collected  and 
algorithmically transformed into insights that are sensitive, such as those 
related to health, or “protected,” such as those relating to pregnancy, what is 
the correct standard of safeguard? For additional complication, the GDPR 
lays down a basic rule that profiling “shall not be based” on the special 
categories of personal data, unless there is explicit consent.72 Does this 
apply to ML systems where the inputs are non-sensitive but the output 
inferences may be, as was the case in the Target profiling? Should explicit 
consent be given where personal data is gathered from public social media 
posts using “legitimate grounds”73 and transformed into data about political 
preferences which is “sensitive” data in the GDPR (Article 9(1))?74 What 
                                                      
71 This was a significant safeguard in an analogue world—consent would often be taken with 
especial care, such as in written form. Online, it is of limited protection, at best pushing 
controllers to more consumer-friendly consent collection such as opt-in rather than opt-out.  
71 GDPR, art. 9(2)(a). Other grounds are available but notable for commercial data 
controllers is that processing cannot be justified by “legitimate interests” of the controller, 
nor because it was necessary for the performance of a contract between data subject and 
controller – the two prevalent grounds for processing used in the commercial world. For 
executive and judicial processing of special data, the main grounds are art. 9(2)(c) 
(emergency health situations), (f) (regarding legal claims or defences or judicial action) and 
(g) (substantial public interest). 
72 GDPR, Article 22(4). It is also not clear if a controller can simply request a blanket 
consent to profiling of sensitive personal data in a privacy policy – which would tend to 
make this provision nugatory - or if something more tailored is needed. It is interesting that a 
recent collective statement of a number of EU Data Protection Authorities (DPAs) (see 
Common Statement by the Contact Group of the Data Protection Authorities of The 
Netherlands,  France,  Spain,  Hamburg  and  Belgium,  CNIL  (May  16,  2017), 
https://www.cnil.fr/fr/node/23602) announcing a number of privacy breaches by Facebook, 
one issue is that company “uses sensitive personal data from users without their explicit 
consent. For example, data relating to sexual preferences were used to show targeted 
advertisements.” (noted specifically by the Autoriteit Persoonsgegevens, the DPA of the 
Netherlands). It is not said if that data was created algorithmically or existed as a user input. 
73 GDPR, art. 6 (1)(f). Note that these interests may be overridden by the “interests or 
fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject” and that this ground is not available for 
special categories of data under art. 9 (see supra note 71). 
74 This is likely part of the data collection and processing to produce political targeted 
advertisements pushed out via Facebook, allegedly undertaken in the UK and elsewhere by 
companies such as Cambridge Analytica. See Jamie Doward, Watchdog to Launch Inquiry 
into  Misuse  of  Data  in  Politics,  The  GUARDIAN,  Mar.  4,  2017, 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/mar/04/cambridge-analytics-data-brexit-
trump. This area of the law is highly sensitive, given concerns about recent elections and 
referenda, and is under investigation by the UK’s ICO. As noted within, the article itself is 
currently the subject of legal dispute as of mid-May 2017! No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  38 
about  when  ordinary  data  collected  via  a  wearable  like  a  Fitbit  is 
transformed into health data used to reassess insurance premiums?75 
3.  Opacity and Transparency 
  Users have long been disturbed by the idea that machines might 
make decisions for them, which they could not understand or countermand; 
a vision of out of control authority which derives from earlier notions of 
unfathomable bureaucracy found everywhere from Kafka to Terry Gilliam’s 
Brazil. Such worries have emerged from the quotidian world (for example 
credit scoring, job applications, speeding camera tickets) to the emergent, 
fictional worlds of technology (such as wrongful arrest by Robocop, 2001's 
HAL, automated nuclear weapons launched by accident in Wargames). 
  In Europe, one of the earliest routes to taming pre-ML automated 
processing was the creation of “subject access rights” (SARs).76 SARs 
empowered a user to find out what data was held about them by a company 
or government department, together with a right to rectify one’s personal 
data—to set the record straight. These rights, harmonised across Europe in 
the DPD, Article 12, included the right to rectify, erase or block data, the 
processing of which did not comply with the Directive—in particular where 
they were incomplete or inaccurate. These rights were, as we discuss later,77 
fused and extended into the so-called “right to be forgotten” in the GDPR, 
which succeeded the DPD in 2016. Although the US lacked an omnibus 
notion of data protection laws, similar rights emerged in relation to credit 
scoring in the Fair Credit Reporting Act 1970.78 
  Domains  such  as  credit  scoring,  public  or  rented  housing 
applications and employment applications have entrenched in the public 
mind the intuition that challenging a decision, and possibly seeking redress, 
involves a preceding right to an explanation of how the decision was 
reached. In Europe, this led to a specific though rather under-used right in 
the DPD (Article 15) to stop a decision being made solely on the basis of 
automated  processing.79  Data  subjects  had  a  right  to  obtain  human 
                                                      
75 This raises the issue of what we define as “health data,” which the CJEU has not yet 
decided on. Similar issues have risen in US in relation to the scope of HIPPA. In an 
interesting example of “counter-profiling” obfuscation and the case of “Unfit Bits,” see Olga 
Khazan,  How  to  Fake  Your  Workout,  THE  ATLANTIC  (Sep.  28,  2015), 
https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/09/unfit-bits/407644/.  
76 See DPD, art. 12 (GDPR, art. 15). 
77 See infra Section IV.B.1. 
78 See Danielle Keats Citron & Frank Pasquale, The Scored Society: Due Process for 
Automated Predictions, 89 WASH. L. REV.1,16 (2014). 
79 This has been interpreted to imply that European systems are more interested in the human 
dignity of data subjects than the US system. See Meg Leta Jones, Right to a Human in the 39                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
intervention (a “human in the loop”), in order to express their point of view 
but this right did not contain an express right to an explanation.80 This right 
was  updated  in  the  GDPR  to  extend  to  a  more  general  concept  of 
profiling.81 As Citron and Pasquale82 map in detail, credit scoring has been a 
canonical domain for these issues in the US as well, as it has evolved from 
‘complicated’ but comprehensible rule based approaches embodying human 
expertise, to ‘complex’ and opaque systems often accused of arbitrary or 
unfair decisions. As such this domain foreshadows the difficulties routinely 
encountered now in trying to interpret many modern ML systems. 
  Explanation rights of a sort are common in the public sphere in the 
form  of  freedom  of  information  (FOI)  rights  against  public  and 
governmental institutions. Transparency is seen as one of the bastions of 
democracy, liberal government, accountability and restraint on arbitrary or 
self-interested exercise of power. As Brandeis famously said, “[s]unlight is 
said  to be  the  best  of  disinfectants;  electric  light the  most  efficient 
policeman.”83 Transparency rights against public bodies enable an informed 
public debate, generate trust in and legitimacy for the government, as well 
as allow individual voters to vote with more information. These are perhaps 
primarily societal benefits, but citizens can clearly also benefit individually 
from getting explanations from public bodies via FOI: opposing bad 
planning or tender decisions, seeking information on why hospitals or 
schools were badly run leading to harm to one self or one’s child, and 
requiring details about public funding priorities are all obvious examples. 
  By comparison with FOI, transparency rights are less clearly part of 
the apparatus of accountability of private decision-making. As Zarsky says, 
“[t]he “default” of governmental action should be transparency.”84 The 
opposite is more or less true of private action, where secrecy, including 
commercial or trade secrecy (and autonomy of business practices85) and 
                                                                                                                       
Loop: Political Constructions of Computer Automation & Personhood from Data Banks to 
Algorithms, 47 SOC. STUD. OF SCI. 216, 217 (2017).  
80 But see supra note 75. 
81 See GDPR, art. 4(4) (“‘Profiling means any form of automated processing of personal data 
consisting of the use of personal data to evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a natural 
person in particular to analyse or predict [...] performance at work, economic situation, 
health, personal preferences, interests, reliability or behaviour, location or movements.”). 
Profiling may be achieved through means other than by ML. See supra Section I.A.1. 
82 Citron & Pasquale, supra note 78, at 16. 
83 LOUIS BRANDEIS, OTHER PEOPLE’S MONEY, AND HOW BANKERS USE IT 62 (National Home 
Library Foundation, 1933). 
84 Tal Zarsky, Transparency in Data Mining: From Theory to Practice, DISCRIMINATION AND 
PRIVACY IN THE INFO. SOC’Y 301, 310 (2013). 
85 Freedom to conduct a business is a fundamental right in the EU. See art. 15, Charter of 
Fundamental Rights of the European Union (CFEU) 2012/C 326/02. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  40 
protection of IP rights, are de facto the norm. Data protection law in fact 
seems quite odd when looked at from outside the informational privacy 
ghetto, as it is one of the few bodies of law that applies a general principle 
of transparency86 even-handedly to private and public sector controllers, 
with more exceptions for the latter than the former in terms of policing87 
and national security.88 But disclosure of personal data to its subject, from 
both public and private data controllers, is of course justified at root in 
Europe by the fundamental nature of privacy as a human right, sometimes 
extended to a separate right to DP.89 
  Yet an explanation, or some kind of lesser transparency, is of 
course often essential to mount a challenge against a private person or 
commercial business whether in court or to a regulatory body like a privacy 
commissioner,  ombudsman,  trading  standards  body  or  complaints 
association.  On  a  societal  level,  harmful  or  anti-competitive  market 
practices cannot be influenced or shut down without powers of disclosure. 
The most obvious example of transparency rights in the private90 sphere 
outside DP, and across globally disparate legal systems, lies in financial 
disclosure laws in the equity markets; however arguably these are designed 
to protect institutional capitalism by retaining trust in a functioning market 
rather than protecting individual investors, or less still, those globally 
affected by the movements of markets. Disclosure is also reasonably 
common in the private sector as a “naming and shaming” mechanism91—
e.g.  the  introduction  in  the  GDPR  of  mandatory  security  breach 
notification,92 or the US EPA Toxics Release Inventory.93 Disclosures may 
                                                      
86 GDPR, art. 5(1)(a). 
87 See GDPR art. 2(2)(d). But see supra note 53. 
88 Despite these exceptions, European countries have traditionally been more transparent 
than the US in the development of ML systems used for judicial/penal decision support. ML 
systems in Europe are often developed in-house, rather than privately procured and subject to 
proprietary secrecy. See A COMPENDIUM OF RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS ON THE OFFENDER 
ASSESSMENT SYSTEM (OASYS) (Robin Moore ed., Ministry of Justice Analytical Series, 
2015); Nikolaj Tollenaar et al., StatRec —Performance, Validation and Preservability of a 
Static Risk Prediction Instrument, 129 BULL. SOC. METHODOLOGY 25 (2016) (discussing 
published UK and Dutch predictive recidivism models). 
89 See ECHR, art. 8; CFEU arts. 7 and 8. 
90 An ancillary question relates to how many of the functions of the state are now carried out 
by private bodies or public-private partnerships, and what the resulting susceptibility to FOI 
requests (or other public law remedies, such as judicial review) should be. 
91 See Zarsky, supra note 84, at 311. 
92 GDPR arts. 33 and 34. 
93 Madhu Khanna et al., Toxics Release Information: A Policy Tool for Environmental 
Protection, 36 J. ENV’T ECON. & MGMT.  243 (1998); Archon Fung and Dara O'Rourke, 
Reinventing Environmental Regulation from the Grassroots Up: Explaining and Expanding 
the Success of the Toxics Release Inventory, 25 ENVIRO. MGMT.  115, 116 (2000). 41                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
also be made voluntarily to engage public trust as in programmes for visible 
corporate social responsibility (CSR), and standards for this exist with 
bodies such as the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). 
  Despite  the  sometimes  almost  unthinking  association  of 
transparency  and  accountability,  the  two  are  not  synonymous.94 
Accountability is a contested concept, but in essence involves a party being 
held to account having to justify their actions, field questions from others, 
and face appropriate consequences.95 Transparency is only the beginning of 
this process. It is interesting that in the context of open datasets as a 
successor to FOI, there is considerable evidence that disclosure (voluntary 
or mandated) of apparently greater quantities of government data does not 
necessarily equal more effective scrutiny or better governance.96 O'Neill 
calls this a “heavily one-sided conversation” with governments able to 
minimise the impact of disclosures by timing of release, difficulty of 
citizens in understanding or utilising the data, failures to update repositories 
and resource agencies who use and scrutinise open data, and general 
political obfuscation.97 Heald terms this a "transparency illusion" which 
may generate no positive results while possibly creating negative impacts, 
such  as  privacy  breaches  and  loss  of  trust  if  disclosures  of 
maladministration are not met with punishment.98 
  Notwithstanding  these  doubts,  and  turning  to  ML  systems, 
transparency rights remain intimately linked to the ideal of effective control 
of algorithmic decision-making. Zarsky argues that the individual adversely 
affected by a predictive process has the right to “understand why” and 
frames this in familiar terms of autonomy and respect as a human being. 
Hildebrandt has long called for Transparency Enhancing Tools to control 
the  impacts  of  profiling.99  Similar  ideas  pervade  the  many  calls  for 
reinstating due process in algorithmic decision making,100 for respecting the 
right to a “human in the loop” as an aspect of human dignity101 and for 
introducing “information accountability” in the form of “policy awareness” 
                                                      
94 See, e.g., PASQUALE, supra note 3, at 212 (rejecting the idea that transparency has created 
any real effects on or accountability of the financial sector post-crash and recession). 
95 Mark Bovens, Analysing and Assessing Accountability: A Conceptual Framework, 13 
EUROPEAN LAW JOURNAL 447, 450 (2007). 
96 See Helen Margetts, Transparency and Digital Government, in TRANSPARENCY: THE KEY 
TO BETTER GOVERNANCE?, 197, 200 (C. Hood & D. A. Heald, eds., Oxford University Press 
2006). 
97 See Onora O’Neill, Transparency and the Ethics of Communication, in Hood & Heald, 
supra note 96, at 75–90. 
98 David A. Heald, Varieties of Transparency, in Hood & Heald, supra note 96, at 30. 
99 Hildebrandt, supra note 9, at 66. 
100 See, e.g. Crawford & Schultz, supra note 12, at 95; Citron, supra note 14, at 1254.  
101 See Jones, supra note 79, at 217. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  42 
which will “make bad acts visible to all concerned”; 102 or varied similar 
ideas of “algorithmic accountability.”103 
  Yet this connection has never really been justified in terms of 
practical efficacy in relation to the broad range of algorithmic decisions. If 
we return to the notion of algorithmic "war stories" that strike a public 
nerve, in many cases what the data subject wants is not an explanation—but 
rather for the disclosure, decision or action simply not to have occurred. 
Consider, in relation to an individual, the Target pregnancy case mentioned 
in section I.B.2 above, or another recent case of outrage affecting a group, 
when Google wrongly categorized black people in its Photos app as 
gorillas.104 
  In  the  few  modern  EU  legal  cases  we  have  on  controlling 
algorithmic governance, an explanation has not usually been the remedy 
sought. An interesting example is the seminal CJEU Google Spain105 case 
which introduced the “right to be forgotten” and is one of the few cases of 
algorithmic harm to have come to the highest EU court. In this case, the 
claimant, Mr. Costeja González, asking Google to remove as top link in 
searches on his name, a link to an old and outdated page in a newspaper 
archive recording his long-repaid public debt. Mr. Costeja González’s 
(successful) ambition when he went to court was to remove the "inaccurate" 
data; he had, apparently, no interest in why Google’s search algorithm 
continued to put long outdated results at the top of its rankings (even though 
arguably this was inexplicable in terms of how we think we know Page 
Rank works). A similar desire for an action, not for an explanation, can be 
seen in the various European “autocomplete defamation” cases.106 
  In all these cases, an explanation will not really relieve or redress 
the emotional or economic damage suffered; but it will allow developers not 
to make the same mistake again. Clearly these cases may not be typical. An 
explanation may surely help overturn the credit refusal issued by a machine, 
                                                      
102 Daniel J. Weitzner et al., Information Accountability, 51 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 6 
82,84 (2008). 
103  Maayan  Perel  &  Nova  Elkin-Koren,  Accountability  in  Algorithmic  Copyright 
Enforcement,  19  STAN.  TECH.  L.  REV.  473,  478  (2016);  NICHOLAS  DIAKOPOULOS, 
ALGORITHMIC ACCOUNTABILITY REPORTING: ON THE INVESTIGATION OF BLACK BOXES (Tow 
Centre for Digital Journalism, 2013). For a rejection of rights of transparency as the answer 
to algorithmic accountability, see Joshua Kroll et al., Accountable Algorithms, 165 U. PA. L. 
REV. 633, 638 (2017). 
104 See Sophie Curtis, Google Photos Labels Black People as 'Gorillas,' THE TELEGRAPH 
(May  4,  2017,  11:20  AM),  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/google/11710136/ 
Google-Photos-assigns-gorilla-tag-to-photos-of-black-people.html. 
105 Google Spain v. Agencia Española de Protección de Datos (AEPD) and González, Case C 
131/12, 13 May 2014 [hereinafter Google Spain]. 
106 For further detail, see Kohl, supra note 27, at 192; Jones, supra note 79, at 216. 43                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
or an automated decision to wrongfully refuse bail to a black person or 
welfare to someone with medical symptoms—and these are obviously 
important social redresses—but it will not help in all cases. And even in 
these more mainstream cases, as Pasquale correctly identifies, transparency 
alone does not always produce either redress or public trust in the face of 
institutionalised power or money,107 just as David Brin's Transparent 
Society does not in fact produce effective control of state surveillance when 
the power disparity between the state and the sousveillant is manifest.108 
  Thus, it is possible that in some cases transparency or explanation 
rights may be overrated or even irrelevant. This takes us to the question of 
what transparency in the context of algorithmic accountability actually 
means. Does it simply mean disclosure of source code including the model, 
and inputs and outputs of training set data? Kroll et al. argue that this is an 
obvious  but  naïve  solution—transparency  in  source  code  is  neither 
necessary to, not sufficient for algorithmic accountability, and it moreover 
may create harms of its own in terms of privacy disclosures and the creation 
of “gaming” strategies which can subvert the algorithm’s efficiency and 
fairness.109 Instead they point out that auditing, both in the real and the 
digital world can achieve accountability by looking at the external inputs 
and outputs of a decision process, rather than at the inner workings. Even in 
the justice system, it is common for courts to adjudicate based only on 
partial evidence, since even with discovery, evidence may be unavailable or 
excluded on grounds like age of witness, hearsay status or scientific 
dubiety. We often do not understand how things in the real world work: my 
car, the stock market, the process of domestic conveyancing. Instead of (or 
as well as) transparency, we often rely on expertise, or the certification of 
expertise (e.g., that my solicitor who does my house conveyancing, is 
vouched for both by her law degree and her Law Society affiliation, as well 
as her professional indemnity insurance if things go wrong). Transparency 
may at best be neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for accountability 
and at worst something that fobs off data subjects with a remedy of little 
practical use. 
  We return to this question of “transparency fallacy” below at 
section IV.A, and to the question of what types of explanation in what 
circumstances may actually be useful, and to whom (section III). First 
however we consider the recent legal debate on whether a “right to an 
explanation”  of  algorithmic  decisions  does  indeed  exist  in  EU  data 
protection law. 
                                                      
107 See PASQUALE, supra note 3, at 212. 
108 See Bruce Schneier, The Myth of the ‘Transparent Society,’ WIRED, (Mar. 6, 2008, 12:00 
PM), https://www.wired.com/2008/03/securitymatters-0306/. 
109 See Kroll et al., supra note 103, at 654. For a further discussion on “gaming,” see infra 
Section III.C.1.  No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  44 
II. SEEKING A RIGHT TO AN EXPLANATION IN EUROPEAN DATA 
PROTECTION LAW 
  In 2016, to the surprise of some EU data protection lawyers, and to 
considerable global attention, Goodman and Flaxman asserted in a short 
paper that the GDPR contained a "right to an explanation" of algorithmic 
decision making.110 As Wachter et al. have comprehensively pointed out, the 
truth is not quite that simple.111 In this section, we consider the problems 
involved in extracting this right from the GDPR, an instrument still heavily 
built around a basic skeleton inherited from the 1995 DPD and created by 
legislators  who,  while  concerned  about  profiling  in  its  obvious 
manifestations such as targeted advertising, had little information on the 
detailed issues of ML. Even if a right to an explanation can viably be teased 
out from the GDPR, we will show that the number of constraints placed on 
it by the text (which is itself often unclear) make this a far from ideal 
approach. 
A.  GDPR, Article 22: Automated Individual Decision-Making 
  Our starting point is Article 15 of the now-replaced DPD, which 
was originally aimed at protecting users from unsupervised automated 
decision making. This rather odd provision112 was mainly overlooked by 
lawyers and commentators by reason of non-significance and few saw the 
potential it had towards algorithmic opacity. It is clear that Article 15 of the 
DPD did not contemplate dealing with the  special opacity found in 
complex, ML systems, and very little was changed to manage this in the 
new GDPR, Article 22 which provides: 
[T]he right not to be subject to a decision based solely on automated 
processing,  including  profiling,  which  produces  legal  effects, 
concerning him or her, or significantly affects him or her.113  
Importantly, Article 22, like Article 15 before it, is a very delimited right. 
Crucially, the remedy it provides is primarily to prevent processing of a 
particular kind and secondly, to require that a “human in the loop” be 
                                                      
110 Goodman & Flaxman, supra note 6, at 2. 
111 Wachter et al., supra note 11, at 72. 
112 See Izak Mendoza & Lee A. Bygrave, The Right Not to Be Subject to Automated 
Decisions Based on Profiling, in EU INTERNET LAW: REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT 2 
(Tatiani Synodinou et al. eds., Springer, forthcoming 2017) (describing art. 15 as "a second 
class data protection right: rarely enforced, poorly understood and easily circumvented,” not 
included in other fair information privacy schemes such as the OECD guidelines nor 
demanded by Safe Harbour); Lee A. Bygrave, Minding the Machine: Article 15 of the EC 
Data Protection Directive and Automated Profiling, 17 COMPUTER L. & SECURITY REP., 17 
(2001). See also Hildebrandt, supra note 9, at 65. 
113 GDPR, art. 22(1) (emphasis added). 45                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
inserted on challenge. The remedy is not, prima facie, to any kind of 
explanation of how processing was carried out or result achieved, that being 
the province of the information rights of the data subject (see below).114 
  Even after this there are a number of hurdles to get over. First, 
Article 22 applies only when the processing has been solely by automated 
means. ML systems that affect people’s lives significantly are usually not 
fully automated—instead used as decision support115—and indeed in a great 
deal of these cases—for example involving victims of crimes or accidents—
full automation seems inappropriate or far off. Article 22 would be excluded 
from many of the well-known algorithmic “war stories” on this basis: for 
example, the algorithmic decisions on criminal justice risk assessment 
reported by ProPublica in 2016.116 While the racial bias in these systems is 
clearly objectionable, the important point here is that these systems were 
always at least nominally advisory. 
  When  does  “nominal”  human  involvement  become  no 
involvement?  A  number  of  European  data  protection  authorities  are 
currently worrying at this point.117 Human involvement can also be rendered 
nominal by “automation bias,” a psychological phenomenon where humans 
either over or under-rely on decision support systems.118 The  Dutch 
Scientific  Council  for  Government  Policy  in  early  2016  specifically 
recommended that more attention be paid to “semi-automated decision-
making” in the GDPR, in relation to profiling.119 
                                                      
114 Mendoza & Bygrave, supra note 112, at 13 (arguing that DPD arts.  13-15 and 22 suggest 
that there is a right to be informed that automated decision is being made). 
115 CABINET OFFICE, DATA SCIENCE ETHICAL FRAMEWORK (HM Government, May 2016), 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/data-science-ethical-framework.  This 
specifically advises human oversight in non-trivial problems, even where autonomous 
systems are possible. 
116  See  Julia  Angwin  et  al.,  Machine  Bias,  PROPUBLICA,  (May  23,  2016), 
https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing. 
Lack of effective supervision has led to bans in some states. See Mitch Smith, In Wisconsin, 
a Backlash Against Using Data to Foretell Defendant’s Futures, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Jun. 
22, 2016). 
117 The UK ICO at the time of writing recently concluded consulting on this point: see ICO, 
FEEDBACK REQUEST – PROFILING AND AUTOMATED DECISION-MAKING [v 1.0 ,2017/04/06] 
(2017)  at  20,  https://ico.org.uk/media/2013894/ico-feedback-request-profiling-and-
automated-decision-making.pdf (asking “Do you consider that “solely” in Article 22(1) 
excludes any human involvement whatsoever, or only actions by a human that influence or 
affect the outcome? What mechanisms do you have for human involvement and at what 
stage of the process?”). 
118 See, e.g., Linda J Skitka et al., Accountability and Automation Bias, 52 INT’L J.  HUMAN-
COMPUTER STUD. 4, 4 (2000). 
119 WRR, supra note 4 at 142.  No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  46 
  Second, Article 22 requires there to have been a “decision” which 
“produces legal effects, concerning him or her, or significantly affects him 
or her.” There is little clue what a “decision” is in Article 22 beyond the 
brief statement of the GDPR that it “may include a measure” (Recital 71). 
This takes us to two sub-issues. First, is a “decision” what a ML system 
actually produces? ML technologists would argue that the output of an 
algorithmic system is merely something which is then used to make a 
decision, either by another system, or by a human (such as a judge). When 
queried, ML models mostly output a classification or an estimation, 
generally with uncertainty estimates. On their own they are incapable of 
synthesising the estimation and relevant uncertainties into a decision for 
action.120 
  Second, even if we posit that algorithmic “output” and human 
“decision” may be conflated in Article 22 for purposive effect, when does 
an ML "decision" affect a specific individual? What if what the system does 
is classify subject X as 75% more likely than the mean to be part of group 
A, and group A is correlated to an unwelcome characteristic B (poor 
creditworthiness,  for  example)?  Is  this  a  decision  “about”  X?  It  is 
interesting  that  in  relation  to  a  "legal"  effect  the  decision  must  be 
"concerning him or her" but not in relation to a "significant" effect. In the 
paradigmatic domain of credit scoring, there seems no doubt to the ordinary 
person (or lawyer) that there is a decision (by the credit offering company) 
and that it affects an individual data subject (the person seeking credit). But 
in many cases using ML systems, as we see below, this is not so clear. 
1.  Article 22 in the Context of “Algorithmic War Stories” 
  Consider  two  well-known  and  influential  early  examples  of 
“algorithms gone bad.” In 2013, Latanya Sweeney, a security researcher at 
Harvard University, investigated the delivery of targeted adverts by Google 
AdSense  using  a  sample  of  racially  associated  names.121  She  found 
statistically significant discrimination in advert delivery based on searches 
of 2,184 racially associated personal names across two websites. First 
names  associated  predictively  with  non-white  racial  origin  (such  as 
DeShawn, Darnell and Jermaine) generated a far higher percentage of 
adverts associated with or using the word “arrest” when compared to ads 
delivered to “white” first names. On one of the two websites examined, a 
black-identifying name was 25% more likely to get an ad suggestive of an 
arrest record. Sweeney also ruled out knowledge of any criminal record of 
the person to whom the ad was delivered. Acknowledging that it was 
                                                      
120 HEATHER DOUGLAS, SCIENCE, POLICY AND THE VALUE-FREE IDEAL (University of 
Pittsburgh Press 2009). We return to the issue of “decisions” and ML below. 
121 Latanya Sweeney, Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery, 56 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE 
ACM 44, at 44 (2013). 47                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
beyond the scope of her research to know what was happening in the “inner 
workings of Google AdSense,”122 and whether the apparent bias displayed 
was the fault of society, Google or the advertiser, Sweeney still asserted her 
research raised questions about society’s relationship to racism and the role 
of online advertising services in this context. 
  In an even earlier incident of notoriety in 2004, the Google search 
algorithm(s) placed a site “Jew Watch” at the top of the rankings for many 
people who searched for the word “Jew.” Google (in stark contrast to its 
more recent attitudes)123 refused to manually alter their ratings and claimed 
instead that the preferences of a particular group of searchers had put Jew 
Watch to the top rather than any normative ranking by Google. It was stated 
that “[B]ecause the word “Jew” is often used in an anti-Semitic context, this 
had caused Google’s automated ranking system to rank Jew Watch—
apparently an anti-Semitic web site—number one for the query.”124 In the 
end Google refused to remove the site from the rankings but collective 
effort was encouraged among users to push up the rankings of other non-
offensive sites, and eventually, the site itself disappeared from the Internet. 
  In each of these cases, did a relevant, “legal,” or “significant,” 
decision take place affecting a person—or only a group? Here we have 
some rare examples of a system apparently making a “decision” solely by 
automated processing, so the first hurdle is surmounted, but is the second? 
In the Google AdSense example, was a “decision” taken with particular 
reference to Sweeney? Clearly there was no effect on her legal status (which 
implies changes to public law status such as being classified as a US citizen, 
or private law effects such as having capacity to make a will)125 but did the 
                                                      
122 Sweeney contemplates advertisers providing ‘black sounding names’ themselves for 
targeting, or auto-adjustment of Google’s algorithm based on distribution of ‘hits.’ 
123 Google has rethought its approach to such cases, especially after unfavourable press 
reports. See Samuel Gibbs, Google Alters Search Autocomplete to Remove 'Are Jews Evil' 
Suggestion, THE GUARDIAN (Dec. 5, 2016, 10:00 AM), https://www.theguardian.com/ 
technology/2016/dec/05/google-alters-search-autocomplete-remove-are-jews-evil-
suggestion. Now, a “quality rating” downgrades pages rather than removes them: interesting 
considering issues raised later regarding altering ML models using the “right to be 
forgotten.” See Google Launches New Effort to Flag Upsetting or Offensive Content in 
Search,  SEARCHENGINE  WATCH  (Mar.  14,  2017,  1:00  PM), 
http://searchengineland.com/google-flag-upsetting-offensive-content-271119. 
124 See Google in Controversy Over Top-Ranking for Anti-Jewish Site, SEARCHENGINE 
WATCH (Apr. 24, 2004), https://searchenginewatch.com/sew/news/2065217/google-in-
controversy-over-top-ranking-for-anti-jewish-site.  
125 See Mendoza & Bygrave, supra note 112 at 10 (suggesting that a decision must have a 
“binding effect.” It is hard to see how an advert could have that. On the other hand, art. 22 
clearly applies to “profiling” which as we have seen (see supra note 81) includes in its 
definition in art. 4(4) the evaluation of “personal aspects” of a person including their No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  48 
delivery of the advert significantly affect her as an individual? The most 
obvious takeaway is that a racial group was affected by an assumption of 
above average criminality, and she was part of that group, which although a 
familiar formulation in discrimination laws, takes us to somewhere very 
different from the individual subject-focused rights usually granted by data 
protection and the GDPR. 
  Even  if  we  accept  an  impact  on  Sweeney  as  an  individual 
constructed through group membership, was it “significant?” She did after 
all merely have sight of an advert which she was not compelled to click on, 
and which could even have been hidden using an ad blocker. Mendoza and 
Bygrave126  express  doubts  that  targeted  advertising  will  “ordinarily” 
generate significant consequences (though it might if aimed at a child) and 
point to the two examples given by Recital 71 of the GDPR discussing 
automated credit scoring and e-recruitment. Was she significantly affected 
by pervasive racism as exemplified by the advert delivery? This sounds 
more important to be sure but surely responsibility should lie with the 
society that created the racist implications rather than the “decision” taken 
by Google AdSense, or Google alongside the advertiser? Is it relevant that 
almost certainly no human at Google could have known Sweeney would be 
sent this advert, or is that merely another example, as Kohl discusses,127 of 
confusing automation with lack of responsibility? Does it matter that 
Sweeney could have conceivably asked not to be shown this kind of advert 
(though perhaps not in 2013) using Google’s own tools? 
  In the Jew Watch example, it is even harder to say a “decision” was 
made affecting any one individual significantly. Given the complexity of 
the search algorithms involved, dependent not only on variables derived 
from the searcher but also the general search environment, it is very hard to 
predict a particular ranking of sites being shown to a particular user in 
advance. Furthermore, and quite likely given the evidence quoted above, the 
searcher might not themselves be of the class affected.128 
1. Re-enter the “Right to an Explanation”? 
  The ban on automated decision-making in Article 22(1) operates 
only under certain conditions. It does not apply when the data founding the 
decision was lawfully processed on the basis that it was necessary for 
                                                                                                                       
“personal preferences.” This sounds a lot like targeted advertising, though see below on 
whether that decision would be “significant.”). 
126 Mendoza & Bygrave, supra note 112 at 12. 
127 See Kohl, supra note 27. 
128 This compares to European cases of algorithmic defamation, where Google autocomplete 
suggested particular names was falsely associated with reputation-harming terms. Yet there 
the causal connection between algorithm and data subject harm seems more obvious. See 
discussion in Jones, supra note 79. 49                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
entering a contract, authorized by law or, most crucially, based on explicit 
consent (Article 22(2)).129 In these cases Article 22 does not prevent 
automated decision-making but, instead, “suitable measures to safeguard the 
data subject’s rights” must be put in place, which should include “at least 
the right to obtain human intervention . . . to express [the data subject’s] 
point of view, and to contest the decision.”130  
  Recital 71 then mentions all of the above safeguards but also adds a 
further, explicit “right to an explanation.” Is this therefore another route to a 
“right to an explanation” in Article 22? This seems paradoxical. Article 22 
gives a primary right, i.e. to stop wholly automated decision making. Would 
it give what seems an equally powerful right—to an explanation—in 
circumstances where the primary right is excluded because the data subject 
has already consented to the processing? 
  To  complicate  matters  further,  under  Article  22(4),  solely 
automated decisions based on sensitive personal data are illegal unless 
based on explicit consent or “substantial public interest.” In both cases 
again, the main text requires the implementation of “suitable measures” to 
safeguard the data subject’s rights, but does not list what these include, 
referring the reader back again to Recital 71 for assistance.131 So it may be 
possible to read a “right to an explanation” into these cases as well, and 
indeed given that we are not pointed to Article 22(3) with its contradictory 
list of safeguards, this might indicate that we could rely more heavily on the 
full extent of the Recital 71 list. 
  Does it matter that the “right to an explanation” is only mentioned 
in the recital text not the main article text? Here we encounter a pervasive 
problem in the GDPR in particular, and European legislation in general, 
which is the status of recitals. Recitals, while a part of the text, are assumed 
                                                      
129 GDPR, art. 9(2). Every act of processing personal data in the GDPR requires a lawful 
ground of processing: see above discussion of consent as such a ground in Section II.A.1. 
130 GDPR, art. 22(3) . 
131 Note also that paragraph 2 of recital 71 details a long list of further suggestions to the data 
controller  to  “ensure  fair  and  transparent  processing.”  These  involve  “appropriate 
mathematical or statistical procedures for the profiling, [and]technical and organisational 
measures.” These seem only to be required (if they indeed are) in relation to processing of 
special categories of data (see art 22(4). Interestingly these move in functionality from 
merely fixing errors in  functionality, to ensuring security, to “prevents, inter alia, 
discriminatory effects on natural persons on the basis of racial or ethnic origin, political 
opinion, religion or beliefs, trade union membership, genetic or health status or sexual 
orientation” (i.e. the special categories of data). This appears to point to the field of 
discrimination-aware data mining, still nascent in the research community at the time of the 
drafting of the GDPR, and can be seen as a transition from the traditional function of 
individual subject access rights (to ensure accurate and secure processing) to a more 
aspirational function. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  50 
to be interpretative of the main text rather than creating free standing extra 
obligations.132 In the GDPR however, as a matter of political expediency, 
many issues too controversial for agreement in the main text have been 
kicked into the long grass of the recitals, throwing up problems of just how 
binding they are. Wachter et al. argue that the history of Article 22 in the 
preliminary  drafts  indicates  a  deliberate  omission  of  a  “right  to  an 
explanation”  from the main text of Article 22, not an accidental or 
ambiguous omission133 which implies the main text omission should rule 
out the “right to an explanation” in the recital. However the use of the 
mandatory “should” in Recital 71 muddies the waters further.134 
  Our view is that these certainly seem shaky foundations on which to 
build a harmonised cross EU right to algorithmic explanation. 
  Thus, returning to the Sweeney Google AdSense case study, we find 
several further issues. Firstly, if we accept for argument’s sake that a 
“decision” was made regarding her which had “significant effects,” then 
was it “based on a “special” category of data135 (in this case, race)? If so, it 
worth noting that Article 9(2) of the GDPR probably required that she had 
given that data to Google by explicit consent. If that was so, she could 
potentially claim under Article 22(4) the “right to an explanation” of how 
the advertising delivery algorithm had worked. 
  But was the decision based on race? Was it not more likely instead 
based on a multiplicity of “ordinary” information that Sweeney provided as 
signals  to  the  ranking  algorithm,  plus  signals  from  the  rest  of  the 
“algorithmic group,”136 which together might statistically proxy race? 
Perhaps it was based on information the advertiser provided to Google—
trigger names or keywords, for example? Ironically it seems like we are 
stuck  in  a  Catch  22–like  situation:  to  operationalise  this  ‘right  to 
explanation,’ you need to know what its relevant input variables were, 
which itself may require access to something resembling an algorithmic 
explanation. 
                                                      
132 See Tadas Klimas & Jurate Vaiciukaite, The Law of Recitals in European Community 
Legislation, 15 ILSA J. OF INT’L AND COMP. LAW 1 61, 92 (2008). Recitals in EU law can be 
perplexing and is at core politicised. They lack “independent legal value, but they can 
expand an ambiguous provision's scope. They cannot, however, restrict an unambiguous 
provision's scope, but they can be used to determine the nature of a provision, and this can 
have a restrictive effect.” 
133 Wachter et al., supra note 11, at 9–11. 
134 Interestingly the French text of recital 71 appears to replicate the use of “should” (devrait) 
while the German text is differently constructed so that it does not. 
135 GDPR, art. 9. 
136 See supra, Section I.B.2 and Mittelstadt et al., supra note 25. 51                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
  Finally looking at the primary remedy Article 22 provides, a 
“human in the loop,” how valuable is it truly? Certainly, for issues of 
abusive or upsetting content thrown up by search or advertising algorithms, 
as in the Sweeney case, pretty useful: this is why Google and Facebook are 
both currently hiring many workers to manually trawl through their outputs 
using both real and hypothetical queries. In such circumstances, an intuitive 
response is likely to be correct and this is something machines do badly. 
But  typically,137  the  types  of  ML  algorithms  that  are  highly 
multidimensional make “decisions” with which humans will struggle as 
much as, if not more than, machines: simply because of human inability to 
handle such an array of operational factors. In some kinds of cases—for 
example, the much discussed “trolley problem”138—humans are as likely to 
make spur of the moment decisions as reasoned ones. For these reasons, 
Kamarinou et al. have suggested that machines may in fact soon be able to 
overcome certain “key limitations of human decision-makers and provide us 
with decisions  that are  demonstrably fair.”139  In such an  event they 
recommend it might be better, not to have the “appeal” from machine to 
human which Article 22 implies, but to have the reverse.140 
B. GDPR, Article 15: A Way Forward? 
  A right which might be more usefully employed to get a transparent 
explanation of a ML system is not part of Article 22 but rather in Article 15, 
a provision not specially related to automated decision making. Article 15 
provides that the data subject shall have the right to confirm whether or not 
personal data relating to him or her are being processed by a controller and 
if  that  is  the  case,  access  to  that  personal  data  and  the  “following 
information.” This includes in the context of “automated decision making . . 
. referred to in Article 22(1) and (4),” access to “meaningful information 
                                                      
137 See infra Section III.B. 
138 The trolley problem is an ethical thought experiment often applied to autonomous 
vehicles. Imagine a runaway train careering towards a group of people unable to avoid it. A 
bystander could flip the lever to send to train to fewer, equally helpless people—but in doing 
so would determine who lives and dies. What should they do? This is interesting, but we note 
here that when faced with stressful situations with many factors in the real world, the 
challenge is both psychological and ethical. See generally PHILIPPA FOOT, THE PROBLEM OF 
ABORTION AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE DOUBLE EFFECT IN VIRTUES AND VICES (Basil 
Blackwell, 1978). 
139 See Calders & Žliobaitė, supra note 33; see also FAIRNESS, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND 
TRANSPARENCY IN MACHINE LEARNING, WWW.FATML.ORG. 
140 Dimitra Kamarinou et al., Machine Learning with Personal Data, QUEEN MARY SCHOOL 
OF LAW LEGAL STUDIES RESEARCH PAPER NO. 247/2016, https://ssrn.com/abstract=2865811. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  52 
about the logic involved, as well as the significance and the envisaged 
consequences of such processing.”141 
  As noted above, this version of the “right to an explanation” is not 
new, but has existed in the DPD since 1995.142 While this may seem a more 
straightforward way to get to such a right than via Article 22, it has its own 
problems. 
  A first issue is timing. Wachter et al. suggest that Article 15 
“subject access rights” should be contrasted with the “information rights” of 
the GDPR. Articles 13 and 14. Articles 13 and 14 require that information 
of various kinds should be made available to the data subject when data are 
collected from either her (Article 13), or from another party (Article 14). 
This information is reminiscent of that required to inform consumers before 
entering, say, distance selling contracts. In contrast, Article 15 refers to 
rights of “access” to data held by a data controller. This seems to imply data 
has been collected and processing has begun or taken place. From this 
Wachter et al. argue that the information rights under Articles 13 or 14 can 
only refer to the time before (ex ante) the subject’s data is input to the 
model of the system. As such the only information that can be provided then 
is information about the general “system functionality” of the algorithm, i.e. 
“the logic, significance, envisaged consequences and general functionality 
of an automated decision-making system.”143 
  In the case of Article 15 access rights, however, it seems access 
comes after processing. Therefore ex post tailored knowledge about specific 
decisions made in relation to a particular data subject can be provided, i.e. 
“the logic or rationale, reasons, and individual circumstances of a specific 
automated decision.” 
  This division seems moderately sensible and seems to promise a 
right to an explanation ex post, despite some textual quibbles.144 However, 
                                                      
141 GDPR, art. 15(1)(h)). 
142 DPD, art. 12(a). 
143 Wachter et al., supra note 11 at 78. 
144 Wachter et al., supra note 11 argue that the art. 15(h) ex post right still seems dubious 
given that it includes the right to the “envisaged consequences of such processing” [italics 
added], which, particularly when considered alongside the German version of the text, seems 
"future oriented.” However recital 63, which annotates art. 15, refers merely to the 
“consequences of processing” not the “envisaged” consequences. Is this an accidental or 
inconsequential small textual difference, or is it enough to restrict the apparent scope of art. 
15(1)(h) to “system logic”? As we have already noted, the text of main article normally takes 
precedence over that of recitals. However it could be argued that EC laws should be 
interpreted technologically and restricting art. 15(h) to ex ante explanations seems against 
the purpose indicated by the recital.  53                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
whether such an explanation can be “meaningful” in substance is another 
story as will be discussed below in section III. 
  Secondly, Article 15(h) has a carve out in the recitals, for the 
protection of trade secrets and IP. “That right should not adversely affect 
the rights or freedoms of others, including trade secrets or intellectual 
property and in particular the copyright protecting the software.”145 This 
probably explains the lack of use of this right throughout the EU, as a 
similar defence was included in the DPD. Recital 63 of the GDPR does 
progress things a little given it now states that this should not justify “a 
refusal to provide all information to the data subject.”146 Several other 
factors also give us hope for overcoming this significant barrier. First, as we 
discuss below,147 some explanation systems which build a model-of-a-
model need not necessarily infringe IP rights. Secondly, the EU Trade 
Secrets Directive, the provisions of which must be adopted by member 
states by June 2018, specifically notes in Recital 35 that the directive 
“should not affect the rights and obligations laid down” in the DPD,148 
going on to specifically name the right of access—although we caution, as 
previously, that the status of recitals is murky at best. 
  Finally, it has been suggested that the text of Article 15(h)’s “right 
to meaningful information” is just as restricted as any remedy derived from 
Article 22, given it refers to “the existence of automated decision-making, 
including profiling, referred to in Article 22(1) and (4).”149 We disagree. It 
seems  quite  possible  to  view  the  reference  to  Article  22  as  merely 
instantiating one form of automated decision making, not excluding others, 
which  are  e.g.,  achieved  partially  but  not  solely  by  automation. 
Furthermore, Article 15(h) says the right to “meaningful information” refers 
“at least” to these types of automated decision making. This seems to 
logically imply a wider scope. Given the dearth of European case law on the 
matter, it is hard to say this was a settled matter in the DPD. 
  Next, drawing on literatures from computer science and elsewhere, 
we turn to some of the practical opportunities and challenges implementing 
any similar right to “meaningful information about the logic involved” to 
that Article 15 potentially provides. 
                                                      
145 GDPR, recital 63. 
146 GDPR, recital 63 [emphasis added]. 
147 See infra Section III.C.2. 
148 Recital 35, Directive (EU) 2016/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 
June 2016 on the protection of undisclosed know-how and business information (trade 
secrets) against their unlawful acquisition, use and disclosure, 2016 O.J. (L 157) 1. 
149 GDPR, art. 15(2)(h). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  54 
III. IMPLEMENTING A RIGHT TO AN EXPLANATION 
  Explanations and the demand for them in machine learning systems 
are not new, although emphasis has more recently turned to explanations for 
the decision-subject, rather than the user of the decision-support tool. 
Computer scientists have been long concerned that neural networks “afford 
an end user little or no insight into either the process by which they have 
arrived at a given result,”150 and that “people should be able to scrutinise 
their user model and to determine what is being personalised and how.”151 
ML explanations are not just good for decision subjects but for system 
designers too. Such systems often do not work perfectly at the time of 
deployment. Given their probabilistic nature, we must expect them to fail in 
some cases. A system which has predictive accuracy of 90% on unseen data 
used to test it, would, in a simple case, be expected to fail at least 10% of 
the time on new unseen data. In the real world, this is usually worsened by 
the changing nature of tasks, the world and the phenomena ML systems are 
often expected to accurately model.152 Explanations can be used to help 
assess the reliability of systems: for example, assessing if the correlations 
that are being used are spurious, non-generalisable, or simply out-of-date. 
These systems of feedback can help to both ensure system performance and 
support varying notions of quality.153 
  Here, our focus is however mainly on decision subjects (data 
subjects, in data protection parlance), who, as discussed above, might 
display an array of overlapping reasons for wanting an explanation. Below 
we discuss what types of explanation are possible (and what they might 
substantially provide to decision-subjects), and consider in what situations 
and for who an explanation of an ML system may be difficult, limited or 
impossible. Finally, we suggest some positive avenues for explanation 
facilities including (a) explanations aimed at helping users to form better 
mental maps of how algorithms work, and thus to develop better trusted 
relationships with them; and (b) pedagogical (model-of-model) rather than 
decompositional (i.e., explain by taking apart) explanations as a way to 
avoid perceived IP and trade secrets restraints on ML algorithms. 
                                                      
150 Alan B. Tickle et al., The Truth Will Come to Light: Directions and Challenges in 
Extracting the Knowledge Embedded Within Trained Artificial Neural Networks, 9 IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS 1057, 1057 (1998). See also Zelznikow and Stranieri, 
supra note 19. 
151 Kay, supra note 8 at 18. 
152 Joao Gama et al., A Survey on Concept Drift Adaptation, 1 ACM COMPUTING SURVEYS 1 
(2013). 
153 In the ML field of recommender systems, this reason for explanation has been discussed 
under the term ‘scrutiny’, and is considered a hallmark of good user design. See Nava 
Tintarev & Judith Masthoff, Explaining Recommendations: Design and Evaluation, in 
RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS HANDBOOK (Francesco Ricci et al. eds., Springer 2015). 55                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
A. Types of Explanation: Model-Centric Versus Subject-Centric 
Explanations 
   We can broadly discern two categories of explanations that might 
be feasible. The first centers on the model itself. In this, we include logics 
that might be generally applicable to many decision subjects as well as 
motivations, context, variables, and performance behind the model and the 
decision process. The second concerns particular predictions of interest, 
which may or may not lead to ‘decisions.’ Here, even in complex models, 
some information can often be provided about ‘why’ a particular prediction 
was made—although this information has its limits. 
1.  Model-Centric Explanations (MCEs) 
  Model-centric explanations (MCEs) provide broad information 
about a ML model which is not decision or input-data specific. Computer 
scientists would refer to some aspects of this explanation as ‘global’, as it 
seeks to encapsulate the whole model—although we deliberately avoid this 
terminology here, as it is likely to cause more confusion across disciplines 
than clarity. We extend the focus from the computational behaviour of a 
model to consider the motivations and context behind this model in action. 
As Singh et al. note, machine learning is part of a process, and the 
dimensions of ‘explanation’ that relate to the broader context are important 
and should not be ignored.154 MCEs provide one set of information to 
everyone, but there are limitations on how detailed, practical and relevant—
and thus, how “meaningful”155—such an explanation can be alone. 
  Information provided with an MCE approach could include: 
•  setup information: the intentions behind the modelling 
process, the family of model (neural network, random 
forest, ensemble combination), the parameters used to 
further specify it before training; 
•  training metadata: summary statistics and qualitative 
descriptions of the input data used to train the model, 
the provenance of such data, and the output data or 
classifications being predicted in this model; 
•  performance  metrics:  information  on  the  model’s 
predictive skill on unseen data, including breakdowns 
such as success on specific salient subcategories of 
data; 
                                                      
154 Jatinder Singh et al., Responsibility & Machine Learning: Part of a Process (Oct. 27, 
2016), https://ssrn.com/abstract=2860048 
155 GDPR art. 15(h). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  56 
•  estimated global logics: these are simplified, averaged, 
human-understandable forms of how inputs are turned 
into outputs, which by definition are not complete, else 
you could use them instead of the complex model to 
achieve the same results. These might include variable 
importance  scores,  rule  extraction  results,  or 
sensitivity analysis; 
•  process  information:  how  the  model  was  tested, 
trained, or screened for undesirable properties. 
  Some work around algorithmic decision-making concerned with the 
consistency, or procedural regularity of the decisions being undertaken falls 
into this category.156 Information about the logics, which might be provided 
in the form of cryptographic assurances,157 might help ensure consistency 
against an adversary intent on switching algorithmic systems behind-the-
scenes, or making arbitrary decisions under the guise of a regular automated 
system. However, for much “meaningful information” for individual data 
subjects, we are probably going to need to look beyond MCEs alone. 
2.  Subject-Centric Explanations (SCEs) 
  Subject-centric explanations (SCEs) are built on and around the 
basis of an input record. They can only be provided in reference to a given 
query—which could be real or fictitious or exploratory. As a result (and 
somewhat contrary to the approach of Wachter et al.), they are theoretically 
possible to give before or after a “decision” as discussed in the sense of data 
protection, if access to the model is provided. Computer scientists would 
refer to this type of explanation as ‘local’, as the explanation is restricted to 
the region surrounding a set of data. Complex models cannot be explained 
effectively in their entirety—which is why they have rapidly become known 
as ‘black boxes’ in the media. Despite this, only considering certain relevant 
parts of them at any one time might allow for more useful explanations. 
   To better understand this, we introduce a concept from computer 
science:  the  “curse  of  dimensionality.”  Data  can  be  thought  of 
geometrically: with two numeric variables, you can display all data on a 
two-dimensional scatter plot. With three variables, a three-dimensional one. 
Conceptually, you can scale this up to however many variables you have in 
your data. As you increase the dimensions (i.e., the number of variables) the 
number of ways that all potential values of them can be combined grows 
                                                      
156 Kroll et al., supra note 103. 
157 Only limited prior work has demonstrated the feasibility of verifying certain types of ML 
systems with cryptographic methods for any purpose. See George Danezis et al., Private 
Client-Side  Profiling  with  Random  Forests  and  Hidden  Markov  Models,  PRIVACY 
ENHANCING TECHNOLOGIES (Springer 2012). 57                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
exponentially. It is this dynamic which makes the data especially complex 
to  comprehend.  Layered  onto  this,  models  which  mix  arbitrary 
combinations  of  variables  in  multiple  different  ways  in  parallel, 
interdependent ways, means that the complexity of the data by its extent is 
compounded by the complexity of the procedures used to analyse it. 
Explaining  everything  in one  go,  as  MCEs  try  to,  quickly  becomes 
unwieldy. 
 
Figure  1  Subject-centred  explanations  in  practice.  The  dotted  line 
represents a machine learned decision boundary, where the ticks are 
classified one way, and the crosses another. This is a highly simplified, 
illustrative  diagram  that  consciously  omits  uncertainty,  or  points 
misclassified during training in order to illustrate a broader point. 
  Despite this, explanations are possible if we zoom in to the part of 
the space in and around a vector of variables that interest us.  By taking only 
a slice of the system, it can become considerably more interpretable. Take 
the simple (and simplified) example above in Figure 1. The dotted line 
represents a machine learned decision boundary over two input variables. 
Using this boundary, we can classify points into ticks and crosses, which 
might, for example, be acceptance of an application for a financial product. 
Giving out the whole model in a useful form will be challenging, especially 
since usually there are more than the two or three dimensions we can grasp 
visually with relative ease. Yet zooming in to a particular point: such as 
why were ?-1 and ?-2 rejected, might be easier to explain. ?-1 is easier in 
many ways—it seems that they have to just increase variable x to switch the 
decision, and this is helped a little if they also increase variable y at the 
same time, and hindered if they don’t. Yet ?-2 is slightly trickier. They 
could increase or reduce variable y, or increase or reduce variable x. This No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  58 
seems pretty unsatisfactory—the individual is likely to wonder (in an MCE 
fashion) why the model was shaped to have these odd ‘pockets’ they could 
be stuck in, anyway. What is clear is that models can be explained in terms 
of one or two things an individual could change. In other cases, they can 
only be framed in terms of many variables, which change in inconsistent 
and non-linear ways. 
  This is an active field of research which we believe needs more 
consideration from a legal perspective. Here, we distinguish between four 
main types of SCEs: 
•  Sensitivity-based subject-centric explanations: what 
changes  in  my  input  data  would  have  made  my 
decision turn out otherwise?158 (Where do I have to 
move in Figure 1 to be classified differently?) 
•  Case-based subject-centric explanations: which data 
records used to train this model are most similar to 
mine?159 (Who are the ticks and crosses nearest to 
me?) 
•  Demographic-based subject-centric explanations: what 
are the characteristics of individuals who received 
similar treatment to me?160 (Who, more broadly, was 
similarly classified?) 
•  Performance-based subject-centric explanations: how 
confident are you of my outcome? Are individuals 
similar to me classified erroneously more or less often 
than average? (How many ticks and crosses nearer me 
were misclassified during training? Am I a difficult 
case?) 
  Unlike MCEs, SCEs are less suited for discussing aspects such as 
procedural regularity. Instead, they are more about building a relationship 
between these tools and their users or decision subjects that can provide 
“meaningful” explanation. In this sense, SCEs are considerably more linked 
                                                      
158 Wojciech Samek et al., Evaluating the Visualization of What a Deep Neural Network Has 
Learned, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 1, 7 (2016); 
Marco Tulio Ribeiro et al. “Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining the Predictions of Any 
Classifier, PROCEEDINGS OF THE 22ND ACM SIGKDD INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING 1135–44 (2016). 
159 DONAL DOYLE ET AL., A REVIEW OF EXPLANATION AND EXPLANATION IN CASE-BASED 
REASONING (Department of Computer Science, Trinity College, Dublin, 2003). 
160 Liliana Adrissono et al., Intrigue: Personalized Recommendation of Tourist Attractions 
for Desktop and Handheld Devices, 17 APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 687, 696 (2003); 
Tintarev & Masthoff, supra note 153. 59                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
to communities of interface design and human-computer interaction than to 
communities concerned with engineering issues, such as those building the 
cryptographic assurances that a system did what it was expected to, 
discussed above. 
B. Barriers to Explanations 
  MCEs and SCEs are far from perfect solutions, let alone easy ones 
to operationalize in many cases. Here, we present an in-exhaustive overview 
of two issues in this field: one that relates to the domain of decision-
making, and one that relates to the interaction between who needs an 
explanation and how solid that explanation is likely to be for them. 
1.  Domain: Some Tasks Are Easier to ‘Explain’ Than Others 
  Meaningful explanations of ML do not work well for every task. As 
we began to discuss above, the tasks they work well on often have only a 
few input variables that are combined in relatively straightforward ways, 
such as increasing or decreasing relationships. Systems with more variables 
will typically perform better than simpler systems, so we may end up with a 
trade-off between performance and explicability. 
  One way to deal with this is if different input variables can be 
combined in a clear and visual way. Images are a good example of the 
latter: for a ML system, and especially since the rise in popularity of deep 
learning, colour channels in pixels are treated as individual inputs. While 
we struggle to read a table full of numbers at a glance, when an image is 
meaningful, the brain can process thousands of pixels at once in relation to 
one another. Similarly, words hold a lot of information, and a visual 
displaying 'which words in a cover letter would have got me the job, were 
they different' is also meaningful. 
  Even visualisation cannot deal with the basic problem that in some 
systems there is no theory correlating input variables to things humans 
understand as causal or even as “things.” In ML systems, unlike simulation 
models, the features that are being fed in might lack any convenient or clear 
human interpretation in the first place, even if we are creative about it. 
LinkedIn, for example, claims to have over 100,000 variables held on every 
user that feed into ML modelling.161 Many of these will not be clear 
variables like “age,” but more abstract ways you interact with the webpage, 
such as how long you take to click, the time you spend reading, or even text 
                                                      
161 KUN LIU, DEVELOPING WEB-SCALE ML AT LINKEDIN—FROM SOUP TO NUTS, PRESENTED 
AT THE NIPS SOFTWARE ENGINEERING FOR MACHINE LEARNING (Dec. 13, 2014). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  60 
you type in a text box but later delete without posting.162 These variables 
may  well  hold  predictive  signals  about  individual  characteristics  or 
behaviours,  but  we  lack  compelling  ways  to  clearly  display  these 
explanations for meaningful human interpretation. In these cases, we must 
ask—what could a satisfactory explanation even look like for decisions 
based on this data? Do we even possess the mental vocabulary of categories 
and concepts to grasp the important aspects in the data? 
2.  Users: Explanations Might Fail Those Seeking Them Most 
  It is worth considering the typical data subject that might seek an 
explanation of a ML-assisted decision. We might expect them to have 
received outputs they felt were anomalous. They might feel misclassified or 
poorly  represented  by  classification  systems—hardly  uncommon,  as 
literatures  on  the  problematic  and  value-laden  nature  of  statistical 
classification note.163 While some might wholesale reject the schema of 
classifications used, others might want to know if such a decision was made 
soundly. For these decision subjects, an explanation might help. 
  However, it also seems reasonable to assume that individuals with 
outputs they felt were anomalous are more likely than average to have 
provided inputs that can genuinely be considered statistically anomalous 
compared to the data an algorithmic system was trained on. To a ML 
system, they are “weirdos.” 
  Researchers have long recognised some outcomes are more difficult 
to predict than others for ML systems, given their relative individual 
complexity.164 Given the many variables being used for each record, 
spotting  these  individuals  cannot  be  done  with  methods  such  as 
visualisation, which we often use to detect outliers. Most of the phenomena 
we are interested in modelling, such as burglary, child abuse, terrorism or 
loan defaults, are rare, at least in comparison to their non-occurrence, and 
this also makes prediction harder.165 ML practitioners expect this kind of 
dynamic within the data they use—the common technique of boosting relies 
on learning more from cases previously misclassified. 
                                                      
162 Sauvik Das & Adam Kramer, Self-Censorship on Facebook, PROCEEDINGS OF THE 
SEVENTH INTERNATIONAL AAAI CONFERENCE ON WEBLOGS AND SOCIAL MEDIA 120, 120 
(2013). 
163 JAMES C. SCOTT, SEEING LIKE A STATE (Yale University Press 1998); SALLY ENGLE 
MERRY, THE SEDUCTIONS OF QUANTIFICATION (University of Chicago Press 2016).  
164 Gary M. Weiss, Mining with Rare Cases, in DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 
HANDBOOK, 747–57 (Oded Maimon & Lior Rokach eds., Springer 2009). 
165 Taeho Jo & Nathalie Japkowicz, Class Imbalances Versus Small Disjuncts, 6 ACM 
SIGKDD EXPLORATIONS NEWSLETTER 40 (2004). 61                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
  Why  might  this  challenge  meaningful  explanations?  SCEs 
practically focus on taking the model you have, selecting a certain region of 
it,  and  modelling  it  in  a  simpler  and  more  interpretable  way.  This 
simplification necessarily discards the complex outlier cases, just as you 
might do when you simplify a scatterplot into a smooth trend-line or a ‘line 
of best fit.’ Optimising an explanation system for human interpretability 
necessarily means diluting predictive performance to capture only the main 
logics of a system: if a more interpretable system with exactly the same 
predictive  performance  existed,  why  use  the  more  opaque  one? 
Traditionally, this has been described as the “fidelity” of an explanation 
facility for a machine learning system: how well does it mimic the 
behaviour of the system it is trying to explain?166 The more pressing, related 
question is, are the cases that an interpretable model can no longer predict 
simply distributed at random, or are they correlated with those we might 
believe to have a higher propensity to request a right to explanation? We 
lack empirical research in this area. If the users of complex ML systems 
who seek explanations are likely to be these “rare birds,” then it is worrying 
that they are the most likely to be failed. 
B.  Opportunities for Better Explanations 
  Better explanations are possible, although it may involve rethinking 
how we make and use them. We highlight two promising avenues. The first 
centers on allowing users to interactively explore algorithmic systems, 
which can enable individuals to develop good and trustworthy mental 
models of the systems they use and are subject to. The second rests on 
another insight—you do not have to have access to the innards of a model to 
attempt to explain it, but can instead wrap a simpler model around it and use 
that as the explanation facility. 
1.  Exploring With Explanations 
  Above we introduced the idea of model-centric (MCEs) vs subject-
centric (SCEs) explanations. Which are best for helping users understand 
complex ML systems? The best explanations of complex systems seem to 
be “exploratory,” using subject-centric inputs. Experimental tests have 
found that interfaces that provided SCEs rather than MCEs appeared far 
more effective at helping users complete tasks, even where the experiment 
was constructed so that unusually, the same amount of information was 
provided by both.167 For users, it seems that when done well, SCEs are more 
appealing, convenient and compelling. Here, explanation facilities might 
                                                      
166 Tickle et al., supra note 150, at 1058. 
167 Dianne C. Berry & Donald E. Broadbent, Explanation and Verbalization in a Computer-
Assisted Search Task, Q.J. EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOL. SEC. A 585, 596 (1987). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  62 
allow decision subjects to build more effective and relevant mental models, 
build justified trust and work better with algorithmic systems.168 
  Drawing on the literature on human–computer interaction (HCI), 
SCEs can be thought of as “seams” in the design of a ML system.169 
Seamless design hides algorithmic structures, providing certain kinds of 
effortlessness and invisibility. This promotes an acceptance of technology 
based on its effect: the idea that when a machine runs efficiently and 
appears to settle matters of fact, attention is often drawn away from its 
internal  complexity  to  focus  only  on  the  inputs  and  outputs.170  Yet 
“seamful” algorithmic  systems,  where  individuals  have  points in the 
designed systems to question, explore and get to know them, help build 
important, albeit partial, mental models that allow individuals to better 
adapt  their  behaviour  and  negotiate  with  their  environments.171  By 
introducing these “seams” of explanation, it has been demonstrated that 
even new users can quickly build mental models of ML systems to the level 
of those with seasoned experience.172 “Seamful” systems might help restore 
what Mireille Hildebrandt terms “double contingency”—the mutual ability 
to anticipate, or “counter-profile” how an agent is being “read” by another, 
so she can change her own actions in response.173 
  Some SCEs already let individuals hypothetically explore the logics 
happening around their own data points. Tools already exist to let you “try 
out” what your credit score might be online, including through filling a 
questionnaire, or signing into these using your data profile (for example, by 
authorising a ‘soft’ check on your credit file, or potentially one day, by 
                                                      
168 Perel and Elkin-Cohen describe this as “black box tinkering” and are positive about it for 
empowering users in the field of algorithmic copyright enforcement. See Maayan Perel 
(Filmar) & Niva Elkin-Koren, Black Box Tinkering: Beyond Transparency in Algorithmic 
Enforcement, FLORIDA LAW REVIEW (forthcoming 2017). Some authors suggest facilities 
help acceptance of decisions. See Henriette Cramer et al., The Effects of Transparency on 
Trust in and Acceptance of a Content-Based Art Recommender, 18 USER MODELING AND 
USER-ADAPTED INTERACTION 455 (2008); while others consider trust building overall. See 
contra A Busone et al., The Role of Explanations on Trust and Reliance in Clinical Decision 
Support Systems, in ICHI ’15, 160–169 (2015). 
169 Matthew Chalmers & Ian McColl, Seamful and Seamless Design in Ubiquitous 
Computing, in WORKSHOP AT THE CROSSROADS: THE INTERACTION OF HCI AND SYSTEMS 
ISSUES IN UBICOMP (2003). 
170 See BRUNO LATOUR, PANDORA’S HOPE: ESSAYS ON THE REALITY OF SCIENCE STUDIES 304 
(Harvard University Press 1999). 
171 Kevin Hamilton et al., A Path to Understanding the Effects of Algorithm Awareness, CHI 
’14 633 (2014). 
172 Motahhare Eslami et al., First I “Like” It, Then I Hide It: Folk Theories of Social Feeds, 
CHI’ 16 (2016). 
173 Hildebrandt, supra note 59. 63                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
giving access to your social media API). More advanced approaches might 
let a data subject see how the system might make decisions concerning 
other users, thus taking the user out of their own “filter bubbles.” 
  Unfortunately, it will be easier to build SCEs that let you explore 
the logics around yourself rather than around others, because simulating the 
inputs of others convincingly is hard. Some researchers have attempted to 
‘reverse engineer’ algorithmic systems online in order to study phenomena 
such  as  price  discrimination  by  simulating  the  profiles  of  diverse 
individuals while browsing.174 However, presenting valid hypothetical 
subjects  other  than  yourself  to  many  of  these  systems  is  becoming 
increasingly difficult in an era of personalisation. British intelligence 
services have noted the challenge in providing data such as “a long, false 
trail  of  location  services  on  a  mobile  phone  that  adds  up  with  an 
individual’s fake back-story,” with the former director of operations for 
MI6 noting that “the days in which intelligence officers could plausibly 
adopt different identities and personas are pretty much coming to an 
end.”175 Individuals everywhere will find it harder to “fake” a new persona 
without changing their lifestyle, friends etc., in these days of the “digital 
exhaust.” 
  A problem frequently raised with this kind of repeated querying of 
ML systems to establish a “mental model,” but one that we believe to be 
overstated, is that such querying might be used to “game the system.” In 
many cases, this is more unlikely or less consequential than often assumed. 
In private sector systems such as targeted advertising deriving from social 
media information, users anecdotally do often try to “game” or self-
optimize systems with false data such as birthdates or locations. Yet in 
public sector cases, such as ML sentencing and parole systems, it seems 
unlikely that gaming will be a large problem. As the criminological 
literature has noted, any evidence that the severity of sentencing deters 
crime is patchy at best.176 If this is true then it seems unlikely that prisoners 
will change their characteristics just to attempt to game a recidivism 
algorithm that will not even be used until after they have been apprehended. 
Perhaps within prison, individuals might seek to ‘game’ an algorithm used 
during parole, by behaving well, or taking specified courses, for example. 
Yet for this to be gaming, we would need to assume that the act of taking 
                                                      
174 Aniko Hannak et al., Measuring Price Discrimination and Steering on E-Commerce Web 
Sites, in PROCEEDINGS OF THE 2014 CONFERENCE ON INTERNET MEASUREMENT CONFERENCE 
(2014). 
175 Sam Jones, The Spy Who Liked Me: Britain’s Changing Secret Service, FINANCIAL TIMES 
(Sep. 29, 2016), https://www.ft.com/content/b239dc22-855c-11e6-a29c-6e7d9515ad15. 
176 See, e.g., Daniel S. Nagin, Deterrence in the Twenty-First Century, 42 CRIME AND JUSTICE 
199, 201 (2013). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  64 
these courses, or behaving well, would not be useful or transformative in 
and of itself. 
  For important decisions, we might question if a system that “works” 
but can so easily be gamed is not a system which is already too fragilely 
reliant on obfuscation to achieve its policy goals. If all that is preventing 
misuse is ‘keeping the lid’ on the logic, then it is not a great stretch to 
assume some individuals or organizations, likely assisted by money and 
power, have already pried the lid open further than others. In particular, 
researchers have demonstrated that with significant financial resources, 
there is a feasibility of “model stealing” i.e. reverse engineering models 
such as those Google and Amazon offer as-a-service via APIs.177 It might 
also be questioned if a system is only based on “entrenched” factors that are 
costly or impossible to change or hide (e.g. race), is this really a fair 
system?178 
2.  Explaining Black Boxes Without Opening Them 
  As  we  have  seen,  the  way  that  ML  systems  optimize  for 
performance usually comes at the expense of internal interpretability. Since 
early research into "expert systems" in the late 80s onwards, there has been 
awareness that a mere trace of the “logic” of how an automated system 
transformed an input into an output was not "meaningful" to a human, let 
alone  to  a  non-expert.  Since  then  researchers  have  generally  seen 
explanation as an entirely separate optimization challenge—decoupling 
algorithmic reasoning from algorithmic explanation.179 
  There are two main styles of decoupled algorithmic explanations.180 
They differ from MCEs and SCES, which concern the focus of explanation, 
to consider the way in which that explanation (MCE or SCE) is decided. 
The first type is the decompositional explanation, which attempts to open 
the black box, and understand how the structures within, such as the 
weights, neurons, decision trees and architecture, can be used to shed light 
on the patterns that they encode. This requires access to the bulk of the 
model structure itself.  Some types of machine learning, like regression, are 
decomposable by design, and commonly used to explain phenomena in 
social sciences. Others can be made more decomposable with relatively 
little effort—random forest models can be trained to also produce “variable 
                                                      
177 Florian Tramèr et al., Stealing Machine Learning Models via Prediction APIs, in USENIX 
SECURITY SYMPOSIUM, AUSTIN, TX, USA, AUGUST 11 2016 (2016).  
178 On the danger of inequalities and gaming, see generally Jane Bambauer & Tal Zarsky, 
The Algorithm Game [draft manuscript, on file with authors]. 
179 Michael R. Wick & William B. Thompson, Reconstructive Expert System Explanation, 54 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 33, 35 (1992). This corresponds to the “naïve” approach Kroll et 
al. talk about of merely dumping source code, inputs and outputs (supra note 103). 
180 Combinations are also possible. See Tickle et al., supra note 150. 65                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
importance  scores”  alongside  the  model.181  Decomposing  others, 
particularly when the innards are complex as they are in deep learning 
systems, requires extra methods—a hot research area.182 
  On the other end of the spectrum, pedagogical systems, also 
referred to as model agnostic systems, do not even need to open the black 
box. They can get the information they need by simply querying it, like an 
oracle.183 Pedagogical systems have the great advantage of demanding a 
much lower level of model access and are thus less likely to run into the IP 
or trade secrecy barriers embedded in Article 15(h) (see section II.B above). 
Indeed, for firms that provide remote access to querying their models—for 
example,  through  an  API—it  might  be  technically  possible  to  build 
pedagogical explanations even if the firm does not directly condone it. 
Furthermore, pedagogical systems cannot easily be reverse engineered to 
construct a model of equal performance, as some might fear. In particular, 
the subject-specific nature of the vast majority of pedagogical explanation 
systems means that even if an algorithm could be siphoned and rebuilt 
elsewhere, that reconstruction would be limited to individuals similar to 
those  to  which  the  explanations  related.  More  critically,  if  a  more 
explainable system was similarly accurate, why use a pedagogical system in 
the first place? Statistical controls also exist that might be fruitfully 
repurposed to prevent “over-explaining” to any one person or organisation, 
notably in the area of “differential privacy” guarantees.184 
IV. SEEKING BETTER REMEDIES THAN EXPLANATIONS WITH THE 
GDPR 
A.  Avoiding a “Transparency Fallacy” 
  Above, we have seen a large number of difficulties, as well as some 
opportunities, around providing meaningful explanations in ML systems.  
This leads us in this section to stop and consider if “the game is worth the 
candle”: if meaningful information about the logic of ML is so hard to 
provide, how sure are we that explanations are actually an effective remedy 
and if so, to achieve what? In section I.B.3, we already began to explore a 
little sceptically the notion of transparency as a remedy, drawing on 
                                                      
181 Durham Police’s recidivism system publicises these measures, for example. See Sheena 
Urwin, Presentation at TRILCon ’17: Algorithms in Durham Constabulary custody suites—
How accurate is accurate? (May 3, 2017). 
182 See, e.g., George Montavon et al., Explaining Nonlinear Classification Decisions with 
Deep Taylor Decomposition, 65 PATTERN RECOGNITION 211 (2017). 
183 For examples of pedagogical systems, see Ribeiro et al., supra note 158; Anupam Datta et 
al., Algorithmic Transparency via Quantitative Input Influence, in TRANSPARENT DATA 
MINING FOR BIG AND SMALL DATA (Tania Cerquitelli et al. eds. Springer 2017). 
184  Cynthia  Dwork,  Differential  Privacy:  A  Survey  of  Results,  in  INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCE ON THEORY AND APPLICATIONS OF MODELS OF COMPUTATION (Springer 2008). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  66 
historical  experience  from  the  financial  crash  and  from  freedom  of 
information laws. A useful warning can also be taken about so-called 
remedies or safeguards that may simply not work by considering the history 
of consent in information privacy. 
  Privacy scholars are already very familiar with the notion that 
consent, often regarded by lay audiences as the primary safeguard for 
control of personal data, has in the online world become a mere husk of its 
former self, often described as “meaningless” or “illusory.”185 Why is this? 
Online consent is most often obtained by displaying a link to a privacy 
policy at the time of entry to or registration with a site, app or network, and 
asking the user to accede to these terms and conditions by ticking a box. As 
there is no chance to negotiate and little evidence that the majority of users 
either read, understand or truly consider these conditions, it is hard to see 
how  this  consent  is  either  “freely  given,  specific,  informed  and 
unambiguous” despite these being conditions for valid consent under the 
GDPR.186 Consent as an online institution in fact arguably no longer 
provides any semblance of informational self- determination but merely 
legitimises the extraction of personal data from unwitting data subjects. As 
behavioural  economics  have  taught  us,  many  users  have  a  faulty 
understanding of the privacy risks involved, due to asymmetric access to 
information  and  hard-wired  human  failure  to  properly  assess  future, 
intangible and contingent risks. Even in the real rather than online world, 
consent is manipulated by those, such as employers or insurers, who can 
exert pressures that render “free” consent imaginary. To posit in a rather 
utopian way that consent can be given once to a data controller in a free and 
informed way, will require constant vigilance as privacy policies and 
practices  change  frequently.  It  is  unreasonable  and  increasingly 
unsustainable to abide by the liberal paradigm and expect ordinary users to 
manage their own privacy via consent in the world of online dependence 
                                                      
185 See discussion and references supra Section I.B.2 and supra note 54. 
186 GDPR, art. 4(11). The GDPR does attempt to improve the quality of consent with some 
new measures such as the requirement that the data controller must be able to prove consent 
was given (Article 7(1)), that terms relating to consent in user contracts must be 
distinguishable from other matters, and written in “clear and plain language” (Article 7(2)); 
and that in determining if consent was given “freely,” account should be taken of whether the 
provision of the service was conditional on the provision of data not necessary to provide 
that service (Article 7(4)). It is submitted however that these changes are not major, and that 
much will depend on the willingness of EU member state data protection regulators to take 
complex, expensive and possibly unenforceable actions against major data organisations 
(Google, Facebook, Amazon and others) emanating from non-EU origins with non-EU law 
norms. The Common Statement of 5 DPAs (supra note 72) is certainly an interesting first 
shot over the bows. 67                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
and “bastard data.”187 As a result, it is now beyond trite to talk about a 
“notice and choice fallacy.”188 
  Relying on individual rights to explanation as the means for users to 
take  control  of  ML  systems  risks  creating  a  similar  “transparency 
fallacy.”189 Individual data subjects are not empowered to make use of the 
kind of algorithmic explanations they are likely to be offered even if 
(unlikely as it seems) the problems identified in section III are overcome. 
Individuals are mostly too time-poor, resource-poor, and lacking in the 
necessary expertise to meaningfully make use of these individual rights. In 
some ways, the transparency fallacy is even worse than its consent cousin, 
since the explanation itself may not be meaningful enough to confer much 
autonomy even on the most empowered data subject. 
  Ananny  and  Crawford  recount the  numerous  ways  in  which 
transparency  “as  a  method  to  see,  understand  and  govern  complex 
systems”190—both in the past, and now in the time of algorithmic ML 
systems—is not only limited but at times misleading and unhelpful. Inter 
alia,  they  note  that  transparency  can  support  “neoliberal  models  of 
agency,”191 placing a tremendous burden on individuals both to seek out 
information about a system, interpret it, and determine its significance, only 
then to find out they have little power to change things anyway, being 
“disconnected from power.”192 Liberal democracy in the past has taught us 
“the feeling that seeing something may lead to control over it”193 but in fact 
in its search for a technical solution, dependence on transparency may 
occlude the true problems which rest in societal power relations and 
institutions as much as the software tools employed. 
B.  Beyond Explanation Rights: Making Fuller Use of the GDPR 
to Better Control Algorithms 
  We now consider if in the stampede to find a legally enforceable 
right to an explanation, other new user rights and tools in the GDPR have 
been given undeservedly little attention. We first explore two main rights: 
the right to erasure (colloquially often called “right to be forgotten”) in 
Article 17, and the right to data portability in Article 20, before turning to 
look at the proposed supporting environment for enforcement the GDPR 
                                                      
187 See McNamee, supra note 55. 
188 See full discussion in Edwards, supra note 59.  
189 See Heald, supra note 98 (discussing the notion of a “transparency illusion”). 
190 See Mike Annany & Kate Crawford, Seeing Without Knowing: Limitations of the 
Transparency Ideal and Its Application to Algorithmic Accountability, NEW MEDIA & 
SOCIETY 1, 5. 
191 Id. at 7. 
192 Id. at 6. 
193 Id. at 3. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  68 
establishes using a varied range of instruments, such as Data Protection 
Impact Assessments (DPIAs) and privacy seals. 
1.  GDPR, Article 17: The Right to Erasure (“Right to be Forgotten”) 
  Article 17 of the GDPR states that the “data subject shall have the 
right to obtain from the controller the erasure of personal data concerning 
him or her without undue delay.”194 This is not an unrestricted right. Erasure 
can be obtained on one of various grounds,195 including: that the data is no 
longer necessary in relation to the purposes for which they were collected; 
that the data subject has withdrawn her consent to processing; that the 
personal data have been unlawfully processed; that the data must be erased 
under local state or EU law (e.g. because of rehabilitation of offenders or 
bankruptcy rules); or that the data was provided while a child under sixteen 
years old. Most usefully, erasure can be sought if the data was being used to 
profile the data subject and had been collected lawfully but without her 
consent.196 The right can conceivably be repelled by the controller on 
“compelling legitimate grounds” and there are other exceptions, including 
to safeguard freedom of expression and the historical record.197 
  In the context of ML, we believe a data subject might usefully seek 
erasure as a remedy in at least three main circumstances. 
1.  Seeking Erasure of Personal Data “Concerning” a Data 
Subject 
  First, a data subject might seek erasure of her personal data simply 
because she does not wish the data controller to have a copy of it any 
longer. 
  An important issue here is what personal data in the ML system an 
individual data subject has rights over. Clearly, she has the right to erase her 
explicitly provided data used as inputs to an ML system (e.g. name, age, 
medical history) but does she have the right to erase observed data about her 
behaviour and movements both in the real and virtual world?  This is 
important—ML systems such as those run by Facebook or LinkedIn make 
heavy use of observed behaviour—for example the type of links clicked on 
                                                      
194 The right to erasure (“right to be forgotten”) in GDPR, arts. 17 and 18 (restriction of 
processing) emerged after the landmark CJEU case, Google Spain, supra, note 105, and it is 
both wider in effect and more specified than the rule elaborated in that case out of the DPD. 
195 GDPR, art. 17(1). 
196 i.e. on the ground of the legitimate interests of the data controller under art. 6(1)(f) or, for 
a public data controller, the public interest under art. 6(1). 
197 There is no guidance in recital 69 on what this might mean. Note that art. 17 rights can 
also be excluded by EU states where exercising them affects important public interests 
(Article 17(3)): these include freedom of expression, ‘public interest’ in the area of health, 
public archives and scientific, historical, and statistical research, and legal claims. 69                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
on-site, the photos viewed, the pages “liked”; or, in the real world, the 
location and movement as tracked by GPS. While this implicitly provided 
data, should arguably qualify as personal data if it clearly allows a data 
subject to be identifiable (e.g. by “singling out”) it does not appear the 
history of Article 17 ever contemplated its use for such purposes. 
  Perhaps  most importantly in relation to ML, what about the 
inferences that are made by the system when the data subject’s inputs are 
used as query? These seem what a user would perhaps most like to delete—
especially in a world of “bastard data” where one system’s output becomes 
another’s input. Somewhat surprisingly, the Article 29 Working Party (the 
body of DPA representatives that advises the Commission), in the context 
of the right to portability198 have already issued guidance that the inferences 
of a system is not the data of the subject but “belongs” to the system that 
generated it.199 It is not yet clear if this approach would be advised 
regarding the right to erase, though it logically might, as the two rights 
(GDPR Articles 17 and 20) are seen as complementary. In that case, we 
seem to have a clear conflict with the already acknowledged right of a data 
subject to erase an inference from Google’s search algorithm. One example 
is the “right to be forgotten,” as vindicated in Google Spain.200 
2.  Seeking Withdrawal of Personal Data From a Model: 
“Machine “Unlearning”” 
  Secondly, a data subject might seek erasure of her data from the 
model of a trained ML system because she was unhappy with the inferences 
about her that the model produced. In other words, she wants to alter the 
model. This is unlikely to be helpful because it is unlikely that one data 
subject withdrawing their personal data would make much difference to a 
trained  model:  ML  systems  often  require  multiple  examples  of  a 
phenomenon of interest to recognise the pattern. They are calibrated 
(“regularised”) this way to avoid modelling the “noise” or random elements 
in the data (“overfitting”), rather than just capturing the main “signal” 
hoped to be fruitful in analysing future cases after the model is built. To 
make effective use of this right to alter models, whole groups would need to 
collaborate explicitly or implicitly to request erasure. We might imagine a 
data subject whose data generated by a wearable fitness tracker phenomena 
have been correlated with a rare medical condition. She might persuade the 
rest of her “algorithmic group” to withdraw their personal data from the 
system so that the model could no longer make this correlation. This seems 
extremely  difficult  to organise  in  practice,  as  well  as  probably  also 
involving unwanted privacy disclosures. 
                                                      
198 See infra Section IV.B.2. 
199 See A29 WP, infra note 218. 
200 Google Spain, supra note 105. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  70 
3.  Machine “Unlearning” Take 2: Erasing Models as 
Themselves Personal Data 
  Third, a data subject might seek erasure of an entire model (or 
aspects of it) on the grounds that it is her personal data. This might be based 
on the assertion that the model itself is the personal data of each and every 
data subject whose input data helped train and refine it. On the face of it this 
seems implausible. To a lawyer, a ML model resembles a structure of 
commercial use which will probably be protected by trade secrets or 
possibly, by an IP right such as a patent or, in Europe, a database right,201 
which is a right over the arrangement of data in a certain system, personal 
or otherwise, rather than the data itself. 
  Yet for ML specialists, an argument might be made that personal 
data used to create a trained model might be fully or partially reconstructed 
by querying the model.202 Attempts have already been made by researchers 
to extract personal data in this way as a form of “adversarial” ML. An 
attacker might attempt to query, observe or externally influence a ML 
system to obtain private information about some or all individuals within its 
training set.203 In this type of attack, individual records can be recovered 
from a model with high probability. Indeed, some applications of ML 
specifically utilise this characteristic to try and improve or better understand 
data compression techniques.204 
  Assuming that some grounds for erasure were established, for a 
data controller, requests for erasure of personal data from an ML model 
would not always be straightforward as it might involve retraining the 
                                                      
201 See Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 
on the legal protection of databases. Case law on the EU database right both in the CJEU and 
national courts has been generally restrictive and it is by no means sure it would operate to 
cover “models,” at least in the UK. In the US it seems to have been accepted in some courts 
that ML algorithms such as search algorithms are protected as trade secrets. See especially 
Viacom Intern. Inc. v. YouTube Inc., 253 F.R.D. 256, 259-60 (S.D.N.Y. 2008). 
202 See Weiss, supra note 164. 
203 See the literature on model inversion attacks, including Matt Fredrikson et al. Model 
Inversion Attacks that Exploit Confidence Information and Basic Countermeasures, in CCS’ 
15, OCTOBER 12–16 2015, DENVER, COLORADO, USA (2016). For attacks against machine 
learning, see generally Ling Huang et al., Adversarial ML, AISEC ’11, 43–58 (2011). For 
counter methods, see Ananad D. Sarwate et al., Signal Processing and ML with Differential 
Privacy: Algorithms and Challenges for Continuous Data, 86 IEEE SIGNAL PROCESS. MAG. 
Sep., 86–94 (2013); Ji Zhanglong et al., Differential Privacy and ML: A Survey and Review 
(2014). 
204 GEORGE TODERICI ET AL., FULL RESOLUTION IMAGE COMPRESSION WITH RECURRENT 
NEURAL NETWORKS (2016). 71                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
model and, especially, revising the features of that model.205 This would be 
problematic as the high computational and labour costs of ML systems 
restrict many organisations’ practical capacities for constant retraining of 
the model when either new data, or indeed, requests for erasure come in. In 
these situations, swift and easy erasure is likely difficult to achieve. 
Computationally faster approaches to ‘machine unlearning’ have been 
proposed,  but still require retraining and  would require  foundational 
changes to model architectures and processes to use.206 
4.  Model Trading and the Right to Erasure 
  A rising business model involves the trading, publishing of or 
access to trained models without the data which was used to train them. For 
example, Google’s ML models syntaxnet for parsing sentences (into the 
relations between verbs, propositions and nouns, for example) is based on 
proprietary treebank data, while the word embedding model word2vec (to 
map which words have similar meanings to each other, in which ways) uses 
closed access text from Google News is also available. Can a data subject 
withdraw their personal data in some useful way from a model which has 
been  traded?  This  presents  interesting  and  extremely  difficult  legal 
challenges to the right to erasure. 
  Article 17, section 2 of the GDPR is an obvious starting point. It 
provides that where a controller has made personal data “public” but is 
asked to erase, then they are to take “reasonable steps, including technical 
measures” to inform other controllers processing the same personal data that 
the data subject has requested the erasure by them of “any links to, or copy 
of, or replication of, those personal data.”207 
  This is a difficult provision to map to ML model trading. It clearly 
had in contemplation the more familiar scenarios of, say, reposted social 
media posts, or reposted links to webpages. First, are models sold under 
conditions of commercial confidentiality, or within proprietary access-
restricted systems, made “public?” If not, the right does not operate. Was a 
"copy" or “replication” of the personal data made? Again, if we regard the 
model as a structure derived from personal data rather than personal data 
                                                      
205 In relation to the importance of feature engineering, see Pedro Domingos, A Few Useful 
Things to Know About ML, 55 COMMUN. ACM 10, 1, 4 (2012). Retraining might only 
involve a single piece of data, such as transforming a postcode into geospatial coordinates. In 
this kind of case, an erasure request is simple. However if a variable is constructed by 
reference to other inputs – e.g. the distance of an input from the mean, which involves all 
data points—then complete erasure might require recalculation of the whole dataset. 
206 Yinzhi Cao & Junfeng Yang, Towards Making Systems Forget with Machine Unlearning, 
in SP’15 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 2015 IEEE SYMPOSIUM ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY, MAY 17–
21, 463–480 (2015). 
207 GDPR, recital 66. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  72 
itself, neither of these applies. Was there a “link to” that original personal 
data? This seems more possible, but it is still rather a linguistic stretch. 
  Finally, the GDPR makes it plain that a controller is only obliged to 
do this as far as is reasonable, “taking account of available technology and 
the cost of implementation.”208 Even if all these problems are met, the 
obligation is only on the model-seller to “inform.” There is no obligation on 
the controller to whom the model was traded to do anything with this 
information. The data subject would, it seems, have to make another erasure 
request to that controller, unless they chose to redact the model voluntarily. 
2.  GDPR, Article 20: The Right to Data Portability 
  Article 20 provides that data subjects have the right to receive their 
personal data, “provided” to a controller, in a “structured, commonly used 
and machine-readable format,” and that they then have the right to transmit 
that data to another controller “without hindrance.”209 Data portability is 
conceptually a sibling right to Article 17. In theory, a data subject can ask 
for their data to be erased from one site (e.g. Google) and at the same time 
ported into their own hands.210 Data subjects can also ask for data to be 
ported directly from controller A, who currently is processing it, to a 
controller B of their own choice.211 Data portability is aimed at explicitly 
allowing data subjects to gain greater control over their personal data for 
consumer protection more than privacy purposes—e.g. by allowing them to 
retrieve billing or transaction data from energy companies or banks—and 
re-use it in their own preferred ways to save money or gain advantages.212 
  In the context of ML, it is possible to imagine Article 20 rights 
being used to facilitate user control over their personal data and possibly, 
the inferences drawn from it. It has often been suggested that data subjects 
might safeguard their privacy by adopting use of what are sometimes 
known as Personal Data Containers (PDCs). Using these technologies, 
personal data does not have to be shared to secure desired services from 
giants such as Google or Facebook. These companies do not use this data 
for their own profiling purposes, but rather the subject only provides an 
index of the data, keeping their own data either on their own server or 
                                                      
208 GDPR, art. 17(2). 
209 GDPR, art. 20(1). 
210 GDPR, art. 20(3). But note the right to erasure covers data “concerning” a data subject 
rather than as here, merely “provided” by the data subject. This is considerably more 
restrictive. 
211 GDPR, art. 20(2). 
212 It is also often said that art. 20 is intended to be more of an atypical competition remedy 
than a privacy remedy. See A Diker Vanberg and MB Ünver, "The right to data portability in 
the GDPR and EU competition law: odd couple or dynamic duo?" 8 EUR. J. OF LAW AND 
TECH. 1, (2017). See also the UK’s voluntary midata scheme which preceded art. 20. 73                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
perhaps in a trusted cloud storage. The philosophy behind this goes back 
several decades, to the idea that an “end-to-end” principle on the internet 
would empower the edges  of a network, and avoid centralisation.213 
Proponents of data containers, which encompass research projects such as 
DataBox and Hub of all Things (HaT),214 argue that these devices in your 
own homes or pockets might help you to archive data about yourself, 
coordinate processing with your data, and guard against threats.215 Article 
20 rights might enable data subjects to withdraw their personal data into 
PDCs  in  order  to  establish  more  informational  self-determination  in 
comparison to suffering the vagaries of profiling. However, as Hildebrandt 
points out, what we increasingly want is not a right not to be profiled—
which means effectively secluding ourselves from society and its benefits—
but to determine how we are profiled and on the basis of what data—a 
“right how to be read.”216 Using Article 20 portability rights, a data subject 
might choose to take their data to a controller whose model appealed to 
them from a market of choices: perhaps on the basis of a certification 
against particular values (see below)—rather than simply accept the model 
used by Google or its ilk. 
  This is no panacea, and there are a number of clear problems with 
using Article 20 this way. First, is it likely the ordinary consumer would 
have either the information or the motivation to “shop around” for models 
in this way? Given the well-known inertia of consumers even about quite 
straightforward choices (e.g. switching energy suppliers, ISPs or banks to 
save money or get better service), it seems difficult to believe they could 
make this fairly esoteric choice without considerable improvements such as 
labelling or certification of algorithms.217 It will take a long time for a 
competing marketplace of algorithmic model choices to emerge and indeed 
it is hard to see the  current marketplace taking to such voluntarily. 
Sometimes, as in criminal justice systems, it is hard to see how competing 
suppliers of models could emerge at all. On a practical point, it is quite 
possible that although the data subject may in theory gain greater control 
over their personal data, in reality they may not have the knowledge or time 
to safeguard their data against emerging threats. 
                                                      
213 See LARRY LESSIG, CODE 2.0. 111 (Basic Books, 2006); see also visions of this in the 
marketing literature, such as ALAN MITCHELL, RIGHT SIDE UP 6 (HarperCollins, 2002). 
214 See discussion in Lachlan Urquhart et al., Realising the Right to Data Portability for the 
Internet of Things (March 15, 2017), doi:10.2139/ssrn.2933448. 
215 Richard Mortier et al., The Personal Container or Your Life in Bits, DIGITAL FUTURES 
‘10, OCTOBER 11–12, 2010, NOTTINGHAM, UK (2010). 
216 Hildebrandt, supra note 59. 
217  See infra Section V. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  74 
  Secondly, from a legal perspective, Article 20, much like Article 
22, is hedged around with what often seem capricious restrictions. It only 
applies to data the subject “provides.” There seems to be no clear consensus 
on whether this covers just the explicit data a person provides (e.g. name, 
hobbies, photos etc. on Facebook); metadata supplied unknowingly (e.g. 
which pictures they look at, what links they click on, who is in their friends 
graph); or most damningly, the inferences that are then drawn from that data 
by the ML or profiling system itself. The Article 29 Working Party suggests 
that both the data a data subject provides directly, and data provided by 
“observing” a data subject, is subject to portability; but data inferred from 
these are not.218 Furthermore, Article 20 only applies to data provided by 
“consent”219—accordingly if data has been collected and profiled under 
another lawful ground such as the legitimate interests of the data controller, 
no right to portability exists.220 Lastly, it is worth emphasising this right 
only covers data which was being processed by “automated means”221—
though not, as in Article 22, “solely” automated means, which sets it up as a 
fundamentally more useful provision concerning algorithms-as-decision-
support, rather as decision-makers. 
V. BEYOND INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS IN THE GDPR: PRIVACY BY DESIGN 
  The General Data Protection Regulation discussion so far has 
revolved around rights given to individual data subjects. Although section 
I.B above demonstrates that algorithms create societal harms, such as 
discrimination against racial or minority groups, a focus on data protection 
remedies makes an individual’s rights approach inevitable. Data protection 
is a paradigm based on human rights which means it does not contemplate, 
as discussed above, remedies for groups (or indeed, for non-living persons 
such as corporations, or the deceased).222 
  This means that even if the rights we have discussed above—
become valuable tools for individuals to try to “enslave” the algorithm, it is 
still up to individual data subjects to exercise them. This is not easy, as we 
noted in our section IV.A on “notice and choice” and transparency fallacies. 
This is even truer perhaps in the EU where consumers are on the whole far 
less prepared and empowered to litigate than in the US. The UK and many 
                                                      
218 See A29WP: A29 WP, GUIDELINES ON THE RIGHT TO DATA PORTABILITY, 16/EN. WP 242 
(Dec. 13, 2016). 
219 GDPR, art. 20(1)(a). 
220 This bizarre choice can only be explained by thinking of art. 20 as a solution to promote 
competition by allowing data subjects to make active choices to retrieve their voluntarily 
posted data from social networks. 
221 GDPR, art. 20(1)(b). 
222 Lilian Edwards & Edina Harbinja, Protecting Post-Mortem Privacy: Reconsidering the 
Privacy Interests of the Deceased in a Digital World, 32 CARDOZO ARTICLES & ENT. LAW J. 
102, 113 (2013). 75                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
other EU nations have no generic system of class actions. Although this has 
been viewed as a problem for many years, attempts to solve it on an EU 
wide basis have repeatedly stalled. Individuals are further hampered in 
meaningfully  attaining  civil  justice  by  a  general  prejudice  against 
contingency lawyering combined with dwindling levels of civil legal aid. 
Some options are emerging in the GDPR to provide a semblance of class 
action remedies, such as mandating third party bodies to act in court around 
data  protection  issues  on  a  data  subjects’  behalf,  or,  with  specific 
derogations by member states, for third party bodies to act without being 
mandated on behalf of a particular sector. However, bodies that are not 
mandated by a data subject have no ability to claim compensation under DP 
law, leaving them still far from a US-style class action, and their utility is 
still to be seen.223 
  The data protection regime  contemplates that individual data 
subjects may find it hard to enforce their rights by placing general oversight 
in the hands of the independent regulator each state must have224 (its Data 
Protection  Authority  or  DPA).  However,  DPAs  are  often  critically 
underfunded since they must be independent of both state and commerce. 
They are often also significantly understaffed in terms of the kind of 
technical expertise necessary to understand and police algorithmic harms. In 
fact, financial constraints have in fact pushed DPAs such as the UK’s ICO 
towards a much more “public administrative” role than one would expect, 
where problems (e.g. spamming, cold calling, cookies) are looked at more 
in the round as societal ills, than via championing individual data subject 
complaints. 
  Is it possible to derive any ways forward from the GDPR that are 
more likely to secure a better algorithmic society as a whole, rather than 
merely providing individual users with rights as tools which they may find 
impossible to wield to any great effect? 
A.  “Big Data Due Process” and Neutral Data Arbiters 
  From a European perspective, it is interesting to observe how the 
predominant North American legal literature has tried to solve the problems 
of  algorithmic  governance  without  the  low-hanging  fruit  of  a  data 
protection–based “right to an explanation.” One notable bank of literature 
explores the idea of “big data due process.” Crawford and Schultz,225 
drawing on early work by Citron,226 interestingly attempt to model how due 
process rights already familiar to US citizens could be adapted to provide 
fairness, agency and transparency in cases around algorithmic automated 
                                                      
223 See GDPR, art. 80. 
224 See GDPR, art. 51. 
225 Crawford & Schultz, supra note 12 at 123. 
226 Citron, supra note 14. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  76 
systems in the governmental sector. Citron’s work argues227 for a number of 
radical adaptations to conventional due process which might include: 
•  extra  education  about  the  biases  and  fallacies  of 
automation for government agencies using automated 
systems;228 
•  agencies to hire “hearing officers” to explain in detail 
their reliance on the outputs of such systems to make 
administrative  decisions,  including  any  “computer 
generated facts or legal findings”;229 
•  agencies to be required to regularly test systems for 
bias and other errors;230 
•  audit trails to be issued by systems and notice to 
subjects that they have been used to make decisions, 
such that judicial review is possible.231 
  Crawford and Schultz take these ideas of re-modelled due process 
and note they fit better into a model of structural rather than individualised 
due process.232 For opaque predictive systems where data subjects never 
become aware of opportunities they might have had, reliance on individual 
rights and awareness is deeply problematic. In a structural approach, 
oversight and auditing can primarily be driven by public agencies. They 
suggest a “neutral data arbiter” with rights to investigate complaints from 
those whose data is used in predictive automatic systems, and provide a 
kind of “judicial review” by reviewing audit trails to find bias and 
unfairness that might render automated decisions invalid. This idea of an 
external regulator or audit body which might investigate complaints and 
provide mediation or adjudication is one with clear appeal in the literature: 
Crawford and Schultz suggest the FTC might act as a model but Tutt, for 
example, suggests an “FDA for algorithms.”233 
  Seen through European eyes, two problems quickly emerge. One, 
the EU data protection regime applies to private and public sector alike and 
                                                      
227 Interestingly, she rejects as part of the “opportunity to be heard” a simple right to access 
to the algorithm’s source code and/or a hearing on the logic of its decision as too expensive 
under the balancing test in Matthews v. Eldridge (Citron, supra note 14 at 1284). 
228 Id. at 1306. 
229 Id. at 1307. 
230 Id. at 1310. 
231 Id. at 1305. 
232 Crawford & Schultz, supra note 12 at 124. 
233 See Tutt, supra note 13. Other suggestions for algorithmic audit are usefully compiled by 
Brent Mittelstadt, Auditing for Transparency in Content Personalization Systems, 10 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION 4994 (2016). 77                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
in the private sector, it is harder to see these “due process” measures being 
taken on-board without compulsion or external funding. As we noted above, 
whereas transparency is a default in the public sector, the opposite is true in 
the private sector. Two, we essentially already have “neutral data arbiters” 
in the form of the state DPAs, and as just discussed, they are already 
struggling to regulate general privacy issues now let alone these more 
complex and opaque societal algorithmic harms. 
B.  Data  Protection  Impact  Assessment  and  Certification 
Schemes 
  However, the GDPR introduces a number of new provisions which 
do not confer individual rights but rather attempt to create an environment 
in which less “toxic” automated systems will be built in future. These ideas 
come out of the long evolution of “privacy by design” (PbD) engineering as 
a way to build privacy-aware or privacy-friendly systems, starting from the 
beginning of the process of design rather than “tacking privacy on at the 
end!.” They recognize that a regulator cannot do everything by top down 
control, but that controllers must themselves be involved in the design of 
less privacy-invasive systems. These provisions include requirements that: 
•  controllers must, at the time systems are developed as 
well as at the time of actual processing, implement 
“appropriate technical and organisational measures” to 
protect the rights of data subjects.234 In particular, 
“data protection by default” is required so that only 
personal data necessary for processing are gathered. 
Suggestions for PbD include pseudonymisation and 
data minimisation; 
•  when a type of processing using “new” technologies is 
“likely to result in a high risk” to the rights of data 
subjects, then there must be a prior Data Protection 
Impact Assessment (DPIA);235 
•  every public authority and every “large scale” private 
sector  controller  and  any  controller  processing 
“special” categories of data236 (sensitive personal data) 
must appoint a Data Protection Officer (DPO);237 
DPIAs especially have tremendous implications for ML design. PIAs (as 
they were formerly known) have traditionally been voluntary measures, in 
                                                      
234 GDPR, art. 25. 
235 GDPR, art. 35. 
236 GDPR, art. 9. 
237 GDPR, art. 37. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  78 
practice largely taken up by public bodies bound to compliance and audit, 
such as health trusts. Attempts to expand their take up in Europe into areas 
like radio-frequency identification (RFID)238 and the Internet of Things239 
by the private sector have in the main been unsuccessful. However, the new 
Article 35 is compulsory, not voluntary, and its definitions of “high risk” 
technologies are almost certain to capture many if not most ML systems. 
The GDPR requires a DPIA where in particular there is a “systematic and 
extensive evaluation of personal aspects relating to natural persons  . . . 
based on automated processing, including profiling . . . and on which 
decisions are based that produce legal effects concerning the natural person 
or similarly significantly affect the natural person.”240 
  This is almost identical to the formulation used in Article 22 around 
automated decision-making. The ICO241 note firmly that “potential privacy 
risks” have already been identified with “the use of inferred data and 
predictive analytics.” Accordingly, they provide a draft DPIA for big data 
analytics.242 It seems clear that, despite the uncertainty of the “high risk” 
threshold,  DPIAs  are  quite  likely  to  become  the  required  norm  for 
algorithmic systems, especially where sensitive personal data, such as race 
or political opinion, is processed on a “large scale.”243 
  Where a DPIA is carried out and indicates a “high risk,” then the 
local member state DPA must be consulted before the system can be 
launched. The impact assessment must be shared and the DPA must provide 
written advice to the controller and can use their powers to temporarily or 
permanently ban use of the system.244 Given the fines that can also be levied 
against non-compliant controllers under the GDPR (in the worst cases, up to 
                                                      
238 See EUROPEAN COMMISSION, PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION IMPACT ASSESSMENT 
FRAMEWORK FOR RFID APPLICATIONS (Jan. 12, 2011), http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/enet/ 
documents/rfid-pia-framework-final.pdf. 
239 See The Data Protection Impact Assessment Template supported by Commission 
Recommendation 2014/724/EU, Smart Grid task Force 2012-14, Expert Group 2: Regulatory 
Recommendations for Privacy, Data Protection and Cybersecurity in the Smart Grid 
Environment, Data Protection Impact Assessment Template for Smart Grid and Smart 
Metering Systems (Mar. 18, 2014). 
240 GDPR, art. 35(3)(a). 
241 ICO, supra note 4. 
242 ICO, supra note 4, annex 1. 
243 GDPR, art. 35(3)(b). See also DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY, Guidelines on Data 
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and Determining Whether Processing Is “Likely to 
Result in a High Risk” for the Purposes of Regulation 2016/679, Art. 29, WP 248 (Apr. 4, 
2017). Judging by this guidance, almost every ML system seems likely to require a DPIA. 
244 GDPR, art. 36(2). 79                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
4% of global turnover245) this is potentially a very effective method to tame 
unfair  ML  systems.246  Binns  describes  this  as  a  kind  of  regulatory 
“triage.”247 
  The voluntary measures of the GDPR may be equally influential for 
ML systems. Article 42 proposes voluntary “certification” of controllers and 
processors  to  demonstrate  compliance  with  the  Regulation,  with 
“certification mechanisms” and the development of “seals and marks” to be 
encouraged by EU member states.248 In the UK, a tender has already been 
advertised by the ICO for a certification authority to run a UK privacy 
seal,249 although progress has been interrupted by the vote to exit the 
European Union, and the subsequent political turmoil. 
  Taken together, these provisions offer exciting opportunities to 
operationalise Citron’s “big data due process” rights and Crawford and 
Schultz’s “procedural due process.” Certification could be applied to two 
main aspects of algorithmic systems: 
1.  certification of the algorithm as a software object by 
a.  directly specifying either its design specifications or the 
process  of  its  design,  such  as  the  expertise  involved 
(technology-based standards, assuming good practices lead 
to good outcomes) 
b.  and/or specifying output-related requirements that can be 
monitored and evaluated (performance-based standards); 
2.  certification of the whole person or process using the system to 
make decisions, which would consider algorithms as situated in the 
context of their use. Citron’s “hearing officers,”250 for example, 
might be provided by such provisions, perhaps as a form of 
alternate dispute resolution. 
                                                      
245 GDPR, art. 83. Maximum fines are the higher of €10m or 2% of global turnover for less 
severe transgressions, €20m or 4% for more severe ones. 
246 In other work, one author has suggested that PIAs could be developed into more holistic 
Social Impact Assessments (SIAs) and although this was developed to deal with the IoT it 
might also have considerable application to ML systems: see Lilian Edwards et al., From 
Privacy Impact Assessment to Social Impact Assessment, in 2016 IEEE SECURITY AND 
PRIVACY WORKSHOPS (SPW), 53–57 (2016), doi:10.1109/SPW.2016.19.  
247 Reuben Binns, Data Protection Impact Assessments: A Meta-Regulatory Approach, 7 
INTERNATIONAL DATA PRIVACY LAW 22, 28 (2017). 
248 For an early analysis, see Rowena Rodrigues et al., Developing a Privacy Seal Scheme 
(That Works), 3 INTERNATIONAL DATA PRIVACY LAW 100 (2013). 
249 Gemma Farmer,  What’s the Latest on the ICO Privacy Seals?, INFO. COMMISSIONER’S 
OFF.: BLOG (Aug. 28, 2015), https://iconewsblog.org.uk/2015/08/28/whats-the-latest-on-the-
ico-privacy-seals/. 
250 Citron, supra note 14 at 1254–58. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  80 
In these  cases,  not only  could fairness and  discrimination issues  be 
considered  in  the  standards  to  certify  against,251  but  it  could  be  an 
opportunity  to  proactively  encourage  the  creation  of  more  scrutable 
algorithms. 
  One notable advantage is that certification standards could be set on 
a per-sector basis. This is already very common in other sociotechnical 
areas, such as environmental sustainability standards, where the standards 
for different environmental and labour harms in different certification 
systems such as SAN/Rainforest Alliance and Fair Trade also differ by 
crop. As we have noted in this paper, explanations and their effectiveness 
differ strongly by type, domain, and the user seeking explanation, and it is 
likely that the exact form of any truly useful explanation-based remedy 
would vary strongly across both these and other factors. Certification could 
be augmented by the development of codes of conduct252 for any specified 
sector, such as for algorithms considering housing allocation systems, 
targeted advertising, tax fraud detection or recidivism. 
  Promising as this may sound, voluntary self-or co-regulation by 
privacy seal has had a bad track record in privacy, with recurring issues 
around regulatory and stakeholder capture. The demise of the EU–US data 
agreement Safe Harbor alone,253 which was externally validated for years 
by trust seals like TrustE, means that many Europeans will be rightly 
sceptical about the delivery of real corporate change and substantive 
compliance with privacy rights by certification.254 
  Another issue is that DPIAs, PbD, certification and the general 
principle of “accountability”255 in the GDPR bring with them a real danger 
of formalistic bureaucratic overkill alongside a lack of substantive change: a 
happy vision for more form-filling jobs and ticked boxes, but a sad one for a 
world where automated algorithms do their jobs quietly without imperilling 
human rights and freedoms, especially privacy and autonomy.   
CONCLUSION 
  Algorithms, particularly of the ML variety, are increasingly used to 
make  decisions  about individuals’  lives  but  have  caused  a  range  of 
                                                      
251 Issues of algorithmic fairness are specifically discussed in GDPR, recital 71. Tristan 
Henderson in private correspondence has suggested that a certifying authority might well 
under art. 42 be given the power to require explanation facilities, thus side stepping the 
Article 22/15(h) debate. 
252 GDPR, arts. 40 and 41. 
253 See Schrems v. Data Prot. Comm’r of Ir., Case C-362/14, 6 October 2015. 
254 TrustE and similar privacy seals failed to meet European privacy standards. See Andrew 
Charlesworth, Data Privacy in Cyber Space, LAW AND THE INTERNET (2000). 
255 GDPR, art. 5(2). This may lead to a new world of form-filling for data controllers. 81                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
concerns. Transparency in the form of a “right to an explanation” has 
emerged as a compellingly attractive remedy since it intuitively presents as 
a means to “open the black box,” hence allowing individual challenge and 
redress, as well as possibilities to foster accountability of ML systems. In 
the general furore over algorithmic bias, opacity and unfairness laid out in 
section I, any remedy in a storm has looked attractive. 
  In this article, we traced how, despite these hopes, a right to an 
explanation in the GDPR seems unlikely to help us find complete remedies, 
particularly in some of the core “algorithmic war stories” that have shaped 
recent attitudes in this domain. A few reasons underpin this conclusion. 
First, the law is restrictive on when any explanation-related right can be 
triggered, and in many places is unclear, or even seems paradoxical. 
Secondly, even were some of these restrictions to be navigated (such as 
with decisive case law), the way that explanations are conceived of 
legally—as “meaningful information about the logic of processing”—is 
unlikely to be provided by the kind of ML “explanations” computer 
scientists have been developing. 
  ML explanations are restricted both by the type of explanation 
sought, the multi-dimensionality of the domain and the type of user seeking 
an explanation. However, “subject-centric’ explanations (SCEs), which 
restrict explanations to particular regions of a model around a query, show 
promise. In particular, we suggest these are not just usable, as Wachter et al. 
argue, “after an automated decision has taken place,” 256 but might be put 
into interactive systems that allow individuals to explore and build their 
own mental models  of complex  algorithms.  Similarly, “pedagogical” 
systems  which  create explanations around a model rather than from 
decomposing it may also be useful and benefit from not relying on 
disclosure of proprietary secrets or IP. 
  As an interim conclusion then, while convinced that recent research 
in ML explanations shows promise, we fear that, given the preconceptions 
in the legal wording of provisions like the GDPR Article 15(h), the search 
for a legally enforceable right to an explanation may be at best distracting 
and at worst nurture a new kind of “transparency fallacy” to match the 
existing phenomenon of “meaningless consent.”257 So, as our last exercise, 
we turned our focus to the other legal rights of the GDPR which might aid 
those impacted adversely by ML systems. We noted with caution some 
possible uses of the GDPR’s “right to erasure” and the “right to data 
portability” to “slave” the algorithm, but found that, like the “right to an 
explanation,” these rely too much on individual rights for what are too often 
group harms. 
                                                      
256 Wachter et al., supra note 11. 
257 See supra Section V. No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  82 
  However, radically, in section IV we found that some of the new 
tools in the GDPR, in particular the mandatory requirements for Privacy by 
Design and DPIAs, and opportunities for certification systems, might go 
beyond the individual to focus a priori on the creation of better algorithms, 
as well as creative ways for individuals to be assured about algorithmic 
governance e.g. by certification of performance, or of the professionals 
building or using algorithms. Starting from a notion of creating better 
systems, with less opacity, clearer audit trails, well and holistically trained 
designers, and input from concerned publics258 seems eminently more 
appealing than grimly pursuing against the odds a “meaningful” version of 
the interior of a black box. 
A.  Further Work 
  There are other matters which have only been hinted at in this 
already long article and which we hope to explore in further work. One is 
oversight and audit. Any system based on GDPR rights ultimately puts the 
supervisory burden on the state DPA. Is this correct? We have already seen 
that DPAs are overwhelmed by the task of managing privacy enforcement 
in the digital era. Is every algorithmic harm also their bailiwick? Does this 
extend to datasets steeped in societal racial bias, driverless trolley-cars that 
cannot  understand  whether  to  mow  down  one  person  or  five,259 
identification systems that think only light skinned people are beautiful260 
and social media algorithms that distribute fake news? All of these involve 
the processing of personal data at some level, but they do not relate to 
privacy except in the loosest sense. There is an overarching issue here about 
whether simply because “data protection” has the word data in it, should it 
acquire hegemony over all the ills of data-driven society? 
  Furthermore, what about ML systems that mainly deal with non-
personal data? Should they be excluded from any data protection based 
governance system? The EU already thinks, from an economic perspective, 
that the lack of rights over non-personal data is a problem waiting to 
happen.261 On the other hand, the limitation of scope to personal data could 
                                                      
258 See GDPR art. 35(7)(9) which suggests when conducting a DPIA that the views of data 
subjects shall be sought when appropriate but (always a catch) “without prejudice to” 
commercial secrecy or security. 
259  See  passim  the  glorious  Trolley  problem  memes  page  at  www.facebook.com/ 
TrolleyProblemMemes/. 
260 See Dave Neal, FaceApp Sorry for Suggesting that Light Skin is 'Hotter' than Dark Skin, 
THE INQUIRER (Apr. 25, 2017), https://www.theinquirer.net/inquirer/news/3008961/faceapp-
sorry-for-suggesting-that-light-skin-is-hotter-than-dark-skin. 
261 European Commission, Public Consultation on Building the European Data Economy 
(Jan.  10,  2017),  https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/public-consultation-
building-european-data-economy. 83                          SLAVE TO THE ALGORITHM?   [Vol. 16 
be seen as an advantage: in a recent UK Parliamentary consultation on how 
to regulate algorithms, the Royal Society complained that: 
Machine learning algorithms are just computer programs, and the 
range and extent of their use is extremely broad and extremely diverse. 
It would be odd, unwieldy, and intrusive to suggest governance for all 
uses of computer programming, and the same general argument would 
apply to all uses of machine learning. 
.  .  .  In  many  or  most  contexts  machine  learning  is  generally 
uncontroversial, and does not need a new governance framework. How 
a company uses machine learning to improve its energy usage or 
warehouse facilities, how an individual uses machine learning to plan 
their travel, or how a retailer uses machine learning to recommend 
additional products to consumers would not seem to require changes to 
governance. It should of course be subject to the law, and also involve 
appropriate data use. 
Many of the issues around machine learning algorithms are very 
context  specific,  so  it  would  be  unhelpful  to  create  a  general 
governance framework or governance body for all machine learning 
applications. Issues around safety and proper testing in transport 
applications are likely to be better handled by existing bodies in that 
sector; questions about validation of medical applications of machine 
learning  by  existing  medical  regulatory  bodies;  those  around 
applications of machine learning in personal finance by financial 
regulators.262 
  We have already noted that sectors are likely to have specific needs 
for  explanation  and  that  a  sectoral  approach  might  be  fostered  by 
certification. In a world apparently scrambling to create as many new bodies 
as possible for various types of oversight of AI, ML and algorithmic 
decision making in embodied forms such as robots,263 it is worth keeping a 
sector-specific, purpose-driven sentiment in mind. 
  As we have already noted, many of the problems with algorithms 
are more problems for groups than for individuals. Remedies aimed at 
empowering  or  protecting  groups—remedies  such  as  “an  FDA  for 
algorithms”  or  a  “supercomplaint”  system  to  empower  third  party 
organisations, or a European-style ombudsman body—may be more useful 
                                                      
262 This submission is primarily drawn from The Royal Society, supra note 4.  
263 See Commons Science and Technology Committee, The Big Data Dilemma (UK 
Parliament, 2016); Commons Science and Technology Committee, Robotics and artificial 
intelligence, (UK Parliament, 2016); The Conservative Party, The Conservative and Unionist 
Party 2017 Manifesto (2017) at 79; European Parliament, Report with Recommendations to 
the Commission on Civil Law Rules on Robotics, 2015/2103(INL). No. 1]  DUKE LAW & TECHNOLOGY REVIEW  84 
things to consider and reinvent than struggling to transform the individual 
rights paradigm of DP. 
  Finally,  this  work  has  been  a  true,  and  sometimes  heated, 
interdisciplinary collaboration between (reductively) a data protection 
lawyer and an ML specialist. Any attempts to increase the transparency or 
explicability of ML systems, and indeed, in general to better harness them 
to  social  good,  will  not  function  effectively  without  this  kind  of 
interdisciplinary work. We need to consider algorithms in the sociotechnical 
context within which they work. We will, as Mireille Hildebrandt describes, 
“have  to  involve  cognitive  scientists,  computer  engineers,  lawyers, 
designers of interfaces and experts in human-computer interaction with a 
clear understanding of what is at stake in terms of democracy and the rule of 
law.”264 
  We thus end with a reiteration of the common plea for collegiate 
work not only across different legal jurisdictions and across different 
disciplines, but also between academics and practitioners. In relation to 
applied domains in particular, we fear that the situation is becoming more 
adversarial than collaborative, and that colleagues risk burning bridges with 
the very practitioner communities they should be working with, rather than 
against. Only with continuing trans-disciplinary collaboration can we hope 
not just to enslave the algorithm, but to create a more legitimate, more 
comprehensible  and in the  end more  useful algorithmically-mediated 
society. 
                                                      
264 Hildebrandt, supra note 9 at 54. 