REPUGNANCY IN THE ARAB  WORLD
HAIDER ALA HAMOUDI*
I.  INTRODUCTION
"Repugnancy  clauses"-those  constitutional  provisions  that,  in
language  that  varies  from  nation  to  nation,  require  legislation  to
conform  to  some  core  conception  of Islam-are  all  the  rage  these
days.'  This  clause,  a  relatively  recent  addition  to  many  modem
constitutions, has emerged as a central focus of academic  writing on
Muslim  state  constitutions  generally,  and  on Arab  constitutions  in
particular.2   Much  of  the  attention  it  has  received  has  been
enlightening and erudite.3  Yet one aspect of the broader repugnancy
discourse that deserves some attention is an important, often de facto,
temporal limitation on the effect of the clause.  There appears to be a
rising trend that repugnancy  in the Arab  world should not apply to
legislation  enacted prior to the date that the repugnancy clause was
* B.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology; J.D., J.S.D., Columbia Law School.  The author
is an Assistant Professor of Law at University of Pittsburgh School of Law.  I would like to
thank Asifa Qureishi and Mohammad Fadel for their helpful comments and suggestions.  Any
errors are mine alone.
1. Haider Ala Hamoudi,  The Death of Islamic Law, 38 GA. J. INT'L & COMP. L. 293,
297 (2010) (describing attention given to repugnancy clauses).  The term "repugnancy clause"
appears to originally have referred to colonial era clauses imposed by the British that limited
local customary law to the extent that it was deemed repugnant to principles of natural justice
or public policy.  T.W. BENNETT, CUSTOMARY  LAW IN SOUTH AFRICA  67 (2004).  Such
clauses, which are almost the reverse of the Islamic repugnancy clauses (in that they subvert an
indigenous law in favor of a Western transplant), remain in force in various African nations
today, including South Africa.  Id at 68.  In any event, the term was used in the Islamic
constitutional context as early as 1973, where it appeared in the 1973 Constitution of Pakistan.
PAKISTAN CONST.  art. 227, § 1. ("All existing laws shall be brought in conformity with the
Injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah, in this Part referred to as the
Injunctions of Islam, and no law shall be enacted which is repugnant to such Injunctions.").
2. Hamoudi, supra note 1, at 297.
3.  See generally, e.g.,  RAN HIRSCHL,  CONSTITUTIONAL  THEOCRACY  103-61  (2010)
(describing,  inter alia, efforts of constitutional courts to interpret repugnancy clauses); Larry
CatA Backer,  Theocratic Constitutionalism:A  n Introduction to a New Global Ordering, 16
IND. J. GLOBAL LEGAL STUD. 85 (2009) (describing "theocratic constitutionalism" as it applies
in Islamic states).WILLAMETTE LA W REVIEW [48:427
inserted into  the  Constitution.  Irrespective  of  electoral  results
throughout the region heavily favoring parties that seek a more robust
role for shari'ai n public life, parties I will describe  for the purposes
of this  Article  as  "Islamist,"  this trend  seem  to be growing  deeper
roots.
The  trend  is  particularly  ironic  because  the  canon  is
fundamentally incoherent, both from the perspective of constitutional
structure  as well as  substantive  policy.  As to  the  former, surely  a
constitutional amendment of this sort must generally have retroactive
effect.  It would make little sense to amend a constitution to grant all
citizens equal protection under the law and then for a court to suggest
that existing slavery laws might be exempted because enacted before
the amendment in question.  Such a result would be one that courts
would  generally  resist to the extent  it was possible to  do so,  given
how much violence is done to the amendment by the limitations.  This
would seem to be no  less the case  for a clause  requiring legislative
conformity with Islam.
Moreover,  as  a matter  of policy,  if there  exists  in any  state  a
broad  view  that  law  should  conform  to  Islam  (a  commonly  stated
Islamist position),4 and  if that view is widespread  (a fair conclusion
given recent electoral results), then surely the advocates of that view
should be as willing to apply it to past legislation as to future.  Either
the Islamicity of legislation is a cornerstone of the Muslim state or it
is not. If it is, then the date of the legislation vis-A-vis the date of the
repugnancy amendment is surely beside the point for the advocates of
shari'a conformity.  Indeed,  the  fact of the incoherence  may well
explain the reluctance to discuss it often, particularly openly.
Ironically, however,  despite the incoherence,  the limitations  on
repugnancy have spread.  Given this, this Article addresses how and
why these limitations grew so popular, and what it might portend for
the future of Islamist parties in the Arab world.  Part II discusses in
detail the origins of the trend in the Arab world,5 including the well-
4.  The importance of repugnancy clauses to Islamist groups should not be understated.
Stilt describes  the repugnancy  provision of Egypt's  constitution as one that is particularly
important to the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's primary Islamist party.  Kristen Stilt,  "'Islami s
the Solution" ConstitutionalV isions of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhoo4 46 TEX. INT'L L.J.
73, 88 (2010).  Iraq's Islamist parties feel no less strongly about the inclusion of repugnancy in
their constitution.  Haider Ala Hamoudi, OrnamentalR  epugnancy: IdentitarianI slam and the
Iraqi Constitution, 7 ST. THOM. L. REv. 692, 697-98 (2010) (describing proposals by Islamist
groups that included the broadest possible formulation of repugnancy, complete with review
undertaken by jurists in shari'ar ather than state law judges).
5.  Importantly,  the notion  of repugnancy  existed  in  Pakistan  as early  as  1973,  and2012] REPUGNANCYIN THEA  RAB  WORLD
known  Decision  20  of 1985  issued  by  the  Supreme  Constitutional
Court  of Egypt  (SCC),  which  exempted  existing  legislation  from
Egypt's  repugnancy  clause  in  a decision  that  specifically  upheld  a
provision of the Civil Code permitting the taking of money interest on
a loan.6  This Part  shows  that, in issuing its  decision, the  SCC was
constrained  in  what  actions  it  could  take.  It  could  not  retain
legitimacy as an arbiter of Islam, at least among Islamist groups, if it
deemed  money  interest  to be permissible  under the  shari'a. At the
same time, it could not very well strike down all legislation permitting
money  interest  without  engendering  some  sort  of nearly  complete
economic  catastrophe.  Hence,  drawing  on  legislative  history  to
justify its result, the SCC embarked upon the path of incoherence.
Part III will demonstrate that far  from having been repudiated,
the  primary  Egyptian  Islamist  political  party,  the  Muslim
Brotherhood, has embraced not only the repugnancy clause in Egypt's
constitution, but also the SCC'sjuisprudence. Its earlier attempts to
ensure greater Islamicity in law, which engendered much resistance in
Egypt, did not object to the exclusively prospective  effect of Egypt's
repugnancy  clause.  The  Part  will  further  demonstrate  that  Iraq's
Islamist constitutional drafters were  not only aware of this Egyptian
example, but sought to replicate it much more forthrightly in the Iraqi
constitution.  Finally,  this  Part  will  discuss  the  strong  statements
issued by Tunisia's Islamist party, the victorious Ennahda, that it will
not seek to dismantle the state's existing legal framework.
Part IV will conclude with a series of explanations as to how this
came  about.  It  will  first  show  that  the  very  same  concerns  that
animated  the  SCC  in Egypt  over 25  years  ago  would  undoubtedly
remain  a central  issue for  any Islamist  party  focused  on economic
development, as every Islamist party  claims to be.  Secondly,  it will
Pakistani  courts have  engaged  in judicial review  of legislation  to ensure compliance with
shari'a since  1980.  For  an excellent,  detailed account  of this,  see  Jeffrey  A.  Redding,
ConstitutionalizingI slam: Theory and Practice,4 4 VA. J. INT'L L. 759, 773-97 (2004).  This
review has even encompassed the validity of legislation permitting taking of interest on a loan.
Id  at 783 n.86.  Nevertheless, because of language differences, cultural differences, and the
fact that Pakistan is a common law society while the Arab world generally operates under civil
law, Pakistani influence on Arab law is quite marginal. As such, I do not include discussion of
Pakistani  example  in the Article,  other  than to  point out  the  perhaps  obvious  point that
interpretive approaches to repugnancy different from those used in the Arab world may well
prevail in other, important Muslim state jurisdictions.
6.  A translation  of the decision  is  available.  Supreme  Constitutional Court  (Egypt)
Shari'a and Riba: Decision No. 20 of 1985, 1 ARAB  L.Q.  100 (1985)  [hereinafter  SCC
Decision].WILLAMETTE LA WREVIEW [48:427
demonstrate  that Islamists seek  to use  repugnancy  to  address  their
fears  of further  state  secularization  rather  than  to Islamize  society.
Finally,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  this  Part  will  show  that
Islamist parties  genuinely seek  a  greater public role  for shari'a, but
prefer to see its realization through the use of mechanisms other than
the state,  and using means  other than state  compulsion.  While  the
Article focuses on three particular (and particularly  influential) Arab
states,  the  lessons  to  be  drawn  might  reverberate  more  broadly
throughout much of the Arab world.
II.  THE COLLISION OF REPUGNANCIES AND ECONOMIC REALITIES
In  1980, Article  2 of the Egyptian Constitution was amended so
that shari'ab ecame  the principal  source  of legislation  rather than a
principal source of legislation, as it had been prior to the amendment.7
On its surface, the enhanced role of judicial review as a result of this
rather small change is not apparent.  The amendment seems to require
that the sole principal  source material  for any law would be shari'a,
though presumably other material could be used as well, so long as its
use was not so broad as to be deemed "principal."  Logistically, it is
difficult to imagine a court examining a complex piece of legislation,
trying to find a source  for each and every provision  in it, and then
making a determination as to whether or not the legislation as a whole
"principally" derives from shari'ao r any other source.  Moreover, not
only is  such  an approach  logistically  difficult,  it also would almost
surely result in the invalidation of large amounts of vitally important
legislation.8   The  fact  is  that  in  drafting  most  modem  law, from
securities laws9 to bankruptcy  laws,10  the vast compendia  of norms
7.  Stilt, supra note 4, at 80.
8. Interestingly, the SCC makes this point in an effort to justify its odd result in Decision
20. SCC Decision, supra note 6, at 106.
9.  A thorough rendition of the Egyptian securities laws, which demonstrates  the extent
of the influence  of European  Union law upon them,  appears in Ahmad  A.  Alshorbagy,
Orascom Telecom  Versus France Telecom: A  Case Study on Egyptian Takeover Law, 20
INFO. AND COM. TECH. L. 157 (2011) (describing, in an excellent article, some of the problems
that  arose  in Egypt  with the transplantation  of the  European  rules  respecting  corporate
takeovers).  By contrast, the shari'ad id not develop the corporate form as a historical matter
and therefore could not offer very much by way of example as concerns the drafting of modem
securities laws.  TIMUR KURAN, THE LONG DIVERGENCE 125 (2011)  (describing the historic
lack of a legal personhood in Islam and indicating that the problem does not lie in some notion
of immutable Islamic doctrine).  Quite plainly, therefore, the "principal  source" of securities
legislation is not shan'a, nor could it be.
10.  Haider Ala Hamoudi,  The Surpising Irrelevance of Islamic Bankruptcy, 19 AM.
BANKR. INST. L. REv. 505, 509-10 (2012) (describing broadly transplanted bankruptcy laws in2012] REPUGNANCYIN THE ARAB WORLD
and  rules  derived  by  jurists,  mostly  from  the  medieval  era,  that
collectively  comprise  the  shari'a have  so  little  to  offer  that  they
cannot meaningfully be considered the "source"  of the law.  The true
sources  of  these  laws  are  European  and  American  models
transplanted into the Arab world.  As a result, it is not a surprise that
commentators  have in various  contexts dismissed the  shari'a source
provision  in  Muslim  state  constitutions  as "chiefly  symbolic""  and
unlikely  to  meaningfully  constrain  legislative  activity.'2  That  the
Drafting  Committee's  Preparatory  Report  seemed  to  grant  some
deference  to  the  legislature  to  determine  precisely  what  the
"principles"  of the shari'a were only adds to the conclusion that the
amendment was  not primarily  focused  on the possibility  of judicial
review.13
On another  level,  however,  at least  in  theory,  the  amendment
might  retain  some  force  as  constitutional  constraint  on  legislation.
Whatever "the principal source of legislation" might mean in terms of
the influence that the shari'a might have on legislation (exceedingly
slight  as  concerns  the  securities  laws,  and  quite  significant  as
concerns  family law),14  surely it must mean  that the  legislation  in
question cannot be repugnantt o the shalf'a. Of course, the shari'ai s
not a legal code.  It is a vast juristic compendia  of rules derived from
sacred  text, spanning  centuries  across  various  schools  of thought.15
Muslim states).
11.  Noah Feldman & Roman Martinez,  ConstitutionalP olitics And Text In The New
Iraq: An Experiment In Islamic Democracy, 75 FORDHAM L. REV. 883, 903 (2006) (describing
effect of shari'a source provision in Iraq).
12.  Baudoin Dupret, A Return to the Shari'a: Egyptian Judges and the Return to Islam,
in  THE  SHARfA  IN  THE  CONSTITUTIONS  OF  AFGHANISTAN,  IRAN  AND  EGYPT-
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRIVATE LAW  165 (Nadjma Yassari ed. 2005) (indicating that "[s]tatute
law, then,  does not seem overly disturbed by  references  made  to Islam and its normative
provisions, as long as these references are not made in order to challenge its validity and/or to
require its subordination to an order external to it.").
13.  CLARK  LOMBARDI,  STATE  LAW  AS  ISLAMIC  LAW  IN MODERN  EGYPT:  THE
INCORPORATION OF THE SARI'A INTO EGYPTIAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 160 (2006).
14.  Lama  Abu  Odeh,  The Politics of (Mis)Recognition."I slamic Law Pedagogy in
American Academia, 52 AM. J.  COMP. L. 789,  800 (2004) (indicating that the law of the
family is the one area of law where traditional Islamic law rules continue to hold).
15.  Haider Ala Hamoudi, The Muezzin's Call and the Dow Jones Bell." On the Necessity
of Realism in the Study of Islamic Law, 56 AM.  J. COMP.  L. 423, 434-35 (2004).  I am
(intelligently and thoughtfully) criticized for often defining this vast and contradictory body of
norms and rules developed by medieval jurists as shai'a,r ather than Fiqh. See, e.g., Patrick S.
O'Donnell,  Divine Law (Shari'ah) and Jurisprudence (Fiqh) in Islam, Ratio Juris: Law,
Politics,  Philosophy,  RATIO  JURIS  BLOG  (June  26,  2009,  10:58  AM),
http://ratiojuris.blogspot.com/2009/06/divine-law-shariah-jurisprudence-fiqh.html.  It  is  true
that the latter term is often used to describe the substantive rules derived by such jurists. SeeWILLAMETTE LA W REVIEW [48:427
These  rules,  as  developed  by  individual  jurists,  are  not  always
consistent with one another.'6  Thus, some thought would have to be
given as to what "repugnancy" to shari'am  ight mean.  Still, at least in
theory,  to the extent that a "core"  of the shari'a could be found, by
letter or by spirit, the legislation could not be in stark violation of it.17
At  the  very  least,  for  example,  repugnancy  would  prevent  the
enactment of a law that provided for the enforcement of contracts that
related  to  conduct  that  jurists  and  scholars  operating  within  the
Islamic legal tradition had deemed to be deeply sinful (for example,
contracts for the sale of alcohol).  Similarly,  repugnancy would seem
to render unconstitutional a law that forbade conduct that was almost
unanimously  deemed  to  be  religiously  mandated  (for  example,  a
prohibition  against  maintaining  the  fast  in  Ramadan).18   If nothing
else,  surely  laws  of this  sort  could  hardly  be  considered  to  be
consistent with a requirement  that shari'a be the principal  source  of
legislation.  There would thus be,  in the  end, some role for judicial
review in a revised Article 2, even if only at the margins.
All of this was largely speculation until May of 1985, when the
FRANK E. VOGEL & SAMUEL L. HAYES I11,I SLAMIC LAW AND FINANCE: RELIGION, RISK AND
RETURN 23-24 (1998)  (distinguishing between shari'aa s the immutable Divine Law and fiqh
as human efforts to capture that law through scholarly interpretation); Asifa Quraishi,  What if
Shari'a Weren't the Enemy, Rethinking International Women 's RJghts Advocacy on Islamic
Law, 22 COLUM. J. GENDER & L.  173, 203  (2011)  (noting a similar distinction). Yet at the
same time my own realist predispositions lead me to the conclusion that if shari'ai s meant to
refer to nothing beyond a perfect and immutable Divine Law separate and apart from any
human effort to understand that law, then almost as a matter of epistemological necessity it
means precisely nothing that can be known and is of no value to lawyers. This is  to say
nothing of the manner in which shari'ai s used in the Egyptian Supreme Constitutional Court,
the context here,  where  it absolutely includes references  to some  legal  content. See, e.g.,
LOMBARDI,  supra note  13,  at  180 (quoting  Case no.  7/1993/Supreme  Constitutional Court
(Egypt)).  Hence  I  find  my  definition,  while  contestable,  more  appropriate  under  the
circumstances.
16.  Hamoudi, supran ote 15, at 435.
17.  I have been deeply critical of efforts to find a letter or spirit in shari'ag iven the vast
and conflicting corpus of rules that comprise it.  Id. at 437-38.  Accordingly, I have always
found  repugnancy  to be  inconsistently  applied  in  fact and hardly  a matter  to be  taken
particularly seriously as genuine Islamic constraint on legislative  activity.  Hamoudi, supra
note  1, at 328-33 (describing  inconsistencies and failures of repugnancy); Hamoudi,  supra
note 4,  at  710-11  (suggesting that repugnancy  review in Iraq  is  largely  "ornamental",  a
function of identity politics rather than a genuine commitment to ensure that law conforms to
shari'a). It is important to note that these considerations are beyond the scope of this Article,
which focuses exclusively on one important aspect of repugnancy as it is developing in the
Arab tradition, and that is to immunize existing legislation from any form of judicial review on
the basis of repugnancy.
18.  See Stilt, supra note 4, at 96 (offering the examples of intoxicants and the fast at
Ramadan as examples of unchanging and universally accepted rules).2012] REPUGNANCYIN THE ARAB  WORLD
Supreme  Constitutional  Court issued  its  famed Decision  20.  As  it
happened,  the medical  school  at the  most venerable  seat  of Sunni
Islamic  learning,  the  Al-Azhar  University,  bought  surgical
instruments  from  the  late  Fouad  Goudah  for  the  price  of
approximately  592 Egyptian Guineas (or $100)  and failed to pay him
back.19  He received judgment  for this amount, and in  addition, 4%
interest on the debt from the date he was forced to pursue legal action
for the Azhar's  delinquence,  as  permitted under Article  226  of the
Egyptian Civil Code.2°  The Azhar's response was to pursue a claim
before the Supreme  Constitutional Court of Egypt, claiming that the
Civil Code's permitting of interest was a clear violation of the shari'a,
and as such, provisions of the Civil Code which permitted interest did
not use shari'aa s their principal source of legislation.21
The difficulty in which the SCC found itself had very little to do
with  shari'a doctrine  in  fact.  While  there  is  an  unmistakable
condemnation  in very strident  terms of a practice  known as fiba in
Islam's  core revelatory texts, there was ample resource to determine
that nba did not encompass  money interest on a loan.  For example,
the SCC could have maintained that under the prevailing Sunni school
of thought  which  historically  prevailed  in  Egypt,  the  Hanafi,  the
prohibition as against the trading of items for delay and with gain (a
common  form  of  iba as  per  foundational  text)  did  not  apply  to
money, but only items measurable  by weight  or volume.22  Hence it
was forbidden to trade 10 pounds of gold for 15 pounds in the future,
but a trade of $10  for $15  in the future (i.e.  money interest) was not
intended to be covered.23  The SCC could have instead cited authority
from a second school  that permitted trades of copper coins for more
coins in the future because that school, the Maliki, excluded from the
forbidden trades  metals that were not precious.24  Or the SCC could
have  attempted a more modernist approach in the fashion developed
19.  SCC Decision, supran ote 6, at 102.
20.  Id.
21.  Id
22.  Hamoudi, supran ote 15, at 448.
23.  Shi'i jurists use this distinction to permit the trading of currencies with gain, so long
as it is a different currency.  Thus, a trade of $10  for $15  to be paid later is prohibited, but a
trade of $10  for £15 to be paid later is acceptable.  2  ALI SISTANI, MINHAJ  AL-SALIHEEN
§234.
24.  The Maliki jurist  Ibn  Rushd, commonly known  as Averroes,  criticizes his  own
school's position on this basis.  See 3 IBN RUSHD,  BIDAYAT AL-MUJTA1ID  1568-71 ("and
thus we see that the legal cause is narrow...  because it does not extend beyond gold and
silver").WILLAMETTE LA W REVIEW [48:427
by the drafter of the Egyptian Civil Code, Abdul Razzaq al Sanhuri,
who does justify Article 226 as being consistent with shari'a2.5  Any
of  these  approaches  was,  from  a  purely  doctrinal  standpoint,
plausible.
The problem was that none of them were, in the  context of the
times,  deemed  particularly  legitimate, particularly  in  Islamist  eyes.
By  1985,  despite  earlier  modernist  efforts  to the  contrary,  a broad
Islamist position had developed which held that there was "complete
unanimity  among all schools  of thought  in Islam that  the term riba
stands for interest in all its types and forms."26  Efforts to justify the
taking  of  money  interest  were  in  turn  characterized  as  being
"apologetic  about  Islam"27 or "defeatist."28   Thus,  any  decision  to
legitimize the taking of interest as consistent with Islam would have
led to a considerable loss of legitimacy on the part of the SCC among
Islamist groups, and the SCC might well have been dismissed by such
groups as being little more than an instrument of the executive rather
than a truly separate and independent branch of government.  At the
same time, it hardly needs to be said that money interest is a vital part
of  virtually  any  modern,  successful  economy  and  to  declare  it
unlawful would have catastrophic economic consequences.  The SCC
thus found  itself squarely between the Scylla of a disastrous  loss of
legitimacy and the Charybdis of economic ruin.
The SCC rescued  itself from this dilemma through creative  and
clever incoherence.  It accepted the principle that money interest was
a form of iba, and that as such, it was stridently condemned in Islam,
making any law deeming it permissible plainly repugnant to shari'a.29
Yet at the same time, relying on legislative history to reach its bizarre
conclusion, the SCC also indicated that the judiciary only retained the
power to  strike down  legislation  enacted after the 1980 amendment,
25.  'ABD AL-RAZZAQ AHMAD SANHURI,  3 MASADIR AL-HAQQ FI AL-FIQH AL-ISLAMI:
DIRASA  MUQARANAH  BI-AL-FIQH  AL-GHARBI  [THE  SOURCES  OF  TRUTH  IN ISLAMIC
JURISPRUDENCE:  A COMPARATIVE STUDY  WITH WESTERN JURISPRUDENCE]  241-43 (1967)
(arguing that permitting interest in the Egyptian Civil Code is consistent with Islam because
the prohibition against money interest was only a "prohibition of means," which could be said
aside  in times  of need,  rather  than a "prohibition  of ends,"  which would  be  absolutely
forbidden).
26.  Mohammad Uzair, Impact of Interest Free Banking, 1 J. ISLAMIC BANKING & FIN.
39,40 (1984).
27.  Id
28.  MUHAMMAD NEJATULLAH SIDDIQI, BANKING WITHOUT INTEREST 7 (1983).
29.  SCC Decision, supra note 6, at 102 (indicating that the Qur'anic practice of riba was
equivalent to interest and therefore "unanimously condemned by divine rule").2012] REPUGNANCY1N THE ARAB  WORLD
to the extent that such legislation violated shari'a3.0  To quote the SCC
more fully:
[T]he  obligation  imposed  on  the  [legislature]  to  follow  the
principles  of the  shari'a and to  consider them  as the source  of
legislation is aimed only at the legislative  enactments  which are
issued after the date of the imposition of the said obligation, and
does not cover former legislative enactments .... [O]nly such new
legislative enactments fall within the prohibition to the effect that
they should not be contrary to the principles of Islamic law.  [I]t
follows the above  that only the legal enactments issued after the
coming into effect of the obligation to conform to Islamic law are
affected, so that, should any such legal enactments be in conflict
with the principles  of Islamic  law,  such legal  enactments  alone
would fall  in the  domain  of constitutional  illegality .... [L]egal
enactments which antedated the amendment are not affected by the
obligation to conform because they were in existence before that
limitation became  due  for implementation.  [C]onsequently, such
prior enactments are immune from the applicationo  f the limitation
because of its anteriord ate, which is the determining factor on
which properc onstitutionalc ontrol is based31
There  is  little reason to explore  at length  the faulty  logic  and
strained reasoning of the SCC.  The more important point was that it
succeeded.  Through  this  combination  of creative  incoherence  and
political  necessity,  a conception  of repugnancy  was  born  in Egypt
from  an  amendment  that  on  its  face  does  not  deal  directly  with
voiding law in conflict with shari'a. While an interesting story on its
own, even  more remarkable  is the continued appeal  of this  type of
approach to repugnancy.  This is the subject of the next two sections.
III.  ISLAMISTS AND REPUGNANCY
A.  The Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood
Egypt's  premier  Islamist  party,  the  Muslim  Brotherhood  has
supported the SCC's approach to repugnancy, thereby demonstrating
the  SCC's  success  in  developing  legitimacy  for  its  approach.
Founded  in  1928  by  Hasan  Al-Banna,  the  Brotherhood  had  long
advocated a greater role for shari'ai n Egyptian political and legal life,
30.  Id at 104.
31.  Id.( emphasis added).WILLAMETTE LA W REVIEW [48:427
and had suffered through decades  of political repression for it.32  The
amendment of Article  2 was in many  ways designed  to mollify  the
Brotherhood.33
Yet rather than argue that the SCC had, in Decision 20 of 1985,
unjustifiably  stripped the courts of their necessary powers of review
with respect to the Islamicity of legislation, the Brotherhood seems to
have  embraced not only  Article  2  as amended,  but also the SCC's
juisprudence with respect to the Article.34  Indeed, the Brotherhood
uses the SCC to demonstrate that its own views on how to recognize
Islam in the state fit well within Egypt's constitutional  structure as it
already existed.35  In its own draft political platform issued in 2007,
the Brotherhood  described Article  2  as being  precisely  the  type  of
"moderate"  Islam it advocated, rejecting theocratic rule and explicitly
endorsing  the Article "according  to what the SCC has determined in
interpreting  the  Article."36   The  Brotherhood  similarly prepared  an
electoral program in November of 2010 in anticipation of the People's
Assembly elections held that year.  That program described a number
of constitutional articles requiring amendment, but Article 2 was not
one, even though it would have been easy to demand  a change  that
would subject existing legislation to judicial review on the grounds of
37
Islamicity.
32.  Stilt, supra note 4, at 76-78.  As Stilt correctly indicates, the level of repression to
which the Muslim Brotherhood was subjected did wax and wane over Egypt's history, but the
group was never fully tolerated.
33.  LOMBARDI, supra note 13, at 130.
34. Nathan J. Brown  and Amr Hamzawy,  The Draf? Party Platform of the Egyptian
Muslim Brotherhood- Foray Into Political Integration or Retreat Into Old Positions?, in
CARNEGIE  PAPERS  (MIDDLE  EAST  SERIES  No.  89)  3  (2008),  available  at
http://carnegieendowment.org/files/cp89_muslimbrothers-final.pdf.
35.  Id.
36.  THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD, DRAFT PLATFORM OF THE POLITICAL PARTY 6 (2007)
(on file with author) [hereinafter PLATFORM].  The Draft Political Platform was once widely
available  online,  but has been  taken down by the  Brotherhood itself, perhaps  because  of
controversies surrounding it.
37.  See THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD, ELECTORAL PROGRAM FOR THE 2010 PEOPLE'S
ASSEMBLY  ELECTIONS  11  (2010),  available  at
http://egyptelections.carnegieendowment.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/1  1/brotherhood-
platform.pdf. The Brotherhood has been more intent on amending Article 5 of the constitution,
which prohibits  political parties that are defined on religious bases. CONSTITUTION OF THE
ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT, 11 Sept. 1971, as amended, March 26, 2007.  The party was able
to run in the 2011 elections that were organized after Hosni Mubarak's fall, but only after it
renamed itself the "Freedom and Justice Party" and purported to be a civil party rather than
one religiously based.  Carnegie Endowment for Int'l Peace, Guide to Egypt's Transition,A  l-
Hanmya  wa  al- 'Adala  (Freedom  and  Justice  Party),
http://egyptelections.carnegieendowment.org/2011/09/22/al-hurriyya-wa-al-2012] REPUGNANCYIN  THE ARAB  WORLD
That the Brotherhood  does not seem to seek a broader mandate
for  the  SCC  so  as  to  extend  to  existing  legislation  also  seems
demonstrated  from  those  proposals  it  does  publicize  that  generate
controversy.  Hence,  for example,  the Brotherhood's  draft  political
platform  in 2007  argued  for the creation  of a council  composed of
religious  scholars.38  These scholars would advise the legislature, and
significantly,  the  legislature  would be  free  to  ignore  the  council's
directives as to any matters that did not impinge upon a ruling within
Islam that was absolutely certain.39  The clear implication is that as to
such certain rulings,  among them the taking of interest according  to
the SCC  as earlier described,  the legislature  would be bound by the
council's decision.4°
Significantly,  however,  this  evidently  would  only  encompass
efforts to enact future legislation, rather than to void older legislation,
as  the  council  advises  the  legislature  and  the  executive,  with  no
mention  made  of the judiciary.41  The  council  would  thus  act  in
precisely  the  same  manner  as  the  SCC  has  interpreted  its  own
jurisdictional  mandate  as  concerns  Article  2-to  address  future
legislation,  that  is,  albeit  at  the  law's  inception  rather  than  when
subsequently  challenged.  This  seems  to  reflect  a  significant
dissatisfaction with legislative  and executive  activities  as they relate
to Islam  and the state, but  comparatively  less as concerns  the  SCC
and its jurisprudence.  Indeed, the SCC is never criticized in the Draft
Platform  at all.42   One would have thought  that if the Brotherhood
was dissatisfied with the limited scope of the SCC's jurisdiction over
the Islamicity of legislation,  as outlined in SCC Decision 20 of 1985,
it would have expressed it.43  This is particularly so in the context of a
%E2%80%98adala-freedom-and-justice-party  (last visited Nov. 12, 2012).
38.  Brown & Hamzawy, supra note 34, at 4.
39.  PLATFORM, supra note 36, at 12.  See also Stilt, supra note 5, at 102.
40.  Brown & Hamzawy, supra note 34, at 4.
41.  PLATFORM, supra note 36, at 12.
42.  Stilt, supra note 4, at 97.
43.  Stilt  suggests  that  the  Brotherhood  may  have  indirectly  expressed  such
dissatisfaction with the temporal limitation established by Article Two when it indicated that
Article Two merely reaffirmed a pre-existing legal order. Id. at 97-98.  1 did not so understand
these rather abstruse ruminations in the Draft Political Platform.  I understood the Brotherhood
merely to be advancing a sort of natural law theory that the validity of the shai'a as a form of
law supersedes any positive law enacted by the state, including the Constitution.  That is to
say, the shari'a does not need Article 2 for its validation, as this would suggest that God's Law
was somehow not binding upon the state unless affirmed by the foundational law of the state.
That would not to my mind necessarily  empower the state's judiciary to invalidate existing
legislation in conflict with Article  2. It might  only obligate the legislature  rather than theWILLAMETTELA  WREVIEW [48:427
draft document that went so far as to propose a council of religious
scholars who could advise and even bind the legislature. 4  If this was
the position of the party in 2007, it is even more  so now.  The party
platform  of the  Freedom  and  Justice  Party,  the  surrogate  of the
Brotherhood  for  the  purposes  of  the  2011  People's  Assembly
elections,45  is  devoid  of any mention of a  council  of scholars  and
lacks a great deal of specifics on the role of shari'ai n public affairs.46
Admittedly, and importantly, the Brotherhood  has never openly
endorsed  the  specific  SCC  principle  that  existing  legislation  is
immune from review for compatibility  with Islam.  To do so might
risk the loss of some support among a more ardent conservative base
of support who would demand that some effort be made to  Islamize
existing  laws.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  the  Brotherhood  has  not
challenged the SCC's determinations or suggested an alternative path,
at least not in any clear fashion,  even as it has endorsed the SCC's
work generally.  This is quite telling of its inclinations.
B.  Iraq
It is one thing  for an unusual  set of circumstances  in Egypt to
have led to a broadly acceptable result on the meaning and scope of
repugnancy.  It  is  quite  another  to  find  that  same  conception  of
repugnancy  transplanted to  other Arab  states.  One brief look at the
Iraq  constitution  demonstrates  that the  ideas  that  have  permeated
Egypt have now transplanted themselves  into Iraq. Specifically, the
Iraqi constitutional text appears to reflect the SCC's jurisprudence  to
a large extent.
First,  the  Iraqi  Constitution  embraces  the  idea  of repugnancy
unambiguously.  Hence, it indicates that "it is not permissible to enact
any law that contradicts  the settled rulings of Islam.'' 7  In Egypt, as
judiciary to revise existing legislation to bring it in conformity with shan'a over time, a point
the SCC itself makes in Decision 20. SCC Decision, supran ote 6, at 106.
44.  Stilt points to two areas where the Brotherhood seems to seek expansion of Article 2
review.  These are the effort to permit any individual with an interest to pursue a claim before
the SCC for an Article 2 violation, and an effort to subject not merely laws, but also executive
orders and regulations, to review for compliance with shan'a. Stilt, supra note 4, at 98-101.
45.  See PLATFORM, supran ote 36.
46.  As a demonstration of the extent to which Islamist parties are aware of global trends
of hyper-connectivity and seek to take advantage of them, the party platform of the Freedom
and Justice Party is most readily found on a Facebook page.  See Party Platform, FREEDOM
AND  JUSTICE  PARTY,  http://www.facebook.com/FJParty.Official?sk-app_7146470109  (last
visited Nov. 12, 2012) [hereinafter FREEDOM AND JUSTICE PARTY].
47.  Article 2, Doustour Joumhouriat al-Iraq [The Constitution of the Republic of Iraq] of2012] REPUGNANCYIN THE ARAB  WORLD
the  previous  section  makes  clear,  the  constitution  merely  made
reference  to shari'a as "the  principal  source"  of legislation,  and the
notion  of  repugnancy  was  developed  by  the  SCC.  Iraq's
constitutional provision incorporates that judicial construction directly
into the text.
This  is not mere happenstance.  In my own  conversations  with
them,  the  Iraqi  constitutional  drafters  were  aware  during  their
negotiations  that  Egypt  had  been  operating  under  a  principle  of
repugnancy  for  nearly  two  decades.48  They  were  also  aware  that
repugnancy  provisions  had  appeared  in  the  constitution  of
Afghanistan,4  and as a result, Islamists within Iraq of both the Shi'i
and Sunni variety wanted to ensure that a similar provision appeared
in the Iraqi  constitution.  Secular and nationalist  forces resisted this
because they wanted to minimize the role of Islam and shar'a in the
nation  state  to  the  extent  possible.5°  Various  factions  proposed
different formulations, and this opened several lines of debate that are
well beyond the purposes of this Article to explore in detail.51
Yet one  notable feature  of the compromise text that ultimately
emerged  is  the  extent  to  which  it  appears  to  endorse the  SCC's
incoherence  concerning  the  immunizing  of all  legislation  enacted
prior to the Constitution's enactment.  The provision plainly prohibits
2005 (translation mine).  The reference to "Islam"  in place of shari'aw  as demanded by more
secular groups, though its precise import remains a matter of some question.  See Hamoudi,
supra note 4,  at  699  (describing  controversies  surrounding  use  of "Islam"  rather  than
"s hari"').
48.  I spent nearly a year in Iraq working with a committee delegated by Iraq's legislature
to develop a set of critical amendments to the Iraq constitution.  These meetings were held in
the offices of the Chair of the Constitutional Review Committee, Sheikh Humam Hamoudi (in
full disclosure, my paternal uncle).  The consultation was part of a larger project organized and
run by the University of Utah S.J. Quinney College of Law entitled: "Global Justice Project
Iraq." The project was funded by the U.S. Embassy's Constitutional and Legislative Affairs
Office and operated in Baghdad from the fall of 2008 through March of 2010.
Significantly,  in connection  therewith,  I was  given access  to the  plethora of negotiation
materials that were compiled during the drafting of the Constitution, and because many of the
same actors  served on the original  committee drafting the Constitution and the committee
tasked with amending it, I had extensive access to those individuals  as well.  Many of the
reflections contained  herein  are the product  of those  conversations  and  that documentary
review.
49.  THE CONSTITUTION OF AFGHANISTAN,  Jan. 26, 2004, ch. 1, art. 3.
50.  Hamoudi, supra note 4, at 698.
51.  For an extensive discussion of this provision, see id.a t 697-700.  See also Ashley S.
Deeks & Matthew D. Burton, Iraq'  Constitution:A  Drafting History, 40 CORNELL INT'L L.J.
1, 7-14  (2007)  (offering  an  excellent  and  detailed  explanation  respecting  the  debates
surrounding Article 2).WILLAMETTELA  WREVIEW [48:427
the "enactment"  of laws that violate Islam's "settled  rulings."  It does
not invalidate  legislation  already  in existence.  Indeed, Article  130
indicates  that existing  legislation remains  in force  until repealed  or
amended.52  This appears to be an effective endorsement of the SCC's
approach-validating  prior  legislation,  and  subjecting  future
legislation to review for Islamicity.  At least one important Iraqi legal
53
expert has taken this position.
Iraqi Islamists generally deny such a reading is possible.  They
point first to the incoherence  of the result, though that did not appear
to be a problem for the SCC in Egypt, operating on far shakier textual
ground than is available in Iraq.  A leading drafter of Iraq's original
constitution  indicates  that Article  13,  Section 2  forecloses  such  an
argument,  because  it  indicates  that  any  law  that conflicts  with  the
constitution  is  void.54  This  argument  might  work  as  for existing
legislation  that  conflicts  with  a  separate  article  of the Constitution
notwithstanding the indication in Article  130 that existing legislation
is deemed valid.55  Hence, an existing law that denied gender equality
would be deemed void under Article  13,  Section 2 as in conflict with
the  principle  that all Iraqis  are  equal before  the  law irrespective  of
gender as set forth in Article 14, even if Article 130 validated existing
legislation more generally.  Yet  an existing law that violates Islam's
"settled  rulings"  does not on its own conflict with the Constitution,
given  that the  Constitution only  prohibits  future  enactment  of such
laws.  At the very  least, there is ambiguity and confusion as to  the
status of existing legislation.
Nevertheless, when faced with the opportunity to amend Article
2 to  make absolutely  clear that existing law in conflict with shari'a
would be deemed void (perhaps using language very similar to that
contained  in  Article  13,  Section  2),  the  Shi'a  Islamists  demurred.
They did not quite endorse the possibility of a more limited approach,
but rather repeated the implausibility of the interpretation,  expressed
their confidence  that the courts  in Iraq would not replicate  those of
52.  Article 130, Doustour Joumhouriat al-Iraq of 2005.
53.  The individual  in question is Judge Ghazi AI-Janabi,  who served as head of the
Shura Council,  effectively  Iraq's  Conseil d'Etat, and thereby one of Iraq's premier  legal
drafting experts.
54.  Article 13,  Section 2, Doustour Joumhouriat al-Iraq of 2005. This is the established
position of Dr. Hasan AI-Yasiri, a preeminent Iraqi legal scholar, who worked closely with Sh.
Humam Hamoudi throughout the drafting of the constitution and the amendment negotiation
process.
55.  Article 130, Doustour Joumhouriat al-Iraq of 2005.2012] REPUGNANCYIN THE ARAB  WORLD
Egypt,  and  indicated  concern  over  the  controversy  that  would
surround  any  attempt  to  strengthen  Article  2  because  of secular
opposition.  These  arguments  hardly  seem  convincing,  and  are
internally  inconsistent.  After  all,  to  the  extent  it  is  obvious  that
existing  legislation  is  not  immunized,  an  amended  and  clarified
Article 2 should do little to raise secular objection.  Moreover, secular
objection did not prevent Islamist groups from including successfully
in  a  final  amendment  proposal  a  revision  to  very  controversial
provisions regarding the Islamizing of family and inheritance laws.56
It seemed plain that the Islamist forces were content to leave the text
in a manner that appeared to endorse the SCC's scheme in Egypt, yet
they could  not bring  themselves  to  say as  much.  Far  from  being
dismissed as a poorly reasoned anomaly, the SCC's approach appears
to have crossed borders.
The Iraqi Federal Supreme Court seems to endorse this result of
immunizing  state  legislation,  albeit not necessarily  by applying  the
same explicit temporal limitation that the SCC adopted in Egypt.  For
example, in Decision 61  of 2011,  a litigant sought to challenge a law
that permitted the government office responsible for administering the
Islamic  charitable  trust, known as  a  waqf, 10%  of the  value of the
waqfas an administrative fee.  The litigant maintained that such a rule
plainly  violates  Shi'i rules  respecting  waqfs, and  as  such,  violates
Article 2 of the Constitution.  The Court upheld the law, reasoning as
follows:
The Federal Supreme  Court finds  the appeal  occasioned  by the
Appellant's attorney  to require detailed  and specialized  study of
the opinions  of all  the  Islamic  schools  in  the  development  of
legislation  of the  administration  of  the  waqfs,  their  areas  of
concern  and their religious institutions  . . . such  that there is  a
single text for all Iraqis based on their Islamic leanings.57
The  Court went  on  to  make  clear  that  until  such  a  law  was
enacted,  determining  the areas on which the various juristic rulings
agreed and reconciling as between inconsistent rulings, the offending
56.  Constitutional  Review  Commission  of the  Iraqi  Council  of  Representatives,
Proposed  Amendments  to  the  Constitution  of Iraq,  art.  58  (on  file  with author).  The
amendments privileged religious and sect based rules of organization of family and inheritance
law  over  other  possibilities  available  in  the  original  text.  See Article  41,  Doustour
Joumhouriat al-Iraq.  It is important to note that the proposed amendments were never enacted.
57.  Decision 61 of2011, Iraq Federal Supreme Court.WILLAMETTELA WREVIEW [48:427
provision  would  stand  as  it  was.  The  Court  reached  a  similar
conclusion with respect to a provision in Iraq's Personal Status Code
that denied a party the right to issue a divorce through an agent.58
In  both  of these  cases,  the  Federal  Supreme  Court  did  not
foreclose  the possibility  that the  challenged  provisions  were indeed
repugnant to Islam.  It did, however,  immunize the provisions  from
judicial review for Islamicity.  The Court did this, it stated, because
the provisions were part of existing, complex legislation which only
the  legislature  could  sensibly  amend  to  conform  to  Islam.  The
reasoning  is not identical to that of the SCC, and makes no explicit
mention of the temporal  limitations that Article 2 of the Constitution
imply. Yet it reaches precisely  the same result and has precisely the
same  effect-existing  provisions  of Iraqi  law  escaped  repugnancy
review and were left for the legislature to amend, if it saw fit.
C  Tunisia
The final state  in the Arab world worth discussing, because  of
the  massive  change  it  has  undergone  in  the  past  few  years,  is
Tunisia.59  Over the past several  decades, Tunisia has operated as a
highly secularized dictatorship, with a 1974 constitutional amendment
that declared the late President Habib Borguiba "President for Life."60
Its  constitutional  process  remains  in  its  infancy,61  and  Tunisia's
primary  Islamist party,  Ennahda,  is  vague  as to  its  own  ambitions
concerning the role of Islam.62 As a result, very little can be said as to
58.  Decision 59 of 2011, Iraq Federal Supreme Court.
59.  Only one other  Arab state,  Libya,  has undergone  a total  regime  transformation
recently.  Unfortunately, it is hardly useful to discuss Arab constitutionalism with respect to it.
The state's institutions have been  so weak and ineffective  as a historical  matter that state
building has to date proven daunting, and the government seems to exert little control, with
power being exercised instead by roving and largely lawless militias.  See Anthony Shadid,
Libya Struggles To CurbM  ilitias as Chaos Grows, N.Y. TIMES, Feb. 9, 2012, at A1.
60.  Ann M. Eisenberg, Law On The Books Vs. Law In Action. Under-EnforcementO  f
Morocco's Reformed 2004 Family Law, The Moudawana, 44 CORNELL INT'L L.J. 693, 701
n.52 (2011).
61.  National elections were held in Tunisia late in 2011, in which the Islamist Ennahda
managed to win with a plurality of seats to the constituent assembly.  David D. Kirkpatrick,
Tunisia: Islamist Party Wins  Vote, N.Y. TIMES, Oct. 28, 2011, at A13.  The assembly has a
year to write the constitution  and schedule  new elections.  Jonathan Manthorpe,  Islamists
Poisedt o Guide Tunisia 's Voyage to Democracy,S UN (Vancouver), Oct. 25, 2011, at B5.
62.  See David. D. Kirkpatrick, Islamsts Head Toward Victory in Tunisia Vote, N.Y.
TIMES, Oct. 25, 2011, at Al (describing Ennahda and its candidates as focusing on economic
issues and security rather than moral concerns).  Even the website of Ennahda  reflects the
vagueness of its own constitutional vision. Nothing comparable to the Brotherhood's electoral
program,  much less the Brotherhood draft  Platform,  can be  found on  it.  See generally2012] REPUGNANCY ]N THE ARAB  WORLD
whether  or  not  existing  law  will  be  subjected  to  some  sort  of
repugnancy test in Tunisia  at all.63  Yet from all indications,  and to
the extent repugnancy is even relevant, Tunisia appears very much to
be sharing this rising Arab trend.
Ennahda objects to the stigmatizing of Islam that it claims took
place historically  in Tunisia.  For example, President Borguiba  went
so far as to  refer to the Islamic  headscarf, the touchstone  of pious
Islamic  observance  among  women  in  the  contemporary  era,  as  an
"odious rag.'64 It also broadly embraces religious themes in its rallies
and encourages  public displays of religion.65  However, Ennahda has
said repeatedly  and  forcefully  that it  is not interested in Islamizing
Tunisia's  existing  law,  even  the  highly  controversial  (though
Islamically  derived)  family  laws,  which  are  among  the  most
progressive  in the region,66 or the rules on alcohol,67 the consumption
of which  is  often  presented  by  commentators  as  an  example  of a
shari'ap rohibition on which there is virtually universal  agreement.68
The only way that this could possibly be consistent with a repugnancy
clause would be if that clause did not relate to existing legislation.
Thus, Ennahda has expressed distaste with a past that sought to
marginalize  a  public  role  for  Islam  and  subjected  individuals  to
discrimination for public expressions of religious piety.69  Logically,
in addition to demanding greater freedom for religious expression (a
goal that can be achieved independent of repugnancy,  or indeed  any
direct mention  of Islam at all), Ennahda  might then seek to prevent
legal secularization measures  from being enacted, and to ensure  that
legislation that is enacted does not violate  some core notion of what
ENNAHDA,  http://www.nahdha.info/arabe/index.php.
63.  Ennahda has recently indicated that it will seek no explicit mention of shari'ai n the
Constitution and that it would be satisfied with wording that indicated that Tunisia was an
Islamic state.  Tunisia's Islamist Ennahda Edges Away From Sharia, BBC NEWS (Mar. 26,
2012), http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa- 17517113.
64.  Adrien K. Wing & Hisham Kassem,  The Future Of Palestinian Women's Rights:
Lessons From A Half-Century Of Tunisian Progress, 64 WASH. & LEE L. REv.  1551,  1557
(2007).
65.  Kirkpatrick, supra note 62, at A1.
66.  Id; Scott Sayre,  Tunisia is Uneasy over Party of Islamists, N.Y. TIMES, May  16,
2011, at A9.
67.  Sayre, supran ote 66, at A9,
68.  Stilt, supran ote 4, at 96.
69.  An excellent account of this type of discrimination is offered in Monica Marks, Op.-
Ed.,  Can  Islamism  and  Feminism  Mix.,  N.Y.  TIMES  (Oct.  27,  2011),
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/27/opinion/can-islamism-and-feminism-
mix.html?_r= I &ref=zineelabidinebenali#.WILLAMETTELA  WREVIEW [48:427
Islam is.  Its repeated, stated commitment not to seek to Islamize the
state, but only grant to  Islam space  that  it had been denied,  is thus
perfectly consistent with an approach to repugnancy that mimics that
of Egypt and Iraq.  As with those two states,  it is not interested in a
constitutional  structure  or institution  that will  displace  any  existing
legislation.  To the extent that it is interested in some  sort of Islamic
control at all, therefore, it will resemble those of Egypt and Iraq, and
apply exclusively prospectively.
IV.  THE INCOHERENT PREFERENCES OF ISLAMIST PARTIES
Why  would Islamist parties  ultimately prefer a state  of affairs
that  effectively  immunizes  all  sorts  of existing,  secularized,  and
transplanted  legislation  from  any  sort  of review  for  its  Islamicity?
Why  would  such  parties  not  instead  offer  some  sort  of coherent
theory setting forth what legislation must look like in order to comply
with shari'a,a nd then demand that a body such as the judiciary apply
it to all legislation, existing or prospective?  Several answers might be
offered to explain this rather bewildering state of affairs.
First of all, ironically, as they gain a measure of political power,
Islamist parties  often  find themselves  in precisely the same bind in
which the Egyptian SCC found itself nearly three decades earlier
That is to say, it is nearly inconceivable  that any political movement
in  any  reasonably  developed  state-including  Iraq,  Egypt  and
Tunisia-could  determine  that  money  interest  on  a  loan  was
somehow  not riba, a  practice  stridently  condemned  in the  Qur'an.
The Islamist consensus has developed deep roots, and is the basis for
the practice of Islamic finance.  As a result, any claim by any Islamist
political  movement  to  the  contrary  will  immediately  give  rise  to
suspicion  that  the  Islamist  movement  in  question  has  been
compromised by "Westoxification. '70
To  reiterate  the  point,  the  problem  with  a  more  liberal
interpretation concerning money interest and riba is not doctinal,a s
ample  doctrinal arguments  have been raised that rise  at least  to the
70.  See supra Part 111.1  regarding Islamist consensus on the subject of money interest.
Respecting the term "Westoxification" and its Iranian origins, see Ben Schott, Westoxification
&  Modem  Toxicity,  N.Y.  TIMES  BLOG  (Apr.  12,  2011,  11:47  AM),
http://schott.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/04/12/westoxification-modern-toxicity.  The  influential
Hamid  Algar  translates  the  same  Farsi  term  as  "xenomania."  AYATOLLAH  RUHOLLAH
KHOMEINI, ISLAM AND REVOLUTION:  WRITINGS AND DECLARATIONS OF IMAM KHOMEINI
(1941-1980)  152 n.23 (Hamid Algar ed. and trans., 1981).2012] REPUGNANCYIN THE ARAB  WORLD
level  of plausibility.71  Rather, it is political,i n that such  a reading,
however plausible from  a doctrinal  standpoint, is simply not one the
broader Muslim  lay public would deem  to be sufficiently  Islamic.72
That Islamist movements  and advocates  of Islamic finance have tied
the  money  interest  prohibitions  to  the promotion  of social justice,
however ill-conceived, only makes any justificatory effort in defense
of money  interest harder to obtain.73  In other words, when money
interest is  suggested to be  a means to favor the  rich and those  with
capital at the expense of ordinary laborers, as has often been argued,74
then a softening  of the  hostility to  interest  is more than merely the
abandonment  of Divine  Command  in  favor  of Western  imposed
imperative,  as  if that  were  not  enough.  It  also  appears  to  be  a
capitulation  to  rich  capitalist  forces  in  derogation  of the  working
classes and the poor.  Hence any Islamist political figure, if asked the
question directly, would almost certainly be forced to indicate that the
taking of money interest on a loan was a grave sin, and repugnant to
the shai'a.
Yet any Islamist figure with even  a marginal understanding  of
political and economic realities is as aware as the SCC was in 1985 of
the  potentially  devastating  effects  that  a  complete  ban  on  interest
would  be  likely to  have  on  any  national  economy  in  the  modem
world.  The SCC's creative dodge may not be the only one available,
but having been employed in the Arab world  once, it seems to have
proven  itself  remarkably  attractive.  Under  this  approach,  the
judiciary  will  be  excluded  from  considerations  of Islamicity  with
respect  to existing,  vital  legislation,  and  the reform  of the  laws  to
ensure their compliance  with shari'a will be left in the  discretion of
the  legislature.  The  legislature  can  ignore  it  in  favor  of higher
priorities, or, should it wish to pander to conservative elements, it can
defer the matter indefinitely using the standard set of tools available
in  any  legislature's  toolkit-hearings,  commissions,  and  the
production of endless reports concerning the matter.
Money  interest  is  the  most  obvious  example  where  the
dichotomous  approach  proves  appealing,  but it is by no  means  the
only  one.  Another  example  might  well  be  the  hudud, the  strict
71.  See supra notes 23-25 and accompanying text.
72.  See supra notes 26-29 and accompanying text.
73.  Haider Ala Hamoudi, Mohammad's Social Justice or Muslim Cant: Langdellianism
and the Failures of Islamic Finance, 40 CORNELL INT'L L.J. 89, 92-95  (2007) (describing the
roots of Islamic finance relating to the realization of social justice).
74.  Id.WILLAMETTE LA W REVIEW [48:427
punishments  established by medieval jurists for particular violations
of Divine Command.75  These  included the well-known  punishment
of  stoning  for  adulterers,  amputation  for  thieves,  and  death  for
apostates  who  do  not  repent.76   Because  the  hudud were  crimes
against God, the punishments could not be mitigated by an exercise of
judicial discretion.77  Yet at the same time, and perhaps for the same
reason,  the  evidentiary  standards  were  quite  strict,  in  some  cases
impossibly so.78  This would make enforcement of the hududperhaps
rare as a realistic matter, yet nonetheless a matter of some concern for
any secular Muslim  or member of a minority religion who  was not
eager to countenance  even the remote possibility of adulterers stoned
or  apostates  killed.  Even  committed  Muslims,  those  who  are
interested in ensuring that Islam play some role at the state, and who
might otherwise be attracted to the message of the Egyptian Muslim
Brotherhood  regarding  economic  reform  and  social  justice,  might
well  recoil  at  excesses  of this  sort.  If measures  like  this  were
undertaken,  they  could  damage  the  reputation  (and  electoral
prospects)  of the Brotherhood.  However,  given  the long  history of
conservative  Muslims using the Egyptian courts to force the divorces
of supposed apostates with some level of success, 79 the Brotherhood
could not claim to more conservative elements of their base that they
75.  Mohammad Fadel, Public Reason As A Strategy ForP rincipledR econciliation: The
Case Oflslamic LawAndlntemationalH  uman Rights Law, 8 CHI. J. INT'L L. 1, 4-5 (2007).
76.  See id. at 5.
77.  Fadel mentions the hudud as raising "particularly  thorny problems" because of the
obligation to enforce them once proven. Id at 5.
78.  The paradigmatic example is the prosecution for zina, or fornication, which requires
four eyewitnesses  to the sexual intercourse.  Quraishi,  supra note 15,  at  179.  For a more
general review of the strict rules of evidence in relation to the hudud, see RUDOLPH PETERS,
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN ISLAMIC LAW: THEORY AND PRACTICE FROM THE SIXTEENTH TO
THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY 13-14 (2005).
79.  Though Egypt does not prosecute the hudud, its personal-status laws do not permit
the marrying of Muslims to non-Muslims, and conservative Muslim groups or individuals have
successfully used these rules to order divorces as between a couple which does not desire one
on the grounds that one is an apostate who has effectively renounced Islam.  The most well-
known instance is that of the Egyptian intellectual  Nasr Abu Zayd, whose writings on the
Qur'an were deemed sufficiently heretical by some as to be a form of apostasy, a position that
the Egyptian courts ultimately endorsed, thereby causing Abu Zayd to flee Egypt for Europe
with his wife, where he lived out the remainder of his life.  See Kristen Stilt, Islamic Law and
the Making andR  emaking of the IraqiL egal System, 36 GEO. WASH. INT'L L. REV. 695, 734-
39 (2005).  The Egyptian government then took measures to institute standing requirements in
proceedings of this sort, so that random people could not interpose themselves and demand a
divorce that neither member of the couple nor their families sought.  This was the basis upon
which similar proceedings instituted against another Egyptian liberal,  the writer Nawal Al-
Sadawi, were dismissed.  Id at 738.2012] REPUGNANCY  IN THE ARAB  WORLD
had  no interest in the hudud and were  indifferent  to declarations  of
apostasy.  The SCC dodge permits them to avoid the issue.
It might also be noted that Islamist groups are not ignorant of the
dominant trends in much of the world in favor of secular states, and
they genuinely express concern about such trends.  To the extent that
the representatives  of Ennahda raise  Islam at all in Tunisia, it is to
express  broad  resentment  against  what  they  view  as  the
marginalization  of Islam  and persecution  of the pious  by the prior
dictatorial  regime.80  Various  members  of  Iraq's  Constitutional
Commission  expressed  to  me  the  view  that  one  of  the  primary
purposes of the repugnancy clause was to ensure that Iraq would not
develop  into  Turkey-so  that  laws  that  ban  the  headscarf,  for
example,  as  is  done  in  Turkey in  some  contexts,  would  be  struck
down as void by a court or other institution whose function it was to
ensure  that law  did not develop  in a manner that was  repugnant to
shari'a.  The  concern seemed genuine,  albeit paranoid.  The  fierce
reaction of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood to an Egyptian Cabinet
Member's  suggestion  that  the  wearing  of  the  headscarf  was  a
regressive  and backwards practice  demonstrates  the extent to which
similar concerns pervade  in Egypt.81  A repugnancy clause that does
not apply  to existing legislation addresses  this fear adequately, as  it
still enables the courts to strike down any potential future legislation
that would be deemed hostile to Islam.
But  the  most  important  point  is  not  so  much  what  Islamist
groups  seek  to evade  as  what  they  seek  to  advance.  The  casual
observer  might  be  surprised  by  the  manner  in  which  mainstream
Islamist  movements  do  not  seem  terribly  concerned  about  Islam.
There  is, for example,  in the platform  of the Brotherhood's current
surrogate political party, requisite praise for Islam and the principles
of the shari'a,a rticulated at such a high level of abstraction that they
would not be deemed objectionable by any political movement-even
a non-Muslim  one.82  Beyond  this,  the  almost  singular  focus  is  on
80.  See Marks, supra note 69.
81.  Yasmine Salah & Sara El Sirgany, Reh'gious Scholars Slam Farouk Husni for Anti
Veil Remarks, DAILY  STAR  EGYPT,  Nov.  19,  2006  (describing  demand  by Brotherhood
members of parliament that Culture Minister Farouk Husni resign for having made statements
disparaging the veil) (on file with author).
82.  FREEDOM AND JUSTICE PARTY, supra note 46, at Part 1 "Principles and Directions of
the Party" (including  as shari'a principles  respect  for human rights,  freedom  of worship,
freedom of thought, respect for religious minorities,  equality of all people,  and reliance on
democracy for political life).WILLAMETTE LA W REVIEW [48:427
more  standard political  and  economic  issues.  Effective  and  lawful
state governance,  development,  economic  reform, and  social justice
constitute the bulk of the platform, with Islam mentioned only briefly
at the  start  and  end.83  Ennahda's  representatives  make  almost  no
reference to Islam beyond anodyne  appeals for religious  freedom.84
The  almost  exclusive  singular  focus  of its  candidates  has been  on
economic issues.85
Iraq's  Shi'a  Islamist  political  parties  are  not  much  different.
While their leaders are in some (though not all) cases more obviously
Islamist  in  orientation,86 in  that  they don  the  traditional  robes and
turbans  of Shi'a  trained  scholars,  their  political  priorities  are  self-
evidently  focused  more  on  issues  that  do  not concern  the  shari'a.
There is some level of predictable demagoguery  relating to sharfia-
efforts to ban or restrict the sale of alcohol,87 for example, or reform
religious curricula in schools88- but  these occupy a relatively modest
proportion  of attention  in relation to other, more pressing  concerns.
Among these  are  negotiations  over a hydrocarbon  law,89 wrangling
about the future of Iraqi federalism,90  and debates over the separation
83.  Id
84.  Kirkpatrick, supra note 62; Sayre, supra note 66.
85.  Kirkpatrick, supran ote 62; Sayre, supra note 66.
86.  Most obviously, the Sadrists are led by Moqtada al-Sadr, who  is a Shi'i jurist by
training and who invariably appears in public in the dress of a jurist. The same might well be
said of the leader of another Shi'a Islamist organization the Supreme Islamic Council of Iraq,
Ammar al-Hakim.  See ISLAMIC SUPREME COUNCIL OF IRAQ, http://www.almejlis.org  (last
visited July 11, 2012).
87.  Haider Ala Hamoudi, Why an Iraq Ruled by Law is Becoming More Hopeful, THE
DAILY  STAR  (LEB.)  (July  9,  2009),  http://www.dailystar.com.lb/Law/Jul/09/Why-an-Iraq-
ruled-by-law-is-becoming-more-hopeful.ashx#axzz1rBleSa7R  (describing  efforts  to  ban
alcohol in the Iraqi legislature).  In addition, Iraqi political authorities appear to go on periodic
raids to close  down unlicensed  liquor stores  in Baghdad, though after some time the raids
cease and the stores open again.  The latest round of raids occurred in January of 2010. Liz
Sly,  Baghdad  Crackdown  Corks  Drinkers'  Spirits,  L.A.  TIMES  (Jan.  24,  2010),
http://articles.latimes.com/2010/j an/24/world/la-fg-iraq-booze24-2010jan24.  Based  on
accounts of colleagues, a great number of liquor stores have reopened.
88.  Steven Lee  Myers,  Iraqi Cleric Avoids Using His Power to Sway  Voters, N.Y.
TIMES, Mar. 3, 2010, at A4.
89.  Iraqi politicians have been debating a hydrocarbon law for nearly half a decade. REX
ZEDALIS, LEGAL DIMENSION OF OIL AND  GAS IN IRAQ: CURRENT REALITIES AND FUTURE
PROSPECTS 54-78 (2009) (describing framework law in draft form since 2006). One has yet to
pass, leaving Iraq to export its oil on legal bases that are defensible, but somewhat nebulous.
Id  at 244-69 (offering a thorough legal analysis of the authority to export in the absence of
law).
90.  In 2005, the  Sunni Arab political leaders  abandoned the constitutional process in
disgust because the constitution recognized  broad rights of federalism to whatever parts of2012] REPUGNANCY IN  THE ARAB  WORLD
of powers.91  Thus, Prime Minister Maliki hails from an Islamist party
and  has  remained  in  power  for over  six  years,  and  yet  Iraqi  law
remains no more or less committed to shari'a than it had been in the
past.92   Even a constitutionalc ommitment  commonly  understood to
require  the legislature  to bring the Personal Status Code  (governing
family  law and inheritance)  further into  conformity with shari'a has
not  advanced,93  nor  have  any  Islamist  leaders  shown  very  much
interest in advancing it, at least in my conversations with them.
V.  CONCLUSION:  THE FUTURE OF ISLAMISM
The  point  of these  reflections  on  the preferences  of Islamist
parties  is not to  suggest  that they  have  embraced  a robust  form  of
secularism, for plainly they have not, nor is there any indication at all
that they intend  to.  Family  law remains  firmly  within the orbit  of
shari'a even  in  relatively progressive  Tunisia,  and  there  is no  real
suggestion  that religion  would cease to  be taught in  public  schools
throughout the Arab world.  Yet Islamist  legislative agendas  in the
Arab  states  have  clearly  moved  beyond Islam, because  of political
and economic realities, and in order to mobilize a base of voters who
are less concerned about state mechanisms for enforcement of aspects
of  shari'a and  more  concerned  about  how  their  lives  might  be
Iraq, other than Baghdad, wished to become autonomous regions and the Shi'a expressed a
desire to form such a region throughout all of Iraq's south.  ANDREW ARATO, CONSTITUTION
MAKING  UNDER  OCCUPATION  232-33  (2009).  In  a rather strange  twist of irony that is
remarked on in much greater detail in my own upcoming book on the Iraq constitution, the
Shi'a reconsidered their demand for autonomy and now seek a centralized state which Sunni
forces are now resisting.  Sunnis in some provinces now demand the right to form a region
pursuant to the constitution.  Sunnis Push for FederalR egion in Western Iraq, MIDDLE.E. REP.
(Jan. 31, 2011).
91.  There  are, for example,  frequent concerns respecting  the possibility of executive
interference  with judicial independence.  Compare Rod Nordland, Mahki, Trailing In Iraqi
Vote, Is Contestingt he Result, N.Y. TIMES, Mar. 28, 2010, at A4 (describing Federal Supreme
Court of Iraq as "nominally independent"),  with Charles P. Trumbull IV & Julie B. Martin,
Elections and Government Formation in Iraq- An Analysis of the Judiciary'sR ole, 44 VAND.
J.  TRANSNAT'L  L.  331  (2011)  (broadly  defending  Iraqi  judiciary  as  competent  and
independent).  Another  frequent  area  of concern  is  the  power  of Iraq's  legislature  and
independent  agencies  vis-A-vis  the executive  branch.  Haider Ala  Hamoudi, Decision 88.
Balance  of  Power  under  the  Iraq  Constitution,  JURIST  (Mar.  18,  2011),
http://jurist.org/forum/2011/03/decision-88-checks-and-balances-in-iraq.php.
92.  Haider Ala Hamoudi, Dream Palaces of Law: Western Constructions of the Muslim
Legal World, 32 HASTINGS INT'L & COMP. L. REv. 803 (2009).
93.  Article 41  of the Constitution requires that Iraqis be given freedom to pursue the
personal  status rules based on their "religion,  sect, belief or choice", but that this would be
organized  by  law.  No  such  organizing  law  has been  passed  or  even presented  in the
legislature.450  WILLAMETTE LA W REVIEW  [48:427
improved  by  state  activity.  Hence  Islamist  parties  offer  agendas
respecting  employment,  wages,  private  sector  growth  and
anticorruption certain to be more appealing to average voters, even if
such platforms are not distinctively Islamic.
Thus,  in  the end,  as  social  movements,  Islamist  organizations
obviously reflect their Islamic values and may seek to expand them,
through  campaigns  to  encourage  the  headscarf,  competitions  for
young  men to memorize  the Qur'an,  or even  funding  women-only
public transportation.  As a politicala nd legislative agenda, however,
Islam is largely (though certainly not entirely) absent, and the law of
the state is largely immunized from any sort of review concerning its
Islamicity.  Contrary to the Muslim Brotherhood's nearly century old
slogan, it seems that Islam is no longer the solution.