CARRICO DOUGLASS 473 (DO NOT DELETE)  3/28/2013 2:47 PM 
 
TRIBUTE TO CHIEF JUSTICE HARRY L. CARRICO 
John G. Douglass * 
My first encounter with Chief Justice Harry Carrico came just 
a few months after I was admitted to the Virginia Bar. It didn’t 
go quite as I had planned. As a brand new lawyer I somehow had 
landed an opportunity to argue a case in the Supreme Court of 
Virginia. After a sleepless night of pre-game jitters, I sat a bit 
bleary  eyed  at counsel  table  and  counted my  heartbeats.  The 
Clerk called out his “oyez” and an imposing array of white-haired 
Justices appeared from behind a crimson curtain to take their 
seats on a bench so impossibly high that it seemed like only the 
tops of their heads were visible. A voice from on high called my 
name. I stood. And then it happened. As I scooped a collection of 
notes and briefs into my arms, my oversized notebook slipped, a 
crystal water goblet fell from counsel table, glass clanked, ice flew 
and water plunged onto the Court’s very plush, very red and the-
retofore very dry carpet. I froze, only half a step into my fledgling 
career as a courtroom lawyer, already marked as a bumbler. I 
waited for the voice of reproach from the bench, expecting at least 
a mildly annoyed “hrrumph.” Instead, I heard the gracious words: 
“Don’t worry, counsel. I’ve done that a few times myself. Please 
proceed with your argument.” I looked up to see the very genuine 
smile and twinkling eyes of Chief Justice Harry Carrico. 
By the time of our courtroom encounter in 1981, Justice Carri-
co had seen twenty years of nervous lawyers at oral arguments in 
the court where he was to serve longer than any Justice. He had 
just become Chief. It would be another twenty-two years, just af-
ter he “retired” to senior status in 2003, before I would have the 
privilege to know him as a friend and colleague on our law school 
faculty.  Only  then  did  I  learn  that  the  self-effacing  grace 
 
* Professor of Law, University of Richmond School of Law. J.D., 1980, Harvard Law 
School; B.A., 1977, Dartmouth College. 
761 CARRICO DOUGLASS 473 (DO NOT DELETE)  3/28/2013 2:47 PM 
762  UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 47:761 
he showed to that fledgling lawyer in 1981 was his defining cha-
racteristic. 
Justice Carrico was eighty-six when we first worked together 
at the law school, but I never knew him as “old.” When he visited 
my house for law school events in my years as Dean, he insisted 
on walking up the long gravel driveway rather than asking some-
one decades younger to park his car. Whenever he arrived at the 
law school he carried a stack of red and blue briefs to read be-
tween student appointments. He continued to serve the court as 
Senior Justice until just a few months before his death, still writ-
ing opinions and sitting on writ panels. And I have seen photo-
graphic evidence of his exploits on roller blades well into his eigh-
ties. 
When Dean John Pagan presented Justice Carrico’s portrait in 
2003, he remarked that the retiring Chief Justice had “adopted” 
our law school. Justice Carrico’s typically humble response was 
that the law school had adopted him. Both were true. The Uni-
versity awarded Justice Carrico an honorary Doctor of Laws in 
1973 while his daughter, Lucretia, was an undergraduate. She 
later earned her J.D. from the law school and now continues the 
family tradition of service on the Virginia bench. In 1987 the law 
school gave Chief Justice Carrico its highest honor, the William 
Green Award for Professional Excellence, a fitting tribute to a 
man who’s commitment to professionalism, civility and excellence 
is legendary across our Commonwealth. In 2003 he helped organ-
ize a major conference on judicial independence, a topic close to 
his heart, and participated on a panel with William Rehnquist, 
Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court. A few years 
later Justice Carrico joined with our former Dean Rodney Smolla 
to produce a widely circulated video on professionalism, a fitting 
encore to his earlier brainchild, the Course on Professionalism for 
all newly admitted members of the Virginia Bar, the first course 
of its kind in the nation. In 2008 the law school named the Harry 
L. Carrico Center for Pro Bono Services to mark his career-long 
commitment to fostering pro bono service throughout the Virginia 
Bar. 
The mutual “adoption” included a good deal more than public 
appearances, degrees and honors. What mattered most to Justice 
Carrico were the students he met here. After he joined our faculty 
in 2004 as Visiting Professor of Law and Civic Engagement, he 
taught the John Marshall seminar and sat on the Marshall Scho-CARRICO DOUGLASS 473 (DO NOT DELETE)  3/28/2013 2:47 PM 
2013]  HARRY L. CARRICO     763 
larship selection committee. With his typically personal touch, he 
called every scholarship recipient and welcomed them to the law 
school. Each year he judged the final round of the moot court 
competition  that  bears  his  name.  Commenting  on  the  perfor-
mance of student advocates, he said, “I hope they are as well pre-
pared in real life as they are for moot court. When I was in law 
school,  I doubt  that  I  could  have stood  up there  before  three 
judges who look as stern as we must look. I think the floor would 
have opened up and swallowed me.” 
Most remarkable to me, Justice Carrico visited the law school 
each week to hold “office hours” for students. There was no agen-
da, no curriculum other than his lifetime of experience. He de-
voted countless hours to those personal conversations with hun-
dreds  of  students,  talking  about  whatever  mattered  to  them. 
Justice Carrico touched those lives in ways the students probably 
did not anticipate. No doubt they sought the wisdom of a judicial 
icon. No doubt he delivered. But in the process they also discov-
ered the open-hearted humanity of a quiet-natured gentleman 
who, despite being three times their ages, related to them with a 
graceful and humble nature that few had imagined. 
I was touched by that grace in my first months as a lawyer and, 
again, decades later. At the memorial service in the University 
Chapel  I  joined  with  hundreds  of  others  who  shared  similar 
memories of this “gentle giant” in the law who wore his judicial 
robe with equal measures of dignity and humility. One speaker 
put it most aptly, quoting the prophet, Micah: “What does the 
Lord require of you but to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk 
humbly with your God?” So lived Chief Justice Harry L. Carrico. 
 