TRIBUTE TO PROFESSOR CARROLL
"JOHN WAS THIRD"
Jim Gibson *
In any  law school, there  are those of us-most of us, really-
who like to hear ourselves talk. We think that no conversation is
complete until we have voiced our views.
But then there are those rare  few who  do not  feel that need,
who instead have a talent for picking their moments and crystal-
lizing  an  issue  with  a  single,  insightful  observation.  That was
John Carroll. At a faculty meeting, in a colloquy with a visiting
scholar, and of course in the classroom, John could be counted on
to say the wise thing at just the right time. His quiet voice could
fill a room. It is impossible to contemplate never hearing it again.
When  the  law  school  family first heard  the  horrible  news  of
John's  passing,  and we  were  grasping for  ways  to comprehend
and express  our loss, one of my colleagues said  that she wished
John were here to help us through it all. She got it exactly right.
John would have known how to give comfort,  what to say. When
not to say anything. How to listen.
Sadly,  it was not until John was gone  that I began to under-
stand all the ways that his gentle, generous soul had enriched our
institution. I  had known John  mostly as a great  teacher  and a
peerless mentor  for his  students. I  knew that he  loved  the law
school. That much was obvious from the time and energy he de-
voted to his work.
But the number of students, staff, and faculty who could tell a
story about how John's counsel had helped them through a tough
time-it  was  amazing.  And  humbling.  And  inspiring.  And  of
course  his  boundless  energies  were  directed  far  beyond  the
*  Professor of Law and Director of the Intellectual Property Institute, University of
Richmond School of Law; J.D., 1995, University of Virginia; B.A.,  1991, Yale University.
961
HeinOnline  -- 46 U. Rich. L. Rev. 961 2011-2012964 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 46:963
He was there when you needed him. And he was  always clear
about what was most important.
That was,  of course,  the  most difficult challenge  I  have  ever
faced. Our prayers  were answered,  and Rose recovered  and blos-
somed into the beautiful, healthy child she is today. In the inter-
vening  months,  though,  I  struggled  with how  to  return to  my
work at the law  school while maintaining  a focus on my family,
and especially baby Rose. Ultimately, I decided to invoke the uni-
versity's "Stop the Clock" policy, which permits faculty members
with a new baby to essentially  hit the "pause" button for a year
and postpone promotion and tenure decisions. It was not an easy
decision, though, and it continued to worry me. It was sometimes
difficult to stay clear about what was most important.
Then just a month before  he  died, John quietly reminded  me
again to cherish and hold close  all that is most  precious in this
life. As the Dean sent out congratulations to all of the law faculty
who had recently been promoted, John wrote the following to me:
"I noticed  a  missing name  that deserves  to be on  this list, and
wanted you to know that I was thinking about you and David and
Rose today. I'm sure  it was  a difficult decision,  but I  deeply re-
spect your decision to 'stop the clock' temporarily on this process
so you could devote time where it was needed most." John under-
You know I'm bound ...
I'm bound to thank you for it
I want to thank you
For so many gifts
You gave with love and tenderness
I want to thank you
I want to thank you
For your generosity
The love and the honesty
That you gave me
I want to thank you
Show my gratitude
My love and my respect for you
I want to thank you
I want to ...
Thank you
Thank you
Thank you
Thank you
NATALIE MERCHANT, Kind and Generous, on OPHELIA (Electra 1998).
HeinOnline  -- 46 U. Rich. L. Rev. 964 2011-20122012] JOHN CARROLL 965
stood my  struggle; he validated  and supported my decision. And
he was clear about what was most important.
The  day before  John's  death, we  celebrated  Rose's  first  birth-
day and marveled  at the miracle of her young life. Rose  and my
family, they are what is most important.
My  favorite poem ends with this question:  "Tell me, what is it
you plan to do with your one wild and precious life?"2  John knew
the answer. He lived the answer. And his gift to me-and to many
-was  to help us remember what the answer is.
2.  Mary Oliver asks:
Who made the world?
Who made the swan, and the black bear?
Who made the grasshopper?
This grasshopper, I mean-
the one who has flung herself out of the grass,
the one who is eating sugar out of my hand,
who is moving her jaws back and forth instead of up and down-
who is gazing around with her enormous and complicated eyes.
Now she lifts her pale forearms and thoroughly washes her face.
Now she snaps her wings open, and floats away.
I don't know exactly what a prayer is.
I do know how to pay attention, how to fall down
into the grass, how to kneel down in the grass,
how to be idle and blessed, how to stroll through the fields,
which is what I have been doing all day.
Tell me, what else should I have done?
Doesn't everything die at last, and too soon?
Tell me, what is it you plan to do
with your one wild and precious life?
MARY OLIVER, The Summer Day, in HOUSE OF LIGHT (1990).
HeinOnline  -- 46 U. Rich. L. Rev. 965 2011-2012HeinOnline  -- 46 U. Rich. L. Rev. 966 2011-2012