Muhammad's Social Justice  or Muslim
Cant?: Langdellianism  and the
Failures of Islamic  Finance
Haider Ala Hamoudit
Introduction  .....................................................  90
I.  The Rise and Fall of Langdellian Legal Orthodoxy ........  98
A.  Langdellian Methodology and Attendant Implications  ..  98
B.  The Failures of Langdellianism in the Modern Era  .....  99
II.  Langdellian Modalities in the Islamic Experience  .........  100
A.  Historical Qualification  ...............................  100
B.  Shafi'i and the Formalist Modalities in the Methodology
of Hadith Reporting ...................................  103
C.  Shafi'i's Reductionist Interpretive Controls in the
Emerging Formalist Modality ..........................  105
D.  Anti-formalism and the Langdellian Modality  ..........  108
1.  Istihsan ...........................................  108
2.  Istislah. ...........................................  109
E.  Demonstrations of Langdellianism:  The Problems of
Riba and Gharar in the Formalist Modalities ...........  109
1.  Contours of the Riba Proscription ...................  111
2.  G harar. ...........................................  114
III.  The Failures of Islamic Commercial Jurisprudence-The
Consequences of Langdellianism  .........................  116
A.  Original Conceptions  .................................  116
B.  Alternative Approaches Within the Langdellian
M odalities ............................................  118
1.  M urabaha. ........................................  119
2.  Ijara ..............................................  120
3.  Istisna'/Salam. ....................................  121
4.  A Problem of Insurance ............................  122
C.  Langdellianism  and Islamic Finance  ...................  124
IV.  Alternative Approaches ...................................  125
A.  Qur'anic M axim s ......................................  126
B.  The Roles of Hadith, Istihsan, and Istislah: An
Examination  of Sanhuri and Sadr  .....................  127
1.  Sanhuri's Definitional Approach ....................  128
t  Associate  in  Law,  Columbia  Law  School.  The  author  would  like to  thank
Abdullahi An-Na'in,  Mark Cammack, Michael Dorf, Bernard Freamon, George Fletcher,
Hoi Kong and Clark Lombardi for their comments and substantial support.  Any errors
are solely the author's responsibility.
40 CORNELL INT'L LJ. 89 (2007)Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
2.  Sadr's Contextual Approach ........................  129
C.  Assertion of Interpretive Control within an Alternative
M odality ..............................................  13 1
1.  A Problem of "Subjectivity" ..  ......................  131
2.  Proposed Synthesis of Definitionalism and
Contextualism .....................................  131
D.  Fairness and Social Justice in an Islamic Context .......  132
C onclusion  ......................................................  133
And We sent you not,
Save in Mercy to the
Peoples of the World.
QUR'AN 21:07.
Introduction
Islamic finance has failed to achieve its most basic and central objec-
tives, but the causes of that failure, and whether anything can be done to
reconstruct  the practice  in a manner  consistent with commercial  reality
and its ontology, are matters that, by and large, have gone unexamined.  To
understand the nature and depth of the failure, it may be useful to consider
the following three simple examples.
First, a Muslim entrepreneur seeks short-term financing, knowing that
any transaction  involving  the payment  of interest  on debt  is  forbidden
under  the  rules  of the  shari'a, defined  for  purposes  of this  Article  as
Islamic law.'  She enters into a contract with an Islamic bank, pursuant to
which the bank purchases a readily fungible  commodity  and simultane-
ously  resells  it  to  the  entrepreneur  at  a  mark-up,  to  be  paid  in three
months' time.  The mark-up corresponds precisely to the prevailing market
interest rate.  The bank never retains title to the commodity and the entre-
preneur waives all claims as to breach of warranty against the bank, while
the bank assigns to the entrepreneur all such rights it had against the origi-
nal  seller.  Immediately  upon  taking  possession  of the  commodity,  the
entrepreneur resells it at market value, leaving her with a sum certain and
an obligation to pay a higher amount in the future.2
Second, a Muslim airline company wishes to finance  the purchase of
an aircraft, again heedful of the Islamic  prohibition against interest.  An
Islamic bank purchases the aircraft company through an intermediate vehi-
cle funded by the bank's financing and equity contributions.  The interme-
diary then exacts from  the airline a  "lease rate" pegged to the prevailing
market interest rate.  The lease is "renewed" semi-annually  for a period of
twelve years, and the lease rate re-pegged at the time of renewal.  However,
the  contract indicates  that  no party is permitted  to withdraw or fail  to
1. The basis for this ban is discussed extensively in Section IL.E of this Article.
2.  A transaction of this sort, albeit without the  final resale back to the  original
seller, is described in greater detail in Umar F. Moghul & Arshad A. Ahmed, Contractual
Forms In Islamic Finance Law and Islamic Inv. Co. of the Gulf v. Symphony Gems N.V. &
Ors.: A First Impression Of Islamic Finance, 27 FORDHAM  INT'L LJ. 150 (2003).2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
renew prior to the expiration of the twelve year period. The lease includes a
provision indicating that New York law governs the transaction.3
Third, a Muslim shopkeeper needs to insure his store against casualty
risks, notwithstanding the alleged shari'a prohibition against insurance.4
Therefore,  an  Islamic  financial  institution  offers  him  an  alternative;
namely, an allegedly  "charitable" instrument whereby he "donates" a set
amount each month corresponding to a premium, which is then kept in his
name at the institution.  Other  Muslim  participants  in the  scheme offer
similar donations.  When a payout to one of the participants becomes nec-
essary due to a qualifying event, the agreements stipulate that the financial
institution withdraws the requisite amount from the aggregate donations
and distributes  the funds  to  the participant  in  question.  The  donated
funds are invested in profit making ventures and gains are  shared by the
beneficiaries  and the financial institution.
The  first  of these  is  a particularly  egregious  example5  of what  is
known  as  a  murabaha transaction,  which  dominates  the  landscape  of
Islamic finance today.  Over 80% of the current transactions by volume in
Islamic banks are of a murabaha model.6  The second example, known as
an ijara transaction, is a newer and rapidly growing segment of the Islamic
financial sector.7  The third is known as takaful, frequently lauded as an
example  of Islamic financial innovation.8
It should also be obvious that all three of these transactions are largely
artificial.  They are substantively the same as their forbidden counterparts,
albeit with  semantic  alterations  and higher transaction  costs associated
with creating the appearance of difference.  "Charitable insurance" is non-
sense,  as  are  simultaneous  purchases  and re-sales  and renewable  leases
with no option but to renew.  These are awkward constructs to circumvent,
in a  fundamentally  disingenuous fashion, central prohibitions  developed
by the shari'a.
3.  For greater exposition on the application of Islamic principles to modern aircraft
finance, see generally Angelo Luigi Rosa, Harmonizing Risk and Religion: The Utility of
Shari'a-Compliant Transaction Structuring in Commercial Aircraft Finance, 13 MINN.  J.
GLOBAL TRADE 35 (2004).
4.  The problem of uncertainty or  risk in the structuring of Islamic commercial
transactions, including insurance transactions, is discussed at length in Section II.E.
5.  The example I have given involves a procedure known as tawarruq, where the
asset sold and purchased is not only fungible but also resold immediately for its cash
value.  This is a somewhat controversial practice that is nonetheless gaining in popular-
ity and is commonly practiced by Islamic banks on the Arabian peninsula.  See Mah-
moud El-Gamal, Limits and Dangers of Shari'a Arbitrage 9 (2005) available at  http://
www.ruf.rice.edu/-elgamal/files/Arbitrage.pdf.  Moghul and  Ahmed  describe  a  more
conventional, orthodox murabaha structure, where the asset in question, jewelry, is used
by the effective borrower rather than immediately resold.  See Part  1.B.1 infra.
6.  See FRANK E. VOGEL & SAMUEL  L. HAYES III, ISLAMIC LAW AND  FINANCE: RELIGION,
RISK, AND RETURN  198 (1998).
7.  See id. at 144.
8.  See  id. at 152;  see also Ibrahim  Warde,  The Prophet and The Profits: Islamic
Finance, LE MONDE  DIPLOMATIQUE,  Sep. 2001, at http://mondediplo.com/2001/09/09
islamicbanking.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
Some argue that legalistic acrobatics of this sort pose no obstacle to
the development of Islamic finance, given literal adherence to the dictates
of the shari'a9.  For example,  Frank Vogel and Samuel Hayes, who wrote
one of the most authoritative works on Islamic finance in the English lan-
guage,  seem entirely  comfortable  with  the formalisms, fictions and  arti-
fices  that  dominate  the  practice.  They  even  provide  sophisticated
techniques  of their own  that develop  more  fully the  concepts  discussed
above.10  They assert that Islamic finance has not failed, given that Islamic
commercial vehicles, such as the murabaha, are, on the narrowest technical
grounds, based on profit-sharing that arises from the sale and purchase of
assets.1  Underlying this is an assumption by Vogel and Hayes that Islamic
commerce, as currently practiced, satisfies broad segments of Muslim soci-
ety that are "socially and politically conservative, seeking individual piety
and social  mores  built around  traditional  compliance  with fiqh [Islamic
law],  and looks  to social and political improvements mainly as a result of
that."12
This assumption is incorrect.  Vogel and Hayes fundamentally misun-
derstand the cause for the recent explosive  growth in Islamic finance  and
underestimate  its  current  dilemma  in  attempting  to  expand  further.
Though the first Islamic banks came into existence little over three decades
ago, Islamic finance has developed into a significant industry with assets in
excess  of $200  billion  dollars  in  Islamically-approved  financial  instru-
ments, operating in over 70 nations and growing at an annual rate of over
20% per year.13  Yet at the root of such growth, frequently expressed as an
article of faith by Muslim  advocates of Islamic finance, is the perception
that Islamic commercialism provides a fairer, more just, and more humane
alternative to the alleged brutality of the global marketplace.14  Respect for
traditional compliance with Islamic rules is not the touchstone; social jus-
tice is.
This perception  of substantive  fairness and social justice is so wide-
spread and so deep that it is difficult to set forth enough authority in favor
of it to underscore  its centrality  to modern Islamic finance.  Three quite
distinct Islamic figures who were central to the development of Islamic eco-
nomics  refer repeatedly  to  notions of social justice  and fairness  in their
descriptions  of  Islamic  economics,  and  in  particular  Islamic  financial
methods.15  These figures  are, without exception, revolutionaries  and by
9.  See, e.g., IBRAHIM WARDE,  ISLAMIC  FINANCE IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY (2000).
10.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 235-87.
11.  See id. at 137.
12.  Id. at 27 n.2.
13.  See WARDE,  supra note 9, at 1, 75.  Malaysia, a nation with a highly developed
Islamic financial system, has alone in excess of $23 billion in Islamic assets, and reports
growth in excess of 42% over the past decade.  See Seelen Sakran, The Future of Islamic
Banking, MALAYSIAN BuSINESS, Jan.  15, 2005, at 55.
14.  See, e.g.,  Moghul & Ahmed, supra 2, at 153.
15.  See Mahmoud El-Gamal, "Interest" and the Paradox of Contemporary Islamic Law
and Finance, 27 FoRDHAM  INT'L L.J.  108, 115, 120 (2003).  Naturally, economics is a far
broader  discipline  than finance,  and  the  author does not suggest their  equivalence.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
no means fit the model described by Vogel and Hayes of political and eco-
nomic  conservatives  seeking  modest  social  and  political  improvements
through  traditional adherence to the shari'a.16
The first of these, Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr, the thoughtful Shi'i Iraqi
jurist who authored a highly influential tome on Islamic economics, as well
as the seminal intellectual contribution to the creation of an interest-free
bank in Islam, makes the point  repeatedly in his writings.17  Sadr's goal
was the establishment of an economic order entirely separate from the pre-
vailing paradigms of capitalism and Marxism.18  The same can be said for
the militant  Sayyid Qutb, whose influence  on radical Islamic movements
remains vibrant.19  Many  of Qutb's economic  theories appear  in a book
entitled Social Justice in Islam.20  His assault on interest is particularly stri-
dent. He describes those who take usury as being without "conscience" or
"ethics.''21  Finally, the highly influential Pakistani Islamist, Sayyed Abulala
Maudoodi,  describes taking interest in almost Marxist  terms, suggesting
that it  increases  maldistributions  of wealth  and perpetuates  class  strug-
gle.22  Maudoodi saw the only solution as being the establishment of what
he termed  an  "Islamic theo-democracy,"  hardly  the words  of a political
23
conservative.
These are by no means the sole contributors to the notion of fairness
and social justice in  the context of Islamic  finance.  Other later, deeply
respected and much less revolutionary figures have said much the same.
However, Islamic notions of finance play an important role in Islamic economics, and
inevitably, proponents of Islamic economics emphasize  the fairness  of both.
16.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 26.
17.  See MUHAMMAD  BAQIR AS-SADR, IQTISADUNA 60-65 (World Org. for Islamic Services
trans.,  1982)  (1969)  [hereinafter IQTISADUNA]  (describing social justice as one of the
cornerstones of Islamic economics); see also MUHAMMAD  BAQIR AS-SADR,  AL-BANK AL-LA
RIBAWI  Fl 'L-ISLAM 6-7 (1973)  [hereinafter  AL-BANK]  (referring to a form of distributive
justice as being a principal objective of Islamic economics, and to the Islamic bank as
being a key component of the economic system).  Though a Shi'i jurist, Sadr's effect on
the world of Islamic finance  and Islamic economics  in the broader  Islamic world has
been significant.  Hamid Algar describes Sadr's works as "the most substantial treatment
of social justice in Islam."  Hamid Algar, Introduction to SAYYID QUTB,  SOCIAl JUSTICE IN
ISLAM 12 (John B.  Hardie & Hamid Algar trans., 2000) (1949).  See CHIBLI MALLAT, THE
RENEWAL  OF ISLAMIC LAW  142-43 (1993).
18.  See id. at 113-16; see generally IQTISADUNA,  supra note 17.
19.  See JOHN L. ESPOSITO,  UNHOLY  WAR:  TERROR IN THE NAME  OF ISLAM  52  (2002)
(describing Qutb as the "godfather" of contemporary Islamic radicalism); see also Ber-
nard K. Freamon, Martyrdom, Suicide, and the Islamic Law of War, 27 FORDHAM INT'L LJ.
299, 348-50 (2003) (describing Qutb's influence).  It is important to note that my com-
parison of these three different individuals is in one respect alone-they are all revolut-
ionaries who may be fairly described as the forefathers of Islamic economics and Islamic
finance.  See EI-Gamal, supra note 15, at 115.
20.  SAYYID  QUTB,  SOCIAL JUSTICE  IN ISLAM  101-42  (John B.  Hardie  trans.,  1953)
(1949).
21.  Id. at 107.
22.  See SAYYED ABULALA MAUDOODI, ECONOMIC PROBLEM OF MAN AND ITS ISLAMIC SOLU-
TION 27-31 (Abdul Waheed Khan trans., Markaz MaktabaJama'at-e-lslami 2d ed. 1955)
(1947).
23.  SAYYED  ABULALA MAUDOODI, AL-KHILAFA WA-AL MULK  13-21 (Ahmad Idris trans.,
Daar al-Qalam  1978).Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
Muhammad Taqi Usmani, a former judge on the Shari'a Appellate Bench of
the  Pakistani  Supreme  Court,  indicates  much  like  Maudoodi  that  the
charging of interest is partially responsible  for the massive wealth dispari-
ties in  capitalist societies.24  Umer Chapra,  an economist  at the Islamic
Development  Bank  in Jeddah,  Saudi Arabia,  and  one  of the most well-
known  and  prolific  advocates  oi Islamic  finance  in  the  Muslim world,
makes notions  of social justice central  to  his robust  defense  of Islamic
finance.25  Muhammad  Nejatullah  Siddiqi,  a  professor  of economics  in
Saudi Arabia, opens one of his most well-known books on Islamic econom-
ics with the sentence ". . .the main insight offered by Islamic economics is
that ethics matters,'26 and another of his books opens with the sentence
"[b]y prohibiting interest Islam has endeavoured to do away with a hideous
form of tyranny and injustice prevalent in the human society.'27  Timur
Kuran, an expert on and critic of Islamic economics, describes the prohibi-
tion of interest as "the most celebrated" injunction in Islamic economics by
proponents  of the  discipline.28  Kuran  indicates  that  these  proponents
ground  the injunction on the principle of fairness.29  Ordinary Muslims
are  captivated  by  this perception  and are  shocked when,  in  seeking  to
obtain Islamic financing, they discover the ruse.30
Proponents of Islamic finance often repeat the same functional objec-
tives of fairness and social justice, but do not employ appropriate method-
ological  techniques  to  achieve  these  goals.  An  altogether  different
approach is used, one that claims its origins in the earliest foundations of
Islamic jurisprudence  and  relies instead  on a rigid formalism, in which
public interest and judicial discretion play a very limited role.31  Given the
24.  See MUHAMMAD TAQ1 USMANI, AN INTRODUCTION  To ISLAMIC FINANCE (1998).  This
is not a surprise given Usmani's links to the militant party led by Maudoodi.  See El-
Gamal, supra note  15, at 115 n.19.  However, Usmani served in a high capacity in the
Pakistani courts while Maudoodi was at one point sentenced to death in Pakistan, so it
would be fair to describe Usmani as less militant and revolutionary.
25.  See, e.g.,  M. UMER CHAPRA, TOWARDS A JUST MONETARY SYSTEM  (1985).
26.  MUHAMMAD NEJATULLAH SIDDIQI, ECONOMICS:  AN ISLAMIC APPROACH,  at iii (2001).
Siddiqi's critique concerns economic affairs generally, not just merely finance.  How-
ever, finance still plays an important role in his analysis.  See, e.g.,  id. at 85-86.
27.  See generally MUHAMMAD  NEJATULLAH SIDDIQI,  BANKING  wAIT HOUT INTEREST,  at x
(1979).
28.  Timur Kuran, On the Notion of Economic Justice in ContemporaryI slamic Thought,
21 INT'L J. MIDDLE E. STUD.  171,  174 (1989).
29.  See id.
30.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 26 n.2. In addition, the author has observed
that many mosques and Muslim institutions in the United States refuse to deposit their
funds in Islamic banks upon realizing the nature of the transactions into which they
would be entering.  More than one has called the author in anger and disgust, asking to
be directed to "real" Islamic financial institutions.  For a typical Muslim expression of
this perception,  as well  as the frustrations  associated with it, see Tarek  El  Diwany,
Islamic Banking Isn't Islamic, June,  2003, http://www.islamic-finance.com/itemlOO_f.
htm ("[T]he words 'profit-sharing' are to be heard constantly at all of the conferences [on
Islamic finance].  Some of the scholars, if pressed, will talk about moving towards more
satisfactory  products  . . . .But  then  everyone  goes  home  and works  on  another
murabaha contract.").
31.  Whether  this type of logic-driven and rigid formalism is inherent to the entire
history of Islamic jurisprudence is a matter much in dispute.  See infra Part II.A.2007  Langde~lianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
disparity between the functional ends and the formalist means employed to
reach  them,  Islamic  finance  fails  to  meet  the expectations  set  for  it.32
Rather  than  offering  any  sort of  alternative  humanistic  means  of con-
ducting  commercial  activity,  the  practice  instead  has devolved  into an
almost random patchwork of rules that are neither cohesive nor coherent.
These inflexible and nondiscretionary  rules are  artificially  forced  into a
paradigm to achieve ends for which they provide at best an awkward fit. As
a result, they seem arbitrary  and senseless, designed  for no purpose and
serving no function other than to complicate already elaborate commercial
transactions.  Social justice and avoidance  of exploitation  play no signifi-
cant role.  In Islamic finance, religion largely serves to obfuscate and com-
plicate  at  some  expense,  while  simultaneously  and  disingenuously
asserting highly exaggerated claims of equity and social justice.33
This Article  considers  two issues.  First, it seeks to  provide  a more
precise  description  of  the  jurisprudential  methodology  employed  in
Islamic  finance  that  has  led  to  its  failure.  The  dominant  interpretive
approach within contemporary Islamic jurisprudence, and Islamic finance
in particular, shares many common features with the jurisprudential theo-
ries of Christopher Columbus Langdell.  Both approaches  are excessively
rigid and dependent on formal exercises of logic,34 allowing the jurist or
32.  This disparity between Langdellian means and functional ends was not lost on
the original founders, and each made an attempt to compensate for this by accommodat-
ing public interest to some extent in their respective theories of economics.  For example,
Sadr indicates that contemporary jurists must engage in robust independent juristic rea-
soning to develop some of the rules of Islamic economics, clearly envisioning discretion
and public interest as an implicit part of that process.  See IQTISADUNA,  supra note 17, at
364-90; see also infra Part IV.B.3.  Qutb, at least in earlier editions of his work, Social
Justice in Islam, references the importance of public interest in developing contemporary
rules. See Hamid Algar, supra note 17, at 14-15.  Finally, Maudoodi's notion of a "theo-
democracy" is an attempt to combine Islamic norms with the demands of modern soci-
ety.  MAUDOODI, supra note 22.  Only Sadr comes close to developing a methodology that
incorporates these principles.  See infra Part IV.  Perhaps because they died when Islamic
banking was either not in existence (in the case of Qutb) or in its infancy (in the cases of
Sadr and Maudoodi), none of the three grasps the extent to which  some of the most
basic prohibitions they embrace, including the interest ban, render Islamic finance not
simply inconvenient but also entirely impracticable in the modern era. As a result, the
relative functional flexibility they espouse could not possibly succeed, unless it develops
further to encompass those basic prohibitions,  as this Article seeks to do in Part IV
hereof.
33.  Others made related observations on Islamic economics and finance, though not
so much from a legal perspective.  See, e.g., EI-Gamal, supra note 15, at 135-36; OLIVIER
Roy, THE FAILURE OF POLITICAL ISLAM,  132-46 (Carol Volk trans., 1994) (1992); MAXIME
RODINSON, ISLAM AND CAPITALISM (Brian Pearce trans., 1973) (1966); TIMUR KURAN, ISLAM
AND  MAMMON:  THE  ECONOMIC  PREDICAMENTS  OF  ISLAMISM  (2004).  Kuran  describes
Islamic economics as "simplistic, incoherent and largely irrelevant to present economic
challenges."  See USC Today, Conversation  With Timur Kuran, Dec.  18,  2006, http://
www.usc.edu/uscnews/stories/13215.html.
34.  It is important to note that the failings of Islamic finance are not necessarily due
to formalism per se, but to the type of logic-driven formalism characteristic of Langdel-
lianism.  For example, Justice Scalia unapologetically embraces a certain type of neo-
formalism based upon a strictly textual interpretation of statutes and the U.S. Constitu-
tion.  See ANTONIN  SCALIA, A MATTER OF INTERPRETATION:  FEDERAL  COURTS  AND THE LAW
23-25 (1997).  However, Scalia makes abundantly clear that his approach does not con-Cornell International Law Journal Vol.  40
judge comparatively little interpretive control over the development of legal
35
rules.
Second, it seeks to explain how Islamic principles might be used in a
more  salutary  fashion  in  finance,  avoiding  unnecessarily  the  elaborate
obfuscations  and  complications  that  serve  no  practical  purpose  while
achieving some  modicum  of social justice in  an Islamic  setting.36  The
more extreme forms of Legal Realism are not a workable solution in light of
the nature of religious jurisprudence and the deep, historic importance of
giving some role to Islamic doctrine and sacred text in developing Islam's
legal rules.  Rather than attempt a comprehensive alternative methodology,
this Article seeks to outline principles necessary for any credible attempt at
reform and will provide specific examples of how such principles might be
applied.  In so doing, it will become apparent that the changes necessary to
cern itself with the development of judge-made common law, such as that described by
Langdell; rather, he suggests that the role of such judge-made law in the modern era of a
democratically elected legislature should be severely curtailed.  See id. at 3-14. Scalia is
critical of legal education,  as developed by Langdell, on the grounds that it creates a
legal culture wherein there is an understanding that a judge plays a significant role in
creating  the  law rather  than simply  interpreting a law  created and implemented by
others. See id. Therefore, Scalia's formalist and textualist approach presupposes a dem-
ocratically elected legislature accountable to the general public that continually enacts
laws as it sees fit.  This approach is very different from the logic-driven quasi-scientific
judge or jurist driven  inquiry, which plagued Langdellianism  in its time and plagues
Islamic finance today.
35.  No area of modern Islamic law, as currently applied, is immune to this same
criticism, but the doctrinal failings are more obvious in Islamic finance.  In alternative
legal  realms where  the shari'a  dominates  the modern Islamic world, the  concern of
developing consistent legal tools sensitive to both social justice and modern contextual
realities is less prominent.  An excellent example is in the Islamic personal law, which is
patently, unambiguously  and without exception biased  in favor of males  within the
traditional interpretive Islamic approaches.  See, e.g., WEISS, THE SPIRIT OF ISLAMIC LAW
188 (1998);  Abdullahi A. An-Na'im, Islam and Human Rights: Beyond the Universality
Debate, 94 Am. Soc'Y  INT'L L. 95, 97-100 (2000); NOEL J. COULSON,  SUCCESSION  IN THE
MUSLIM FAMILY (1971); JOHN L. ESPOSITO, WOMEN IN MUSLIM FAMILY  LAW 12-46 (2d ed.
2001);  Donna E. Arzt, The Application of International Human Rights Law in Islamic
States, 12 HUM. RTs. Q. 202, 208 (1990).  In many Islamic nations in the world today,
these rules generally apply, though exceptions exist.  See, e.g., WEISS, supra note 35, at
188; RENE DAVID  & JOHN E.  C. BRIERLEY, MAJOR LEGAL SYSTEMS IN THE WORLD TODAY 438
(2d ed. 1978).  However, the rigorous and extensive demands of the modern commercial
marketplace that so shape Islamic doctrine in the area of finance play a less direct role in
the development of personal law.  See generally EsposITo, supra note 35.  Thus, rather
than conform  to changed circumstances  through  artifice, jurists instead  continue to
apply personal law as it has always been applied.  See id.
36.  The author does not suggest that any form of social justice or fairness would
satisfy the Muslim  demand for a unique brand  of finance.  Naturally, those Muslims
attracted to a concept such as Islamic finance take Islamic doctrine very seriously and
would want any financial  institution in which they invest to have a uniquely Islamic
character. See id. at 101-2 (indicating that the desire to retain a distinct cultural identity
drives much of Islamic economics); see also infra Part IV.A.  Nevertheless, though iden-
tity politics  play  a  role  in developing  a  unique  form  of finance  understood  to be
"Islamic," social and economic justice play an equally important, if not more important,
role.  Moreover, the author's recommendations in Part IV do not call for the elimination
of culturally distinct Islamic financial institutions, but rather their reexamination in a
way that would permit them to serve the social justice and fairness goals that Muslims
seek and that proponents of Islamic finance advertise.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
develop an interpretive system, which will achieve  the objectives of Islamic
finance, are not as vast as might be imagined.
This Article illustrates its two central  themes  through an admittedly
contentious  comparison37 of the jurisprudential  theories of Langdell and
Muhammad Ibn Idris al-Shafi'i, the person credited by the dominant con-
temporary proponents of Islamic finance  as responsible  for systematizing
the Islamic jurisprudence they use.  Their respective jurisprudential inter-
pretive  systems, which the author shall call  "modalities," are  remarkably
similar, both in terms of methodology and the consequences flowing from
the application thereof. The author accepts Sherman Jackson's description
of the  American jurisprudential  tradition as  being "uniquely  and  abun-
dantly rich in analytical tools and methods for inquiring into the nature,
function, problems and possibilities of law."'38  The use of these tools, and
the application of this comparative approach, provides useful insights for
the American legal scholar on the basic and essential flaws in the domi-
nant Langdellian  interpretive trends  that inhere to modern Islamic juris-
prudence.  As Professor  Fletcher  notes,  these tools  suggest solutions  to
seemingly  intractable  legal  problems  that  might  not  otherwise  be
39
apparent.
Part I of this Article  discusses  the basic jurisprudential  theories  of
Christopher  Columbus  Langdell,  and  then  describes  the  reasons  that
37.  Despite the similarities in their respective approaches, the author has found only
one other  comparison  of Shafi'i to Christopher  Columbus Langdell,  but  this effort
shows substantial limitations and is largely incomplete. See Amr A. Shalakany, The Ana-
lytics of the Social in Private Law Theory: A Comparative Study 142-59 (1990) (unpub-
lished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University) (on file with UMI's Dissertation Abstracts
database).  For example, Shalakany does not assign nearly the same fundamental impor-
tance to hadith in Shafi'i's jurisprudential system that this Article does, a puzzling omis-
sion given the importance  of the hadith to  Shafi'i himself.  See id.; see also WAEL  B.
HALLAQ, A HISTORY OF ISLAMIc  LEGAL THEORIES 29 (1997) (remarking that, as compared
to the discussions on hadith, "[njearly everything  else  [in Shafi'i's seminal work, Al-
Risala,] seems tangential").  Moreover, Shalakany tends to regard Islamic analogical rea-
soning, or qiyas, as somehow deductive  in nature, similar to  the deductive logic that
Langdell employed  to  derive his rules  from fundamental  principles.  See  Shalakany,
supra note 37, at 149-50.  This Article takes almost an opposite approach, arguing that
qiyas expands the specific hadith into Langdellian fundamental principles, and the type
of demonstrable,  Cartesian deduction insisted upon by Langdell did not exist in the
Islamic context.  Shalakany's comparison is limited in other ways as well.  For example,
he properly shows how both Langdell and Shafi'i created formal systems of law based on
logic.  However, he fails to contrast the systems in any methodological level of detail,
both in deriving the proper cases and in expanding those cases into fundamental princi-
ples or fundamental rules from which all law would be developed.  See id.  Finally and
most importantly, Shalakany does not, and given the lack of methodological detail could
not, provide any contrast on the development of particular legal rules under the respec-
tive systems, nor does he, nor could he, compare the resulting failures of Langdellianism
in the two contexts.  To be fair to Shalakany, these were not his aims, as his very interest-
ing and thorough dissertation  fundamentally concerns  the development of legal con-
sciousness in the United States and Egypt, not the failures of the respective interpretive
systems.  See id. at 108-09.
38.  Sherman A. Jackson, Fiction and Formalism: Toward a Functional Analysis of Usul
al-Fiqh, in STUDIES IN IstAmc LEGAL THEORY 177, 180 (Bernard G. Weiss ed., 2002).
39.  See George P. Fletcher, Comparative  Law as a Subversive  Discipline, 46 AM.  J.
CoMp.  L. 683, 695-97 (1999).Cornell International Law Journal Vol.  40
Langdellianism ultimately fell from favor.  Part II describes the Langdellian
formalist  modalities  operating  in Islamic  finance  allegedly  developed  by
Shafi'i,40 and then compares them to Langdellianism in terms of method-
ological  approach.  Specific  examples relating  to commerce  are  also pro-
vided  in Part  II  to demonstrate  how the  Islamic  Langdellian  modalities
function in Islamic finance.  Part III outlines the principal rules governing
contemporary  Islamic  finance  through  application  of  the  Langdellian
modalities, and then discusses how the existence of these financial rules
results in the establishment of a bizarre and highly artificial construct that
fails to address the social justice concerns central to the creation of Islamic
banking and finance.  Part IV discusses the principles that any alternative
approach must follow to be faithful to the Islamic tradition and capable of
achieving the central ontological  objective of fairness in a commercially
practicable manner.
I.  The Rise and Fall of Langdellian Legal Orthodoxy
A.  Langdellian Methodology and Attendant Implications
Christopher Columbus Langdell has been widely credited as the crea-
tor of the classical and orthodox theory of American jurisprudence.41  The
basic thesis of Langdellianism is that law is a science, akin to the natural
sciences, and that the relevant data set for the science of law are cases.42
From proper  selection of the specimen  cases,43  the legal  scientist could
derive  the  few,  general  fundamental  legal  principles  that  exist through
44
inductive reasoning.
The legal principles so derived functioned as the constituent ontologi-
cal units within the construct.45  From  them, through  the rigorous  and
almost Cartesian application of logic and deductive  reasoning, a series of
clear specific rules would be derived that would govern any given case.46
The specific rules themselves were formalistic in conception, meaning that
they were framed in a manner that made their application uncontroversial
when applied to  stipulated facts.47  The rules would then be the bases of
40.  Unfortunately,  although  references  to  Shi'ism  and  Shi'i  scholars,  such  as
Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, appear in this Article,  Shi'i Islamic jurisprudence generally
lies beyond its purview.
41.  See, e.g.,  GRANT  GILMORE,  THE AGES  OF  AMERICAN  LAW  42 (1977);  Thomas C.
Grey, Langdell's Orthodoxy, 45 U. PITT. L. REV.  1, 2 (1983); Pierre Schlag, Law and Phre-
nology, 110 H~Av. L. REV. 877, 896 (1997).
42.  See GILMORE, supra note 41, at 42.
43.  Langdell asserted that the vast majority cases would not be worthy of study and
might even prove "worse than useless."  C.C. Langdell, Preface to the First Edition of A
SELECTION OF CASES ON THE LAW OF CONTRACTS, at viii-ix (2d ed., Boston, Little, Brown &
Co. 1879).  However, the fundamental principles that exist in the law could be discov-
ered from studying the properly selected cases. See id. at viii-ix.  Interestingly, however,
Langdell never specified the means by which these proper cases could be identified.
44.  See Stephen M.  Feldman, From Premodern to Modern American Jurisprudence:
The Onset of Positivism, 50 VAND.  L. REv.  1387, 1428 (1997).
45.  See Schlag, supra note 41, at 898.
46.  See Feldman, supra note 44, at 1428; see also Grey, supra note 41, at 16-21.
47.  See id. at 11.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
decision-making in future cases.48
Three  important  consequences  flow  from  the Langdellian jurispru-
dential modalities that resonate in the Islamic context. First, the modalities
possess an inherent disdain for any notion of judicial discretion.  They sup-
pose that capable judges  can deduce the applicable  formal rule from the
established  principles  in  an uncontroversial  manner.49  To  the Langdel-
lians, the notion that a judge would have any discretion in the deductive
application of the rule would be abhorrent, as it would render the law an
50
unscientific discipline.
Second, the Langdellian  modalities do not consider public welfare  or
public interest when rule-making for precisely the same reason.  Langdell
famously remarked that though the "mailbox rule," whereby an acceptance
to a contract offer is deemed given on the date it is placed in the mailbox,
might be more  in  the public  interest, this  fact was  "irrelevant" because
Langdellian logic made it impossible for a contract to exist before  accept-
ance was communicated to the offeror.51  This position drew the criticism
of Holmes, who famously retorted that the life of the law was not logic, but
52
experience.
Finally,  Langdellianism  is  largely impervious  to broader social  and
economic developments.  Fixed, immutable, and abstract principles simply
cannot form the ontological units of a jurisprudential modality that would
admit extensive  social  change.53  Langdellianism  was  designed  to  "dis-
cover" rules that admitted no possibility of evolution or development, and
consequently could not keep pace with rapidly changing social, political
54
and economic circumstances.
B.  The Failures of Langdellianism in the Modern Era
There  are four  principal reasons  that the Langdellian  modality  ulti-
mately "crumbled,"  to use Gilmore's  phrase,  replaced by jurisprudential
theories that relied less on pure logic, and more on discretion and experi-
ence, to develop and hone legal rules.55  First, the few fundamental princi-
ples and doctrines upon which the Langdellians  placed so much reliance
failed  to  materialize,  as  they were  under constant  revision  and  supple-
48.  See id. at 20-21.  There was a circularity to the reasoning, as cases provided the
bases upon which the principles were induced and rules derived, but the  rules also
provided the bases upon which cases were to be decided. For an analysis of this circular-
ity and the potential means by which it might be addressed, see id. at 20-24.
49.  See id. at 11-12 (describing the system as "doubly formal" as a result).
50.  See GILMORE, supra note 41, at 42-43.
51.  C.C. LANGDELL, A SUMMARY  OF THE LAW OF CONTRACTS  20-21  (2d ed.  1880).
52.  See Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  Book Notices,  14 AM.  L.  REV.  233,  234  (1880)
(reviewing C.C. LANGDELL,  A SELECTION OF CASES  ON THE LAW OF CONTRACTS (1879)).
53.  See GILMORE, supra note 41, at 42-43. One commentator posits a potential means
of development whereby new principles are "discovered" from existing case law and
rules derived, but even he admits that such a process is inherently slow and strains at
the foundational elements of the Langdellian jurisprudential modality.  Grey, supra note
41, at 31-33.
54.  GILMORE, supra note 41, at 43.
55.  Id. at 68.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
ment.56  Secondly, judges faced with difficult cases often found two con-
flicting principles equally  applicable.  Cardozo went so far as  to suggest
that discretion was inherent in the judicial enterprise.57  This position was
radical for its time.58
Moreover,  considerations  of public policy or justice were  never sup-
pressed, as judges or juries would simply neglect to  apply them, finding
one way or another to reach the result that seemed more just or practical.59
Finally, Langdellianism failed to keep pace with rapid social change in the
beginning of the century due to its insistence  on timeless principles.  It
became,  to paraphrase  Langdell  himself, largely  "irrelevant"  as a swiftly
changing  polity  required  a  new  legal  architecture  and jurisprudential
modality to develop rules more consonant with the reality in which mod-
ern actors tended to find themselves.60  The notion that sixteenth century
legal decisions would  continue to govern life in the post-industrial world
could simply not be sustained.
II.  Langdellian Modalities in the Islamic Experience
A.  Historical Qualification
Islamic jurists, like American judges purporting to apply common law
many centuries old, are not historians.  They often work at cross-purposes
to history, relying on highly stylized  accounts that are, at best, simplistic
and reductive and, at worst, inaccurate, to legitimize the jurisprudence on
which they rely.  However,  these narratives  are ingrained in the legal  cul-
ture and serve as the engine of jurisprudential development.
There can be no doubt that contemporary traditionalist Islamic schol-
ars, including those that operate in the realm of Islamic finance, adhere to
what they consider the solely authentic brand of shari'a with its origins in
the  dawn of Islam.61  These  scholars  also  overwhelmingly  credit  Shafi'i
56.  For a contemporaneous critique of precisely this phenomenon, see Thurman W.
Arnold, Institute Priests and Yale Observers-A Reply to Dean Goodrich, 84 U. PA. L. REV.
811, 820-821 (1936).
57.  See BENJAMIN N. CARDozo,  THE NATURE  OF THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 166-67 (1946).
58.  See GILMORE, supra note 41, at 77.
59.  See Grey, supra note 41, at 45.
60.  See id. at 39.
61.  See MOHAMMAD  TAQI  USMANI,  AN APPROACH  TO THE QUR'ANIC  SCIENCES  433-34
(Mohammad Swaleh Siddiqui trans., Rafiq Abdur Rehman ed., 2000) (describing rules
derived under the  Langdellian  modalities, including those of interest, as having been
established and agreed upon for over 1400 years, thereby dating it as being developed in
Muhammad's time). Usmani has served on the Pakistani Bench and on the boards of a
number of Islamic banks. See MUHAMMAD ABU ZAHRA, USUL AL-FIQH 8-12 (1969); see also
BADRAN ABu AL-AYNAYN  BADRAN, USUL AL-FIQH 5-12 (1965) (indicating that the modali-
ties' origins principally lie in the  period immediately  following Muhammad's death).
Badran and Abu Zahra have produced highly influential works on Islamic jurispruden-
tial methodologies.  See  MOHAMMAD  HASHIM  KAMALI,  PRINCIPLES  OF  ISLAMIC JURISPRU-
DENCE,  at xvi  (2003)  (using Abu  Zahra  and  Badran  as principal references  on the
modalities used to derive the shari'a). In addition, the author has heard frequent refer-
ences in several Iraqi law schools to Abu Zahra and Badran as two of the most authorita-
tive voices on Sunni Islamic modalities in the modern world.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
with development  of the  methodology  they use  to  derive  the shari'a.62
Therefore, most would not simply credit Shafi'i as the founder of Islamic
jurisprudence but would go further and indicate that Shafi'i did not found
the jurisprudence  so much as set down in writing (dawwana) a modality
that existed from Islam's  earliest days.  This distinction  consecrated the
modality as an elemental part of the Islamic faith rather than the ex post
interpretations of jurists, such as Shafi'i, who lived two or more centuries
after Muhammad's  death.63
More  reform-minded  Muslims would  not agree with  this  idea  of a
sacred jurisprudence, as significant evolution of Islamic doctrine requires
reexamination  of  the Islamic  legend  concerning  shari'a development.64
Moreover, his historical account is simplistic  and almost certainly inaccu-
rate in many respects.  Shafi'i's role in developing the jurisprudence is one
area of contention.65  Another would be the extent to which formalist rigid-
62.  See, e.g., ABU  ZAHRA, supra note 61, at 12-14 (1969);  BADRAN, supra note 61, at
11-12; M. Cherif Bassiouni & Gamal M. Badr, The Shari'ah:S ources, Interpretation, and
Rule-Making, I  UCLA J.  ISLAMIC &  NEAR E. L.  135,  136-37 (describing, in admirable
detail, the modern understanding of Islamic jurisprudence and methodologies used to
derive it; crediting Shafi'i with systematizing this dominant methodology; and indicating
that Shafi'i is commonly considered the founder of Islamic jurisprudence).
63.  See BADRAN,  supra note 61, at 11-12; ("And Shafi'i was faced with great juristic
riches from the Companions and Successors  to the Apostle of God  [Muhammad]  and
thus we cannot say before these great riches anything other than that Shafi'i set down in
writing the  bases that the riches  focus upon.")  (translated by author);  see also ABU
ZAHRA, supra note 61, at 12 (using the same verb, dawanna, to describe Shafi'i's achieve-
ment); Bassiouni & Badr, supra note 62, at 136.  Cf. KAMALI,  supra note 61, at 4-6 (argu-
ing that most Islamic methodological principles employed today largely predate Shafi'i,
but nonetheless crediting him with founding the modality).
64.  Abdullahi  An-Na'im  has  made the  point  repeatedly  in his writings  that the
shari'a is not an inherently divine code of conduct, but rather a fundamentally norma-
tive rather than legal code with roots in the divine, ultimately interpreted and applied by
humans throughout history and consequently subject to manipulation and error.  See,
e.g., An-Na'im, supra note 35, at 97 ("While Muslims tend to ascribe divine authority to
historical formulations of shari'ab y jurists of the eighth and ninth centuries, it is clear
that the precise content of that normative system has always been, and will continue to
be, the  product of human understanding  in specific  historical context");  ABDULLAHI
AHMED AN-NA'IM,  TOWARD AN  ISLAMIC REFORMATION:  CIVIL LIBERTIES, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL  LAW  11-33 (1990).  An-Na'im  indicates that unless Muslims dissociate
the divine origin of the shari'a from the continuing human efforts to interpret it, Islam
cannot play a positive role in the lives of Muslims. See An-Na'im, supra note 35, at 97.
This is emphatically true in the case of Islamic finance.
65.  Much scholarship, including the work of the most respected and influential Ori-
entalists of the last century, emphasizes the ultimate influence of Shafi'i and dubs him
the father of Islamic jurisprudence. JOSEPH SCHACHT, ORIGINS OF MUHAMMADAN  JURISPRU-
DENCE  11  (1950);  NOEL J.  COULSON,  A HISTORY  OF  ISLAMIC  LAW  59  (1964);  IGNAZ
GOLDZIHER,  INTRODUCTION  TO  ISLAMIC  THEOLOGY  AND  LAW  21  (Hamori trans.,  1981).
Some recent scholars, however, and most prominently Wael Hallaq, indicate that this is
largely historical fiction, and that Shafi'i had at best a minor role in the development of
Islamic jurisprudence.  See generally Wael Hallaq, Was Al-Shafi'i the Master Architect of
Islamic Jurisprudence?, 25 INT'L J.  OF MIDDLE E.  STUD.  587  (1993).  Others interpret
Shafi'i's work differently, with Jackson considering him to be an anti-formalist (and an
Arabist bigot) and another commentator insisting that he never intended to create a legal
system with four identifiable sources of law. Jackson, supra note 38, at 187-91;Joseph E.
Lowry, Does Shafi'i Have a Theory of Four Sources of Law?, in STUDIES  IN ISLAMIC LEGAL
THEORY 23-50 (Bernard G. Weiss ed., 2002).Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
ity is truly faithful to classical Islamic interpretive theory.  M.  Cherif Bas-
siouni, a renowned expert on international criminal law, has indicated that
classical Islamic criminal law was by its nature "policy oriented", even if in
the contemporary  era it is often applied  in a "rigid and repressive" fash-
ion.66  Mohammad Fadel and Sherman Jackson have been in the forefront
of work concerning the development  of classical Islamic law that suggests
that it was far more flexible and discretionary than once believed.67
Nevertheless, to the extent that particular modern Islamic interpretive
modalities rely on ahistorical legends to sustain them, they are little differ-
ent from the historical myths common in the United States. Among such
American  myths  are  the  dubious  historical  propositions  that  seminal
Supreme Court cases fundamental to American legal culture, such as Mar-
bury v.  Madison and Lochner v. New York,  respectively stand for the estab-
lishment of judicial review and as a cautionary tale about the dangers of
judicial overreaching on the basis of a fashionable social or economic the-
ory.68  The work undertaken to uncover these legends in the Islamic and
American contexts is, without question, worthy and commendable for any
variety of reasons, but for purposes of this Article, irrelevant.
The author instead elects to engage the stylized historical narrative of
Islamic jurisprudential history on its own terms, as it ultimately controls
the  hermeneutic  and  points  the  way  towards  enactment  of  necessary,
organic  and  workable  adjustments  to  the shari'a. Therefore,  the author
emphasizes that the narrative related herein is a reconstruction of Shafi'i,
presupposing the role that Islamic finance proponents give him as setting
down in writing  their modality, and describing his views within the con-
straints  of  those  assumptions.  The  description  is  not, by  any  means,
intended to be a historically  faithful rendition of this controversial  figure,
66.  M. Cherif Bassiouni, Sources of Islamic Law and the Protection of Human Rights in
the Islamic Criminal Justice System,  in ISLAMIC CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM 5 (1982).
67.  See, e.g., Mohammad Fadel, Istihsan is Nine-Tenths of the Law: The Puzzling Rela-
tionship of Usul to Furu' in the Maliki Madhhab, in STUDIES IN IsLAMIC LAW AND SOCIETY
161-76 (Bernard G. Weiss ed., 2002); Jackson, supra note 38, at 180; MOHAMMAD FADEL,
ADJUDICATION  IN THE MALIKI MADHAB; A STUDY OF LEGAL PROCESS IN MEDIEVAL ISLAMIC LAW
(1995);  Sherman Jackson,  ISLAMIC  LAW AND  THE STATE:  THE CONSTITUTIONAL JURISPRU-
DENCE OF SHIHAB AL-DIN  AL-QARAFI  (1996).
68.  See Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. 137 (1803); see also Lochner v. New York, 198
U.S. 45 (1905); Michael W. McConnell, The Story of Marbury v. Madison: Making Defeat
Look Like Victory, in CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW  STORIES  13-32 (Michael C. Dorf ed.,  2004);
David E. Bernstein, The Story of Lochner v. New York:  Impediment to the Growth of the
Regulatory State, in CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW STORIES  325-58 (Michael C. Dorf ed., 2004).
Marbury is the more instructive example, given its centrality to American jurisprudence.
Historical research seems to demonstrate that John Marshall is not the father of judicial
review, and that Marbury did not intend to establish judicial review, a doctrine which
was in its day uncontroversial and utterly unremarkable.  See McConnell, supra note 68.
Therefore, the narrative, told to every incoming law student and universally accepted as
fact by the bar and bench alike, of a clever Chief Justice ruling in the face of a hostile
President to expand judicial power considerably, appears to be without historical basis.
See id.  It perhaps was concocted at a later date by a legal culture eager to anchor this
vitally important doctrine in early Supreme  Court precedent through a compelling, if
historically false, narrative.  See id.  Storytelling, it seems, is not unique to the Islamic
context.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
or of the rich and multifaceted jurisprudence that developed in the classi-
cal era after him.69
B.  Shafi'i and the Formalist Modalities in the Methodology of Hadith
Reporting
ShafiTs  central  thesis, developed in his seminal work, AI-Risala, and
elsewhere,  is that revelation  is comprehensive,  determinative,  and  com-
plete.70  Revelation includes not only the Qur'an but also the hadith, or the
specific utterances of Muhammad.71  This inclusion of the hadith in revela-
tion adds considerable legal material to the corpus of the shari'a,g iven that
the Qur'an has only approximately 200 verses with legal content unrelated
to  religious ritual,72  and few  of these verses  are well developed  or well
defined.  For example,  the  Qur'an proscribes  transactions involving the
consumption  of riba (illicit gain), while  simultaneously  permitting,  and
indeed encouraging,  bai' (sale),  without providing precise  definitions  to
determine  which of the  principles  applies in any particular  situation.73
The Qur'an orders believers to honor their contracts74 but provides no sup-
plementary doctrinal principles of contract by which a jurist might deter-
mine when a breach  has taken place,  what the appropriate remedies  are
and whether there is an exception to the general Qur'anic principle.  The
hadith, by contrast, are more numerous, specific, and contextual-in many
ways, akin to cases in the Langdellian construct.75
Shafi'i  not only includes  the  hadith but also  makes clear that they
never depart from the maxims of the Qur'an and only serve to clarify and
expound  upon it.76  Shafi'i doggedly  holds to this position even when it
69.  There are numerous, valuable historical works on the  development of Islamic
jurisprudence  in the classical era.  For a classical discussion, see, e.g., SCHACHT, supra
note 65; COULSON,  supra note 65; GOLDZIHER, supra note 65.  For a more recent discus-
sion, see, e.g. WAEL B. HALLAQ, A HISTORY OF ISLAMIC LEGAL THEORIES (1997) [hereinafter
HISTORY]; WAEL B. HALLAQ, THE ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION OF ISLAMIC LAW (2005) [herein-
after ORIGINS];  WEISS, supra note 35.  The author makes reference to these from time to
time, though the focus remains primarily on the contemporary orthodox historical leg-
end typically endorsed by proponents of Islamic finance.
70.  MUHAMMAD  IBN IDRIS AL-SHAFI'I, AL-RISALA  c91c4 3-47 (Ahmad Muhammad Shakir
ed.,  1940) [hereinafter RISALA].
71.  See id.  9 43-47, 225-27, 569-71.
72.  See Roy Parviz Mottahedeh, Introduction to MUHAMMAD BAQIR AS-SADR, LESSONS IN
ISLAMIC JURISPRUDENCE  1-2 (Roy Parviz Mottahedeh trans., 2003).
73.  See QUR'AN 2:275.
74.  See id. 5:1.
75.  For example, doctrinal principles have been derived from Muhammad telling a
man to tie his camel so that it does not flee, or instructing merchants that forward sales
should always be accompanied by necessary specifics.  See infra notes 212, 141.  Analo-
gizing to an American judicial case can only be taken so far, as Muhammad, acting as
God's Apostle, clearly had the authority to issue an advisory opinion, or to settle politi-
cal questions.
76.  See,  e.g.,  RISALA,  supra note  70,  9I 535-37  (using Muhammad's  practices as
related by the hadith to supply the particulars for the pilgrimage to Mecca mandated by
the Qur'an), 613-18 (using the pilgrimage, the rules of prayer and theft as examples of
the hadith providing particulars, and in some cases exceptions, that are absent from the
Qur'anic mandates).Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
appears untenable.77  For example, the Prophetic hadith prescribe death by
stoning  as the punishment for zina (non-marital relations) for non-virgin
women,78 a punishment that remains law in some Islamic countries to this
day.79  However,  this punishment lies in flat contradiction  to the Qur'an,
which prescribes one hundred lashes for any man or woman engaged  in
sexual relations outside of marriage.80  Shafi'i refuses to see this as a con-
tradiction, and instead  points to a different verse that describes the pun-
ishment for slave women for falling into shame ("atayna bil fahisha"), to be
half that of free women, reasoning that the hadith established no contradic-
tion, but merely created a third category, non-virgin women.81
Therefore, to Shafi'i, the hadith are absolutely central in Islamic juris-
prudence to the creation of a legal architecture.82  They are the fundamen-
tal ontological units of the jurisprudential theory, which are in practice, if
not in theory, superior even to the Qur'an's verses.
For revelation to be comprehensive,  determinative, and complete, the
hadith, though  similar  to  case  law at  first blush,  must  serve  a  role in
Shafi'i's  analysis  not  unlike  that  of  Langdell's  fundamental  principles.
Shafi'i needed to take two crucially important steps to achieve this.  First,
Shafi'i required definitional parameters to determine which hadith were the
proper ones to use.83  As Langdell faced casebooks from dozens of jurisdic-
tions, some centuries old, Shafi'i faced an unmanageable number of hadith
supposedly from Muhammad, his Companions, and revered Successors.84
Some form of discrimination and determination  undoubtedly was neces-
sary to develop a sustainable jurisprudential architecture.  Langdell never
precisely defined his parameters, other than to declare the vast majority of
cases to be "worse than useless," but Shafi'i was much more careful in this
respect.85  His approach, repeated throughout his works, is clear:
Every hadith related by a person of confidence, on the authority of a person
of confidence, until [the chain] ends with the Prophet, is certain to be from
the Prophet  and we do not disregard the hadith of the Prophet under any
circumstances unless another hadith from the Prophet contradicts it; if there
is a contradiction and one abrogates the other, then we accept the abrogating
over the abrogated.  If there is no sign of abrogation, then we accept the more
certain of the two narrations, and if they are both certain, then we look to
77.  See generally id. 11  610-40.
78.  See id.  227.
79.  See, e.g., Vanessa von Struensee, Stoning, Shari'a, and Human Rights Law in Nige-
ria, 11 WM.  & MARY J. WOMEN & L. 405, 405-406 (2005).
80.  See QUR'AN 24:2.
81.  RISALA, supra note 70, ' 227 (translated by author).
82.  This point seems to be a matter upon which even Islamic historians would agree
in light of the emphasis given to it in the Risala.  See, e.g., SCHACHT, supra note 65, at 12;
HISTORY,  supra note 69, at 25.  To this day, proponents of Islamic finance, and Islamic
scholars generally, invariably describe  the Qur'an and the hadith as the two primary
sources of legal rules under the shari'a. See, e.g., MUHAMMAD NEJATULLAH SIDDIQI, PART-
NERSHIP AND PROFIT-SHARING IN ISLAMIC LAW 12 (1985); Au ZAHRA, supra note 61, at 100.
83.  See SCHACHT, supra note 65, at 315-19.
84.  See ORIGINS,  supra note 69, at 70-71.
85.  See SCHACHT, supra note 65, at 315-19.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
which harmonizes best with the Qur'an and the remainder of the hadith.86
The most important element of Shafi'i's position on hadith can be gleaned
from  this quotation-they  are  to  be  derived  almost  exclusively  through
chains of reliable transmitters, known as an isnad.87  If the isnad appears
sound, then the authenticity  of the hadith can only be questioned in the
event of a direct contradiction with another sound hadith.88  Even if a con-
tradiction exists, harmonization with the Qur'an may establish the author-
ity and  applicability of the hadith only when no other more  determinist
technique offers an adequate  solution.89
Thus, selection of the hadith, the cases from which the fundamental
principles would be drawn, was originally neither based on compatibility
with the Qur'an nor on the dictates of human discretion, opinion, or har-
mony with public policy or practice, but rather on a lengthy chain of sup-
posedly  reliable  narrators  over  a  span  exceeding  one  hundred  years.90
That this methodology is highly flawed is accepted quite widely beyond the
world  of  Islamic  theologians.91  However,  Shafi'i  returns  to  this  point
repeatedly,  insisting  on  the  isnad as  the  premier  means  by which  the
authenticity of hadith could be ascertained and selected.92
C.  Shafi'i's Reductionist Interpretive Controls in the Emerging Formalist
Modality
ShafiTs second step to transform the hadith from specific cases to fun-
damental principles derived from the need to adopt a jurisprudential tool
that would  enable  extension  of the  hadith beyond  their  literal  original
terms.  One possible solution would have been the adoption by qadis, or
judges, of a largely juristic  discretionary principle whenever gaps arose,
86.  MUHAMMAD IBN IDRIS SHAFI'I, Ikhtilaf Malik wa Shafi'i, in 8 MAWSU'AT AL-IMAM  AL-
SHAFI'I  AL-KITAB  AL-UMM  513  (Abdul  Muttalib  ed.,  2001)  [hereinafter  Ikhtilaf Malik]
(translated by author).
87.  Eventually this method resulted in 4,000-5,000 hadith being accepted as sound
out of a possible half million reports.  See ORIGINS,  supra note 69, at 107.  As with Lang-
dell, the vast majority of "cases" turned out to be "worse than useless."  Id. at 110.
88.  See SCHACHT, supra note 65, at 12.
89.  See id.
90.  An example of an isnad appearing in Shafi'i's works reads: "And Malik, [who has
heard] from Zaid son of Aslam [who has heard] from Atta son of Yasar, [who has heard]
from Bassir son of Sa'id, who reports that Abu Huraira heard the Apostle of God state
....  Ikhtilaf Malik, supra note 86, at pt. 2 (translated by author).
91.  See,  e.g.,  SCHAGHT,  supra note 65, at 4 ("It is generally conceded that ...  the
classical corpus contains a great many traditions that cannot possibly be authentic.  All
efforts to extract  from this often self-contradictory  mass an authentic core  . . . have
failed.").  See generally IGNAZ GOLDZIHER, 2 MUSLIM STUDIES  [MUHAMMEDANISCHE  STUDIEN]
17-251 (C.R. Barber & S.M. Stern trans.,  1971); G. H. A. JUYNBOLL,  MUSLIM  TRADITION:
STUDIES  IN CHRONOLOGY,  PROVENANCE  AND  AUTHORSHIP  OF EARLY  HADITH (1983).  Even
those who find the extreme  skepticism of the earliest commentators  toward the  sub-
stance of the hadith unwarranted  consider the science of hadith-gathering to have been
highly suspect and prone to error, if not outright fabrication.  See, e.g., COULSON,  supra
note 65, at 64-65, 70; HISTORY, supra note 69, at 3; ORIGINS, supra note 69, at 104.
92.  See SCHACHT, supra note 65, at 12 (indicating that Shafi'i repeats this point with
"tedious monotony").Cornell International Law Journal Vol.  40
causing  a  slow  movement  towards  recognizable  norms  based  on  the
Qur'an, hadith and the opinions of judges.  Yet Shafi'i abhorred any such
approach,  and spoke particularly  stridently against  adoption  of the doc-
trine of istihsan, or preference based on generally equitable principles.93
Shafi'i argues that istihsan is not based on revelation and consequently
is invalid.94  Moreover, Shafi'i insists istihsan is entirely arbitrary, possibly
resulting in different conclusions under the shari'a for the same problem in
different  locations  at different  times.95  To  Shafi'i,  this inconsistency  in
result  must be,  from a jurisprudential  standpoint, entirely  impossible.96
Shafi'i is a classic Langdellian  in this instance,  clinging tenaciously, and
beyond the bounds of good sense, to the notion that law must be a science,
and that there  should be exactly one determinable outcome  to any given
juristic problem.  Shafi'i's objections are deep-rooted and transcend policy
considerations.  He  compares  the application of istihsan to voicing  delu-
sions  and engaging  in sin  and, at one point, goes  so far  as to  describe
istihsan as illicit pleasure (taladhudh).97  This is similar to the Langdellians'
reaction to Cardozo's ideas  on judicial discretion  as a form of "hard-core
pornography."98
Shafi'i instead repeats his demand that all law be grounded in revela-
tion, if not explicitly, then through dala'il,o r signs, contained in revelation
itself.99  He considers these  signs akin to the stars and the moon, which
themselves  are  signs that permit  Muslims to determine  the  direction  of
Mecca and adhere to the Qur'anic command to pray towards Mecca when
they are  not in its vicinity.100  This forced metaphor serves  only to rein-
force  Shafi'i's belief that law was driven by some form of quasi-scientific
logic,  and that observation and study  of the signs would  determine the
proper answer to  any legal question.
Shafi'i indicated that qiyas, or a form of reasoning that is largely, but
not exclusively, analogical, was the sole means by which the signs might be
discovered  and  the  cases  translated  into  broader  fundamental  princi-
ples.10 1  Qiyas is less rigorous than the strictly Cartesian logic instituted by
Langdell,  and, from a  logician's point  of view,  it is no doubt extremely
93.  Shafi'i devotes an entire treatise to this subject.  See MUHAMMAD  IBN IDRIS SHAFI'I,
Kitab Ibtal al-Istihsan, in 9 MAWSU'AT AL-IMAM AL-SHAFI'I AL-KITAB AL-UMM 57 (Abdul Mut-
talib ed., 2001) [hereinafter Kitab Ibtal). Literally, the term istihsan comes from the root
hasana, meaning "to be good" or "to deem good."  HANs WEHR, ARABIC-ENGLISH DICTION-
ARY 208 (J.M . Cowan ed., 4th ed. 1994).  A prominent Hanafi jurist later described
istihsan as "the request for mildness or facility [sahula] in rulings ...  and the leaving of
what is difficult or unpleasant ['asr] for what is simple or pleasant [yusr], which is the
basis  of [our]  religion."  MUHAMMAD  IBN  AHMAD  SARAKHSI,  10  KITAB  AL-MABSUT  145
(1993) (translated by author).
94.  See Kitab Ibtal, supra note 93, at 65-67, 76; see also RISALA, supra note 70, 1  504-
05.
95.  See Kitab Ibtal, supra note 93, at 75-76.
96.  See id.
97.  See id. at 76; see also RisALA, supra note 70, 1 1464.
98.  GILMORE, supra note 41, at 77.
99.  See RIsALA, supra note 70, 9 1456; see also Kitab lbtal, supra note 93, at 71-73.
100.  See Kitab Ibtal, supra note 93, at 71-73.
101.  See RIsALA, supra note 70, '  1460.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
problematic. 102  In that sense, it seems an unusual choice by Shafi'i, who
clearly preferred logic and certainty  to discretion and potential variation.
Yet he had little other choice because qiyas is as reductive a tool as can be
imagined, while still fulfilling the ultimate purpose that Shafi'i desired-the
transformation of the hadith from specific cases to fundamental principles,
the central units upon which Islamic jurisprudence rests.  Unlike Langdell,
this methodology is not two steps-inductive reasoning of cases to a princi-
ple, then deduction from a principle to a formal rule-but rather one step
whereby a specifically precise rule is extended by analogy to a broader rule
that can be thought of as a fundamental principle, or at least a fundamen-
tal rule, given its breadth.103  Despite this small difference  between Lang-
dell and Shafi'i, there are remarkable similarities between their approaches.
Shafi'i and those following him make clear that qiyas includes, but is
not limited to, pure analogical reasoning that is almost inductive in nature,
whereby a jurist identifies a ratio legis, or 'illa, and then applies this 'illa in
a comparable  case.104  The classic example is the  prohibition against all
intoxicants based upon the Qur'anic prohibition against the consumption
of alcohol.105  Shafi'i and his successors also subsumed certain forms of a
fortiori reasoning, better described as deductive, within the qiyas rubric.10 6
For example, consuming large quantities of an item was prohibited if con-
suming small quantities was forbidden.107  Shafi'i made clear  his prefer-
ence for the latter type of qiyas, given its firmer logical foundations.108
In light of the imprecision that can adhere to the purer forms of ana-
logical reasoning, differing jurists could still reach different results in the
application of qiyas. To further reduce the possibility of non-uniform appli-
cation of the shari'a,S hafi'i introduced (or merely "set down in writing," as
some traditionalists would have it)'09 a second interpretive control known
110
as ijma, or consensus.
The basis for ijma under the current modalities is a hadith that the
community  of Muhammad  "would never  agree  to go  astray.""'  Shafi'i,
apparently unaware  of this hadith, referred  to two other hadith in which
Muhammad suggests  that a Muslim should hold fast to the believers.112
From this, Shafi'i reasoned in a rather strained fashion that if a Muslim is
102.  See Wael B. Hallaq, Legal Reasoning in Islamic Law and the Common Law: Logic
and Method, 34 CLEV. ST. L. REv. 79, 85-86 (1985).
103.  For purposes of clarity and consistency the author continues to use the term
"fundamental principle," despite the fact that "fundamental rule" might be more apt in
some contexts.
104.  See RisA,  supra note 70, '  594 (using the term ma'na rather than 'illa).
105.  See, e.g., Hallaq, supra note 102, at 88-89; see also RisALA,  supra note 70,  9t 1394-
1400 (using a separate example concerning hunting during the time of the pilgrimage).
106.  See RisALA, supra note 70,  1483.
107.  See id.
108.  See id. (describing this as the strongest type of qiyas).
109.  See ABU ZAHRA, supra note 61, at 189-90 (describing ijma as having been devel-
oped by Muhammad's closest and most revered companions) (translated by author).
110.  See RiSALA,  supra note 70, IN 1101,  1315.
111.  ABU ZA-RA, supra note 61,  at 190.
112.  See RisALA, supra note 70,  c 1101,  1315.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
not to deviate from the community, then a fortiori the community must be
free  of error.113  Moreover,  Shafi'i argued  that the communal determina-
tion must be applied in perpetuity because otherwise, the effect of the ijma
would always be to give the current generation of scholars the right to over-
rule their forebears, vanquishing  the notion of absolute  authority.114  In
addition  to  resisting  temporal  constraints,  Shafi'i  devoted  considerable
energy to refuting the notion that there could be a local or limited Islamic
ijma  among  a  geographical  region,  or  that  ijma  could  apply  to  a
supermajority of scholars, as opposed to strict unanimity  of them."l5
As would be the case with anyone analogizing scientific endeavor to
deduction of legal rules, Shafi'i appeared obsessed with obtaining the sin-
gle correct result and ensuring its uniform application over time and place.
Therefore, Shafi'i's modality is like Langdell's and extraordinarily resistant
to  variation.  For  Langdell,  the  rules  derived  from  such  principles  are
deductive,  straightforward,  and not  subject to  serious  future  challenge,
while Shafi'i  not only raised hadith to the equivalent  of commandments
from  God  but  also  crystallized  and  canonized  particular  extensions  of
them through the doctrines of qiyas and ijma.
D.  Anti-formalism  and the Langdellian Modality
A full discussion of the dominant Langdellian modalities is impossible
without discussing two anti-formalist tools dismissed by Shafi'i but none-
theless found in Islamic jurisprudence. 11 6  Their influence over the devel-
opment  of  jurisprudential  principles  is  generally  slight  in  the
contemporary  era but is significant enough  to bear mention, particularly
because they played a minor role in deriving the rules governing Islamic
finance.
1.  Istihsan
Istihsan, the target of Shafi'i's  fiercest attacks, is the primary anti-for-
malist jurisprudential tool that still remains part of the dominant modality
applied in modern Islamic finance. 117 It was classically permitted only by
113.  See id.'1 9l  1105, 1320 ("[Alnd thus it is not possible for the community in its
entirety to be in error, on the meaning of the Qur'an, or the hadith or the application of
qiyas") (translated by author).
114.  See Ikhtilaf Malik, supra note 86, at 763.
115.  See id. at 763-71.
116.  This is not meant to suggest that other, lesser sources of Islamic law do not exist.
Bassiouni and Badr do an admirable job of cataloging and describing all such sources.
See Bassiouni & Badr, supra note 62, at 138-159; see also Bassiouni, supra note 66 at 9-
10. It suffices to say, however, that none of the sources other than those described in the
text plays a major role in the development of Islamic jurisprudence in the world of con-
temporary Islamic finance.
117.  Interestingly, the dominant modalities, to preserve the impression  of a unified
jurisprudence that has existed from Islam's birth, strive mightily to minimize the differ-
ences between early jurists, such as Shafi'i, who seems to regard istihsan as a moral
failing, and the eponyms of the Hanafi and Maliki schools, the latter of whom indicated
that istihsan is nine tenths of the law.  For example, Kamali points out that even Shafi'i
employed istihsan once, though it is hard to see how one casual and minor reference2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
two of the four primary schools of thought in Sunni Islam, the Hanafi and
Maliki." 18  Istihsan is of secondary status, to be used  only when the hadith
offers no explicit solution, qiyas does not lend a satisfactory answer, and
there is some necessity or reason for applying the alternative rule.  t9 For
example, Islamic jurisprudence  has derived a prohibition  against certain
extraneous stipulations in contracts, based on a series of hadith.'20  How-
ever, some stipulations common in customary commercial practice are per-
mitted by some jurists through the doctrine of istihsan.121 Therefore, the
continued existence  of istihsan may impose  fewer interpretive  controls in
developing modern commercial rules but the effect is largely marginal.
2.  Istislah
Istislah, or concern for the public interest, is a supplementary jurispru-
dential doctrine adopted by the Maliki and Hanbali schools of thought, and
it bears remarkable  resemblance  to istihsan both in its purposes and its
very narrow scope. 122 It is used to guide the process of qiyas or to provide
an answer  that somehow harmonizes  with or is near to, but not rigidly
derived from, qiyas.123
E.  Demonstrations  of Langdellianism: The Problems of Riba and
Gharar in the Formalist Modalities
'Abd  al-Razzaq  Sanhuri, the premier Arab jurist of the last century,
was as influential to the establishment and subsequent development of the
legal order in the post-colonial Middle East as Blackstone and Coke were to
the development of the common law.124  Sanhuri contended that three doc-
could possibly negate Shafi'i's strident attacks on the doctrine contained in his more
well-known works. See KAMALI,  supra note 61, at 344.  Abu Zahra posits that Shafi'i was
not directing his attacks against istihsan, as the Hanafis understood it, so much as istis-
lah, discussed infra Part II.D.2, which is what the Malikis really meant by istihsan.  See
ABU ZAHRA, supra note 61, at 258-60.  In any event, Abu Zahra argues that the differences
are not as great as they might seem.  See id. at 271-72.
118.  See, e.g.,  id. at 251; KAMALI, supra note 61, at 332-34.  The four classical schools
.of thought within the Sunni jurisprudential tradition are the Hanafis, Shafi'is, Hanbalis
and Malikis.  See Bassiouni & Badr, supra note 62, at 161.  Modern Islamic scholars tend
not to divide themselves according to school of thought, and, in applying the Langdellian
modalities, tend to minimize any differences that might have existed between the classi-
cal schools.  See, e.g., supra note 117.
119.  See ABU ZA-RA, supra note 61, at 251.
120.  See  'ABD  AL-RAZZAQ  AHMAD  SANHURI,  3  MASADIR  AL-HAQQ  Fl  AL-FIQH  AL-ISLAMI:
DIRASA  MUQARANAH  BI-AL-FIQH  AL-GHARBI  [THE  SOURCES  OF  TRUTH  IN  ISLAMIC  JURISPRU-
DENCE: A COMPARATIVE STUDY  WITH WESTERN JURISPRUDENCE]  172-73 (1967).
121.  See id. at 173.
122.  See ABu ZAHRA, supra note 61, at 260 (indicating that Malik's references to istih-
san were primarily meant to cover istislah).
123.  See id. at 281-83.
124.  As any common lawyer in the early nineteenth century would naturally have a
copy of Blackstone's Commentaries by his side, so any Arab lawyer working in most of
the Arab countries of the Middle East would refer any legal question concerning inter-
pretation of the civil code to  Sanhuri's multi-volume  Al-Wasit, which functions effec-
tively  as his commentaries  on the  Egyptian  Civil Code.  See 'ABD AL-RAZ7AQ  AHMAD
SANHURI,  AL-WASIT F1 SHARH  AL-QANUN  AL-MADANI  AL-JADID  (1952).  See, e.g., WILLIAM M.Cornell InternationalL aw Journal Vol.  40
trinal prohibitions in the shari'a, as interpreted under the dominant modal-
ities,  were  particularly  problematic  in  the  development  of  Islamic
commercial jurisprudence.  These are (a) the prohibition of riba, or illegiti-
mate gain,125 (b) the prohibition of gharar,o r particular forms of risk, and
(c) the prohibition of stipulations or multiple bargains in a single contract.
Sanhuri  argues that these are entirely divorced from that which commer-
cial practice demands,126 leading one prominent English legal practitioner
in the Arab world to remark, in furtherance  of Sanhuri's claim, that  "[i]n
the modern commercial context, the shari'a is an embarrassment."' 27
This section examines two of the three problematic principles laid out
by Sanhuri,  riba and gharar,a s they constitute  paradigmatic examples of
the means by which formal fundamental principles are established under
the dominant Langdellian modalities in modern Islamic finance.128
BALLANTYNE,  ESSAYS AND  ADDRESSES  ON AR" LAWS  79 (2000).  Sanhuri drafted the civil
codes of both Egypt and Iraq, and served as dean of the historically prestigious Cairo
and Baghdad colleges of law.  His civil code is the template of the civil codes of nearly
every nation in the Middle East, excluding those governed entirely by the shari'a.  See
Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im, Globalization and Jurisprudence:A n Islamic Law Perspective,
54 EMORY L.J.25 , 47 (2005).
125.  For a fuller description of the controversies concerning the definition of the term
riba, see infra Section II.E.1.
126.  See SANHURI,  supra note 120, at 14.
127.  BALLANTYNE,  supra note 124, at 82.
128.  The Article does not discuss the third prohibition, stipulations and multiple bar-
gains in contract, simply because the rather extensive discussion it requires would prove
unnecessarily burdensome to the central theses the Article seeks to advance.  The thesis
is demonstrated well enough by the doctrinal prohibitions of riba and gharar. However,
the example of stipulations is a fascinating one, as it demonstrates the extent to which
modern Islamic financiers  are forced to ignore the Langdellian modalities when their
extensive and elaborate artifices cannot surmount them. According to Vogel and Hayes,
modern Islamic finance rarely pays heed to the specific prohibitions against stipulations
in contract (such as, for example, a requirement attending the purchase of a camel that
the camel be transported to a particular location at the seller's expense), relying on a
classical interpretation of Ibn Taymiyah  that does not appear  to prohibit stipulations,
unless they contradict the contract or otherwise violate the shari'a. See VOGEL & HAYES,
supra note 6, at 101 (citing Sanhuri, who quotes Ibn Taymiyah); see also SANHURI,  supra
note 120, at 167-68.  Ibn Taymiyah belongs to the Hanbali school, which traditionally
approves of a single stipulation in any agreement of sale, but no more.  Ibn Qudamah,
for example, indicates that Ibn Hanbal, the eponym of the Hanbali school,  reports a
hadith, also contained  in two of the six works that constitute  the classical corpus of
hadith, which prohibits two stipulations in a sale, but that Ibn Hanbal rejects a separate
hadith, nevertheless appearing in two of the six canonized texts as well, prohibiting even
a single stipulation.  See MUWAFFAQ AL-DIN 'ABD ALLAH IBN AHMAD IBN QUDAMAH ET AL.,  6
Al-MUGHNI  321-22 (1986).  Ibn Taymiyya also rejects the latter hadith on the authority of
his mentor, Ibn Hanbal.  However, Ibn Taymiyya says absolutely nothing about the for-
mer  restriction.  IBN TAYMIYAH,  6  A-FATAWA  AL-KUBRA  408  (1987);  IBN TAYMIYYA,
NAZARIYYAT AL-'AQD [OPINIONS ON THE LAW OF CONTRACT] 14-16 (1977).  The irony is that
despite their rigid insistence on the absolute authority of the eternal validity of the Pro-
phetic hadith, the Langdellian proponents of Islamic finance are disregarding one, and
possibly two, hadith with sound isnads per the writings of a single fourteenth century
jurist, who provided no basis at all for doing so.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
1.  Contours of the Riba Proscription
Riba as currently understood is possibly the most difficult of the com-
mercial prohibitions contained in the shari'a to incorporate into modern
commercial practice.  The prohibition of riba derives from several verses of
the Qur'an, the most prominent of which is verse 2:225, which reads:
Those who devour riba cannot rise ...  [T]hat is because they say, bai' [sale]
is like riba. But Allah has allowed bai' and forbidden riba. Those who, after
receiving direction  from their Lord, desist, shall be pardoned for the past;
their case is for Allah (to judge); but those who repeat (the offense) are com-
panions of the Fire: They will abide therein (forever). 129
However, while the verse makes abundantly clear a vast conceptual differ-
ence between riba and bai', the contours of the terms themselves are almost
entirely undefined.  The term riba has been variously translated as "unjus-
tified profit," "illicit gain," "usury" or, most broadly, "unlawful gain by way
of excess or deferment," which effectively would mean interest.130  From
this and other verses, it is also  clear that riba was  a practice  known in
Muhammad's lifetime (hence the reference to those who compare it favora-
bly to bai'), that it potentially involves enormous profit,131 that it involves
some  form of exploitation that can be compared to theft,132  and that its
opposite  appears  to  be charity.133  The  Qur'an  provides  little guidance
beyond this.
The riba practice in Muhammad's time appears to have been a transac-
tion  between  lender  and borrower,  whereby  the  lender agrees  to  delay
repayment of a loan at the time of repayment in exchange for doubling of
the value  of the loan.  This  explains the Qur'anic reference  to "doubling
and redoubling" in verse 3:130.134  This practice  is commonly  known as
riba al-jahiliyya. Indeed, Ibn Abbas, Muhammad's  cousin, reports a sound
hadith that the only riba is riba aljahiliyya.1 35  Yet a second hadith reads as
follows:
Gold for gold, like for like, hand to hand and any excess is riba. Silver for
silver, like for like, hand to hand and any excess is riba; grain for grain, like
for like, hand to hand and any excess is riba; salt for salt, like for like, hand
to hand and any excess is riba; barley for barley, like for like, hand to hand
and any excess is riba; dates for dates, like for like, hand to hand, and any
excess is riba. And if the kinds differ, then sell as you wish, so long as it is
129.  QUR'AN 2:225 (translated by author).
130.  See, e.g.,  NOEL J. COULSON, COMMERCIAL  LAW IN THE GULF  STATES  100 (1984);
NABIL A. SALEH, UNLAWFUL GAIN AND LEGITIMATE PROFIT IN ISLAMIC  LAW 13 (1986).
131.  See QUR'AN 3:130 ("Oh ye who believe, do not devour riba, making it double and
redouble .. .") (translated by author).
132.  See id. 4:161 (promising a painful punishment for those who devour riba and
those who devour the property of others falsely).
133.  See id. 30:39 ("And whatever you lay out as riba, so that it may increase in the
property of men, it shall not increase with Allah; and whatever you give in charity, desir-
ing Allah's pleasure, you shall get manifold.") (translated by author).
134.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 72-73; see also S.E. RAYNER, THE THEORY OF
CONTRACTS  IN ISLAMIC LAW 268-69 (1991), see also SANHURI, supra note  120, at 241.
135.  See id. at 222-23.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
hand to hand.136
The two hadith on riba are not easily reconcilable, and Ibn Abbas, as
well as  a  few  like  minded  Companions,  appear  to  have  maintained  the
validity  of  his narrower  definition  of riba, though  there  are  debatable
reports  that he abandoned  his claim when  confronted with the broader
hadith.137  Yet  these  conflicting  hadith are  not to  be  ignored  under  the
modalities, given  the centrality  of the  hadith to the development  of legal
rules.  As a result, Ibn Abbas' hadith was declared by juristic consensus to
be in some way misunderstood, and riba al-jahiliyya is, in light of the lan-
guage of the Ibn Abbas  hadith, perhaps  the strongest of several potential
forms of riba, but other forms exist.138
The second hadith quoted above  adds two categories of riba, one  in
which certain hand to hand, or simultaneous, transactions result in a mate-
rial gain for one party, and one in which a transaction results in  delayed
receipt on the part of one party.139  The hadith only applies to  six items,
and even then, only to trade within any particular item when excess values
are  concerned.  Yet  the  tool  of qiyas as  applied  reductively  within  the
modalities took this relatively  narrow rule and broadened it into a funda-
mental principle of considerable breadth, forbidding trade of various kinds
between items resembling those on the list unless the trade was simultane-
ous, or of equal value.140  Classically, and in keeping with the terms of the
hadith, jurists obsessed primarily on the sales and trades prohibited by it,
not whether it encompassed loans.141  However, Islamic  finance has con-
136.  SARAKHSI, supra note 93, at 110 (translated by author); SANHURI,  supra note 120,
at 177 (translated by author).  A similar version appears in the Risala as well. See RISALA,
supra note 70, 1 1518.
137.  See SANHURI,  supra note  120, at 222, 226.
138.  See id. at 224-27 for classical references suggesting this.  The idea that the Ibn
Abbas hadith is meant to suggest that riba al-jahiliyya is the strongest but not the exclu-
sive form of riba is not altogether impossible reasoning, given an Arabic idiomatic pecu-
liarity where the negation of the existence of all other types of an entity or style can
merely be an emphasis on the strength of that entity or style. For example, Muhammad
is known to have  said that there is no youth except his son in law Ali, and no sword
except Ali's sword.  Clearly Muhammad knew of the existence of other youth and other
swords, and the statement is meant more in praise of Ali's prowess than as a statement
of exclusion.  See PHILIP K. HiTTi,  HISTORY  OF THE ARABS  183  (1937)  (translating this
hadith as "no sword can match [Ali's] and no young warrior can compare with 'Ali!'").
139.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 74.
140.  See id.
141.  See, e.g., SANHURI,  supra note 120, at 178-94.  No consensus was ever reached on
the parameters of the relevant prohibited trade classifications in classical jurisprudence
once  this hadith was expanded  through  qiyas.  For example, jurists  disagreed  as  to
whether the hadith, when expanded to a fundamental principle, should classify items by
weight and volume and prohibit delayed exchanges within each classification,  as the
Hanafis and Hanbalis believed, or whether the hadith should classify items as currency
or preservable and non-preservable foodstuffs, as the Malikis maintained, or simply cur-
rency and foodstuffs, as the Shafi'i's maintained.  See id. The inquiry is largely casuistic
and irrelevant for the purposes of this Article.  However, it should be noted that there is
an exception to this rather broad restraint on trade based on a separate series of hadith
that permit a practice known as salam, or advance purchase of commodities if accompa-
nied  by specific  information  and  full advance  payment.  See  MUHAMMAD  IBN ISMA'IL
BUKHARI,  3 SAHIH AL-BUKHARi 35 (1990) ("The Messenger of Allah came to Madinah, and2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
cluded that an ijma, based on this hadith, prohibits trades of not only gold
and silver but also of all other forms of currency, unless hand to hand and
without excess.142  Thus, riba has become synonymous in the modern era
with interest of any kind on a loan, and jurists in Islamic finance routinely
dismiss any alternative conclusion, based on the employment of alternative
modalities, as "apologetic" or "defeatist."'143  Since the modality admits no
possibility  for the  community  to be  mistaken  in reaching  this ijma, the
found its inhabitants entering salam contracts in fruits for one, two, and three years.  He
said: 'Whoever enters into a salam contract, let him specify a known volume or weight,
and a known term of deferment."') (translated by author); see also VOGEL & HAYES, supra
note 6, at 74, 139; see also SANHURI,  supra note 120, at 35, 190.
142.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 77; see also SALEH,  supra note 130, at 48.
Classical  references  seem to  support this conclusion to  some extent.  See, e.g.,  IBN
QUDAMAH,  supra note 128, at 436 (declaring an ijma on the subject). Ibn Qudamah and
the prominent Hanafi jurist, Sarakhsi, both also report a hadith that prohibits a loan
with a benefit.  See id.; see also SARAKHSI, supra note 93, at 35. The latter hadith, however,
is of arguable validity given particular problems with the isnad. See VOGEL  & HAYES,
supra note 6, at 77. In addition, it should be noted that loans were considered charitable
acts in the early Islamic period, and the notion of a loan with a benefit would therefore
probably  be  considered  odious  to  Muslims  in  the  classical  period.  See,  e.g.,  IBN
QUDAMAH,  supra note 128, at 429-30 (discussing the ethereal rewards given to those who
offer interest free loans to their fellow Muslims in need).
143.  See, e.g., Mohammad Uzair, Impact of Interest Free Banking, 1 J. ISt.AMIC BANKING
& FIN. 39, 40 (1984) ("By this time, there is a complete consensus of all... schools...
and among Islamic economists that interest in all forms, of all kinds, and for all pur-
poses is completely prohibited in Islam. Gone are the days when people were apologetic
about Islam, and contended that the interest for commercial and business purposes, as
presently charged by the banks, was not prohibited by Islam."); UsMANI,  supra note 24, at
111 (describing the position permitting some forms of interest as "defeatist"); COUNCIL
OF ISLAMIC IDEOLOGY,  GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN,  Report of the Council of Islamic Ideology
on the Elimination of Interest from the Economy, in CONSOLIDATED  RECOMMENDATIONS  ON
THE ISLAMIC ECONOMIC SYSTEM 7 (1983) (indicating the presence of "complete unanimity
among all schools of thought in Islam that the  term riba stands for interest in all its
types and forms"); ABDULLAH  SAEED, ISLAM1C BANKING AND  INTEREST 50 (describing this
position as "dominant" and "the basis of Islamic banking theory as well as practice");
CHAPRA, supra note 25, at 63.  This position has come under attack by some modern
reformist-minded  jurists  using  anti-formalist  hermerieutical  techniques.  See,  e.g.,
SANHURI,  supra note  120, at 219-49; Chibli Mallat,  The Debate on Riba and Interest in
Twentieth Century Jurisprudence, in ISLAMIC LAW AND  FINANCE 69, 8--81 (Chibli Mallat
ed., 1988). This is discussed further in Part IV, but the point here is that anti-formalist
interpretive modalities are not entirely extinct.  However, the dominance of the Langdel-
lian position and the marginalization of the various anti-formalist modalities of modern
reformers should not be understated.  The Egyptian Constitutional Court, when asked
to rule on the issue of whether the Civil Code's provision of interest violated the shari'a,
adopted neither the riba interpretations of Sanhuri, the drafter of the Civil Code, nor of
Rashid Ridha and Muhammad Abdu, both respected reformist Islamic scholars working
at one of the most prestigious Islamic centers of learning in the modern world. Instead,
the Court accepted  the  notion that interest  on loans was indeed riba and therefore
banned  by  the shari'a, but then  contended  that the  constitutional  amendment  that
demanded all laws conform to the shari'aw  as not intended to apply in any meaningful
way to legislation enacted prior to its adoption.  See Rector of the Azhar University v.
President  of the  Republic, Judicial Year  No.  1, Case  No. 20 (Sup.  Const. Ct.  1985)
(Egypt),  reprinted in W. M.  Ballantyne, Supreme Constitutional Court (Egypt)-Shari'a
and Riba, 1 ARAB L.Q. 100 (1985).  That the Court preferred this type of legalistic non-
sense to the adoption of a coherent anti-formalist position on riba speaks volumes about
the virtually exclusive control that the Langdellian modalities have in deriving the sub-
stance of the shari'a.Cornell International Law Journal Vol.  40
derived rule is unassailable and will haunt Islamic finance for as long as it
continues to cling to its Langdellian ways.
2.  Gharar
Unlike  riba, whose  foundational elements  are contained within  the
Qur'an, the jurisprudential  doctrine  of gharar, or risk, is nowhere  men-
tioned in the Qur'an, and the verses from which it is derived form an atten-
uated justification  for it through the  prohibition of maysar, or  games of
chance.144  The  most  often  cited  verses  are  5:90-91,145  which  read  as
follows:
0 you who believe!  Intoxicants and maysar, sacrifices for idols and divina-
tion by arrows are an abomination, the work of Satan, so avoid them so that
you may be successful.
By  means of intoxicants and maysar Satan only wants to sow enmity and
hatred among you and take you from the remembrance of Allah and prayer,
so will you not abstain?146
The juxtaposition  of  maysar with  alcohol,  activities  of divination,
throwing arrows, and sowing  enmity  and hatred and creating some  dis-
tance between the believers and the worship of God, does not indicate that
maysar was meant to address more than standard forms of gambling.  That
the Langdellian  modalities would expand this prohibition to encompass
significant levels of risk in modern financial and commercial transactions
seems astonishing and entirely incongruent with the verse.
However, the hadith on the subject do forbid high levels of uncertainty
in commercial transactions despite the incongruity.  A variety of hadith for-
bid the sale of unripe fruit on a tree, the sperm of a stallion, the fetus of a
camel, grapes until they are black, or grain until it is strong.147  Applying
qiyas to these and related hadith, the Langdellian modalities have derived a
series of rules concerning gharart hat stringently limit levels of uncertainty
in contemporary commercial  transactions.148  All  of these have been rati-
fied and consecrated as immutable rules under the doctrine of ijma. 149
The two central fundamental principles involving gharar are a prohibi-
tion against the sale of an item not currently in existence,'50  and a ban on
144.  See SALEH,  supra note  130, at 85.
145.  See, e.g., VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 64; SALEH,  supra note 130, at 62.
146.  QUR'AN 5:90-91 (translated by author).  A similar verse appears in 2:219, where
maysar and intoxicants are said to have both benefit and sin, but that the sin exceeds the
benefit.  See id. 2:219.
147.  See IBN RUSHD,  2 THE DISTINGUISHED  JURIST'S PRIMER  [BIDAYAT AL-MUJTAHID]  179-
80 (Imran  Ahsan Khan Nyazee  trans.,  1996).  This is another example  of an area in
which the doctrine of istihsan has provided marginal levels of interpretive flexibility in
the classical era. For example, some jurists recognize the doctrine permitting the sale of
fruit on a branch so long as it is cut imminently and ripens fully after its cutting. See
SARAKHSI,  supra note 93, at 197.
148.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 87-95.
149.  See id.
150.  See, e.g., SANHURi,  supra note 120, at 31 ("[A]nd thus we find that there is an ijma
among the schools of thought that if an object is not at all in existence at the time of
contracting, then the contract  is void.") (translated by author); VOGEL & HAYES,  supra2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
all significant uncertainties in a contract, such as any uncertainty over cost
or duration.151  The effect of these  prohibitions, and particularly  the ban
on uncertainties, is commercially devastating.
There are two exceptions to the prohibition of gharar,o ne developed
as a result of a contradictory hadith, and the other derived from an applica-
tion  of  istihsan in  the  classical  era  and  extended  by  modern  Islamic
finance.152  As to the first exception, advance purchases, known as salam,
were permitted by Prophetic  hadith'53  so long as they did not pertain to
particular  objects and were generic  or abstract  sales.154  The delivery  of
cash for the purchase  had to be immediate. A bilateral executory contract,
where the seller agreed to purchase at a later date and the buyer agreed to
buy at that date, was invalid.155  The second exception related to a concept
known as istisna, pursuant to which parties contract for the manufacture of
particular goods not in existence at the time of contract formation.' 56  The
doctrine exists, and has existed classically, through the doctrine of istihsan,
making it a very limited exception to the prohibition against sales of non-
57
existent objects.'
note 6, at 91.  This is reflected in classical texts as well.  See, e.g., IBN RUSHD, supra note
147, at 124 ("[T]hus all of the jurists have reached an ijma that [the sale of fruit prior to
its appearance] is forbidden because it is the sale of an item not created.") (translated by
author).
151.  See SANHURI,  supra note 120, at 49.  Thus, a price pegged to a varying index or a
lease contract that imposes largely unknown liabilities on a lessee falls well within the
bounds of prohibited gharar in Islamic finance.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 93,
144.  Classical jurists, for their part, tended to classify gharar as being either large or
small, with  scholars  agreeing generally  that the  large  form  was  prohibited and the
smaller form permitted.  See,  e.g.,  IBN  RUSHD, supra note  147, at 175-77  (comparing
schools of law with respect to great and small forms of gharar); cf. SANHURI,  supra note
120, at 47 (quoting other classical jurists who include a third form, moderate gharar,
about which there is disagreement as to its permissibility).  There was considerable disa-
greement about what constitutes large gharar and small gharar. See IBN  RUSHD, supra
note 147, at 175-81.  However, the prohibited large form generally inheres in contracts
of sale or other profit-based contracts (as opposed to gratuitous contracts or contracts of
marriage) when it has a large effect on the contract.  See SANHURI,  supra note 120, at 49.
Thus,  jurists  disagreed  on  whether  the  non-presence  of  an  existing  object,  fully
described at the time of sale, would create a form of gharar as large or small, with some
arguing that the non-presence has no effect on the contract, and others, such as Shafi'i,
insisting that it does.  See IBN RUSHD, supra note 147, at 177-78.
152.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 89.
153.  See supra note 141.
154.  See VOGEL  &  HAYES,  supra note 6, at  89.  Thus,  for example,  the  immediate
purchase of a certain number of bushels of wheat was permitted, but not wheat from a
particular  field.  See id.  Other rules also existed,  requiring precise  specifications on
weight and type, for example.  See SANHURI,  supra note 120, at 34.
155.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 89.
156.  See SANHURI, supra note 120, at 38.  This existed in the classical era as well.  See
ABU BAKR IBN MAS'UD KASANI,  7 BADA'i AL-SANA'I  FI TARTIB AL-SHARA'! 2167-69 (Zakariya 'Ali
Yusif ed., 1968)
157.  See SANHURI, supra note 120, at 38-39.  The majority of classical Hanafi jurists
held istisna contracts to be non-binding in their entirety until the goods had been manu-
factured and the buyer had the opportunity to inspect them. See KASANI, supra note 156,
at 3168-69 (indicating that the non-binding nature of istisna derives directly from the
fact that it is a product of judicial preference and departs from the rule of qiyas). How-
ever, there was a minority opinion from the early Hanafi jurist, Abu Yusuf, holding thatCornell International Law Journal Vol.  40
III.  The Failures of Islamic Commercial Jurisprudence-The
Consequences of Langdellianism
A.  Original Conceptions
The foundational  element  of the  alternative  fairness-based  architec-
ture, which the proponents of Islamic finance first envisaged as complying
with  the  rules  of  gharar and  riba under  their  modalities,  was  the
mudharaba, an Islamic  form of passive  partnership.158  In a mudharaba,
passive investors place their capital in a venture, other participants contrib-
ute only their labor, profits are distributed first to the investors until their
investment  is  recouped,  and  the  remaining  profits  are  then  distributed
based on an agreed upon percentage.159  Those contributing their labor
would bear no capital risk.160
As  originally  envisaged,  Muslims  would  passively  "invest"  in  the
Islamic "banks" through deposits, and the banks would then invest as pas-
sive partners in various ventures.161  Profits from the ventures would  be
distributed to the partners  of the Islamic bank and the managers  of the
ventures based on an agreed upon percentage.162  Thus, this model would
avoid debt and derive all profits derived from genuine gain.  Passive part-
ners would exclusively bear all losses.'63
Unfortunately, as might be expected of a legal system developed with
scant concern for discretionary preference or practical reality, this model is
commercially unworkable as an alternative  to the conventional bank sys-
tem because it offers neither the liquidity nor the minimal risk of loss that
would be expected  of a bank.164  For example,  private equity funds cur-
rently operate  on principles of limited  partnership  very similar to  those
envisaged by the early Islamic financiers. 165  However, because of the con-
istisna contracts were binding at the time of the offer, not acceptance,  considering the
hardship that would exist if either party refused to enter into the contract after the goods
had been manufactured.  See id. at 3169.
158.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 130-31; see also SIDDIQI, supra note 26, at 86;
see also UsmAI, supra note 24, at 10. Sadr seems to have adopted this principle as well.
See AL-BANK, supra note  17, at 154 (indicating that the first principle of lending policy
should be the transformation of loans into partnership transactions where possible).
159.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 109-10.
160.  See id.
161.  See id. at 131; see also WARDE, supra note 9, at 135-36; see also AL-BANK, supra
note 17, at 154.
162.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 131; see also WARDE, supra note 9, at 135-36;
see also AL-BANK, supra note 17, at 154.
163.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 109-10.
164.  As to whether or not such a system, even if it were somehow workable, is neces-
sarily fairer than interest-based banking, there can be considerable doubt.  The financial
institution would only be entitled to share in gains in the venture, but given that there
are few limitations on the percentage of profits that an investor may earn in a venture,
the  transaction could be considerably less equitable than debt.  See VOGEL &  HAYES,
supra note 6, at 81; see also Kuran, supra note 28, at 178. For example, an entrepreneur
may well regard a 6%  guaranteed return to a bank as considerably fairer than a 90:10
division of profit in favor of an investor.
165.  For more detailed information on the structure of private equity funds, see JAMES
M. SCHELL, PRIVATE EQUITY FUNDS: BUSINESS STRUCTURE AND OPERATIONS  301 (2000).  In2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
siderab!e risk of loss, annualized internal rates of return to the passive lim-
ited partners are expected to net significantly higher gains than investment
in a bank.166  Moreover, Islamic banks would have less liquidity than con-
ventional banks if they relied solely on mudharaba. For example, if deposi-
tors at an Islamic bank react to unexpected losses by rushing to withdraw
their funds, then an Islamic bank would have no recourse to quick liquidity
through discounting current debt obligations or borrowing from a central
67
bank with interest.1
Another difficulty in using the mudharaba paradigm is that banks do
not generally have the capacity to monitor their many investments in ven-
tures.168  Again, juxtaposing  the  paradigm  of the  private  equity  fund,
funds generally deeply involve  themselves in the management  of the few
underlying ventures in which they invest, and the funds also demand sig-
nificant shareholder rights, such as  a director's seat, veto over significant
changes to the business, rights to review financial records,  and rights to
purchase the interest of any other investor seeking to dispose of his invest-
ment.169  Commercial banks generally do not engage in this type of costly
exercise because they are guaranteed a fixed return on their investment in
the form of an interest payment.170  If an Islamic bank were to engage in
the same extensive  and costly practices as an equity fund with respect to
every investment made, it would raise its costs substantially, severely com-
promising its ability to compete with commercial banks.17'  However, if it
chose to  forego this, the bank would expose  itself to  the possibility that
financial  records were  being  falsified,  or  at least  accounting  standards
interpreted in a way that minimized distributed profits.172  There is some
evidence that this is precisely what happened to early Islamic banks that
attempted to apply the mudharaba model.173
It is possible that the financial institution could avoid these problems
simply  by investing  in highly  liquid, low risk, and low return  equities,
much as a "money market" fund tends to do, but then it would not serve
addition, the author has had extensive experience in the structuring and deployment of
private equity funds.
166.  See id.  2.02-2.04.  Most private equity funds require that revenue first be dis-
tributed exclusively to the limited partner investors, not only to the extent of their invest-
ment, but also to a preferred return level of approximately 6 to 7%.  See id.  2.03. Fund
managers are entitled only to profits, ironically and misleadingly termed "carried inter-
est," above this level at a specified percentage, usually 20%.  See id.  2.02.
167.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 134.
168.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 135; see also Timur Kuran, The Economic
System in Contemporary Islamic Thought, 18 INT'L J. MIDDLE E. STUD.  135, 153 (1986).
169.  See generally Schell, supra note 165,   1.01-1.07.  Admittedly, private equity
funds at times insist on some of these provisions, and, in particular, seats on the board
of directors for regulatory reasons unrelated to monitoring.  See id.  8.06(4).
170.  See id. Commercial banks may seek some control over key decision-making with
respect to parts of a venture, such as a sale of the business, particularly for larger loans.
However,  the level of control is generally  much smaller than it would be for a private
equity fund.
171.  See id.
172.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 135.
173.  See id.Cornell International Law Journal Vol.  40
the market role that a bank would.  A bank as a financial intermediary is
supposed to overcome particular market failures concerning economies of
scale, information asymmetry, and liquidity mismatches that would other-
wise develop.  It collects the funds of many unsophisticated depositors who
need quick access to their funds and uses expertise and specialized  skills
to identify and monitor to some extent its portfolio, earning interest from
the portfolio and having sufficient ready liquid cash on hand to satisfy the
requirements of its  depositors.174  If it were to  forgo these  opportunities
and merely act as a money market fund, it would never be a substitute for a
conventional  bank,  and  conventional  banks  would  continue  to  be
necessary.
B.  Alternative Approaches Within the Langdellian Modalities
Given  the foregoing,  Islamic  financial institutions have  found them-
selves in an existential crisis that has lasted to this day.  The entire founda-
tion upon which the institutions had expected to rest, the mudharaba, had
proved incapable of sustaining them, and no ready alternative methodol-
ogy was apparent.
Moreover, given  the Langdellian  modalities within which  contempo-
rary Islamic jurisprudence willfully imprisoned itself, the flexibility neces-
sary  to  develop  an  alternative  legal  architecture  responsive  to  the
commercial  demands of the modern  era was severely  limited.  The  doc-
trines of riba and gharar had been developed through strict application of
these modalities.  Little could be changed  by an application  of the same
reductive methodology, and, in any event, many of the rules had been con-
firmed by ijma with only a few exceptions, most of them casuistic.175  The
fundamental principles had been laid, and they could not sustain a sensi-
ble commercial jurisprudence.  The doctrines and the modalities that gave
rise  to  them  needed  to  be  abandoned,  or  at  least  fundamentally
reconsidered.
Islamic  commercial  jurisprudence  has  not risen  to  this  challenge.
Rather than address the problem directly by seeking an alternative system
that is cognizant of commercial reality and sensitive to populist demands
for social justice, Islamic financial institutions have largely fallen back on
obfuscation, complication,  and implicit deception.  Islamic financial insti-
tutions rely primarily on three basic commercial structures,176 and each is
an artifice.  In  addition, discussed  below is the problem  of insurance,  a
vitally  important  commercial  arrangement  that  clearly  falls  within  the
prohibitions of gharar and riba according to Islamic finance practitioners..
174.  See Mahmoud  El-Gamal,  Islamic Bank Corporate Governance and Regulation: A
Call for  Mutualization,  at  7,  available  at  http://www.ruf.rice.edu/-elgamal/files/
IBCGR.pdf.
175.  See EI-Gamal, supra note 15.
176.  See generally VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 138-49.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
1.  Murabaha
Murabaha is the principal tool of the Islamic financial institution.  By
one estimate, approximately 80-95% of the funds of Islamic financial insti-
tutions are employed in murabaha transactions. 177  A murabaha is basically
the sale of an item with a fully disclosed markup.178  As used by financial
institutions, however, the murabaha is effectively an artifice through which
interest may be charged without falling afoul of the prohibition of riba. A
financial institution purchases  some  asset and simultaneously  sells it to
the effective  borrower  at a  higher price.179  The  borrower's  payment is
delayed  for  the desired  term,  with the  price  to  the  ultimate  purchaser
reflecting the prevailing market interest rate.180  The final step of the trans-
action in some cases is that the borrower sells the asset to recover what is
effectively the loan principal.
The sole legal difference between this resale of an asset and an inter-
est-based transaction relates to ownership of and liability for the asset dur-
ing  the  time  of transfer.  However,  these  differences  are  obliterated  by
provisions in murabaha transactions  that declare  the sale to the effective
borrower  as  occurring  simultaneously  with  the  first  purchase  by  the
Islamic  financial  institution.181  The  borrower  also  waives  all  claims
against the financial institution for breach of warranty, and the financial
institution assigns all of its similar rights as the original purchaser to the
borrower.'82  As  might  be  expected,  the  murabaha usually  involves  the
purchase and sale of a readily resalable commodity, so that all connection
to the asset purchased is illusory.'83
To expound on an example set forth by Vogel and Hayes, if a borrower
sought credit from a conventional  bank in the amount of $50,000 at an
interest rate of 8.5%, with repayment to be made in nine equal monthly
installments, she would be required to pay $5,754.17 per month.184  Alter-
natively,  she  could go  to  an  Islamic  financial  institution  and purchase
stock in IBM currently valued at $50,000 while agreeing to pay for them in
nine monthly installments of $5,754.17.  The bank's purchase of the stock
from the market would be simultaneous with her purchase of the stock.
She  could  then have  a broker  (perhaps  employed  at the  same  financial
institution) sell the stock immediately thereafter  and deposit the $50,000
into  her  account.  In  an  increasingly  popular variant  of  the murabaha,
known  as tawarruq, the borrower would sell the purchased  asset back to
177.  See WARDE, supra note 9, at 133; see also VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 198.
178.  See WARDE, supra note 9, at 140.
179.  See id. at 140-41.
180.  See id. at 139. Banks are often eager to appear not to be engaged in such obvious
artifice and seek to disguise their murabaha transactions in a slightly less vulgar man-
ner. Id. (indicating the reluctance of Islamic financial institutions to make explicit refer-
ences to prevailing interest rates despite their reliance on them).
181.  See id. at 141.
182.  See id.
183.  See id. at 143.
184.  See id. at 177.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
the original seller from whom the bank purchased it.185
Given the obvious  transparency of most murabaha transactions, they
have proven somewhat controversial.  Many jurists have denounced them,
at least in their current form, and the Fiqh Academy of the Organization of
Islamic Conference, probably the dominant Islamic jurisprudential author-
ity with respect to matters of finance, has shown some discomfort with the
approach even as it has sanctioned it.186  The Gulf Cooperation Council
has been considerably more flexible, sanctioning both the murabaha and
its tawarruq manifestations.187  Few within the Islamic finance community
would  describe the murabaha as entirely violative of Islamic law; Islamic
financial institutions could not at this point survive without it.
2.  Ijara
Ijara, or lease, transactions represent a rapidly growing segment of the
Islamic  finance  sector.'38  Ijara is  barely  less  transparent  than  the
murabaha, and conceptually similar to a conventional  lease in that it per-
mits a bank to purchase an item and lease it to a third party at whatever
price the lessor and the  lessee deem fit.'8 9  Three theoretical  differences
arise between ijara and conventional interest-based financing, but all three
are ignored in Islamic commercial arrangements, often in clear contraven-
tion of the shari'a.
First, a floating interest loan would be impossible, as uncertainties in
price  at the time of contracting would violate the gharar prohibition.  To
avoid this, banks routinely offer renewable leases with the lease value shift-
ing to conform to the prevailing interest rate at each renewal.190  Though
either party can in theory cancel the renewable lease, in practice, this is
never the case and commercial actors rely on business reputation, internal
understandings and non-binding good faith agreements indicating that the
lease will be periodically renewed.19'  When these informal  understand-
ings are not enough,  Islamic commercial actors simply draft the provisions
they prefer, in this case compulsory renewals of the lease, and select a law
to govern the arrangement that is not the shari'a.192  This is exceedingly
common,193 even if a highly disingenuous, hypocritical,  and obfuscatory
measure given the professed desire to practice a specifically Islamic form of
commerce.
185.  See supra note 5.
186.  See VOGEL & HAYES, supra note 6, at 143; see also MUHAMMAD  NEJATULLAH SIDDIQI,
ISSUES  IN IsLAMIC  BANKING 49 (1983);  SALEH, supra note 130, at 118-19.
187.  E1-Gamal, supra note 5, at 9.
188.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 144.
189.  See id.
190.  See id.
191.  See id.
192.  See id. at 263; see also Moghul & Ahmed, supra note 2, at 189-90 ("[Plarties to
Islamic finance transactions often assert English or New York law as the governing law
on the probability that the contracts are more likely to be enforced as written.").
193.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 263; see also Moghul & Ahmed, supra note
2, at 189-90.2007  Langdellianism and the Failureso f Islamic Finance
Second, gharar also  requires  ijara arrangements  to be cancellable  at
will because  of the  uncertainty  in  the  future  value  of the  leased  prop-
erty.194  This problem is addressed the same way as a renewable lease-by
contracting in violation of the shari'a or by relying on business reputation
and an informal understanding.195
A third and final difference is that the lessor, as the owner of the prop-
erty, must be responsible for all expenses related to its upkeep, on the the-
ory that ghararp rohibits placing an uncertain obligation of this sort on the
lessee.196  Again, commercial  actors routinely  ignore this rule and either
require the lessee to pay for the upkeep or purchase casualty insurance.197
Neither  of  these  options  complies  with  the  rules  established  by  the
Langdellian modalities.198
3.  Istisna'/Salam
Istisna' is  a  limited  exception  developed  through  istihsan  to  the
prohibitions  on the  sale of nonexistent  objects as  derived  by qiyas and
ijma'.199  The broader type  of advance purchase permitted by a specific
hadith was salam, or full advance payment for a generic product to be deliv-
ered at a later time.  Thus, istisna', with its more flexible payment terms,
did not cover the  more general  products that were  permitted  under the
doctrine of salam, as it dealt exclusively with manufacture.200  Moreover,
because it is based on the discretionary istihsan, it is supposed to be used
very sparingly.20 1  However, Islamic financiers have reversed the presump-
tion, and activities permitted under istisna' are now the rule rather than the
exception.202  As a result, they now use the terms salam and istisna' nearly
interchangeably,  applying the rules of istisna' to both.203  This approach is
particularly ironic given the apparent reluctance of Islamic financiers gen-
erally  to  overhaul  the  underlying  Langdellian  bases  that have  relegated
istihsan to such a minor role in the development of Islamic jurisprudence.
If the anti-formalist tool of istihsan is permitted to  do such considerable
violence to  the fundamental  Langdellian  principle  derived from  the Pro-
phetic hadith that the sale of nonexistent  objects is prohibited, then one
wonders why it could not also be used, for example, to do equal or lesser
violence to the prohibitions against interest.
In any event, istisna' permits a financial institution to request the con-
struction of a particular  item,  such as a house, and  to pay for it in, for
194.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 144.
195.  See id. at 145.
196.  See id. at 144.
197.  See id. at 145.
198.  See id. at 150.
199.  See RAYNER, supra note  134, at 27, 137-38.
200.  This is obvious from  the definition of the term istisna, which means, "to have
someone make something."  WEHR, supra note 93, at 615.
201.  See SANHuRI,  supra note 120, at 38.
202.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 146-47.
203.  See id. at 146-49.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
example,  three  annual  installments.204  A  second  istisna' could then be
concluded selling that same house to a prospective homeowner through a
longer  series  of  monthly  installments  extending,  for  example,  over  25
years.205  This arrangement renders any profit or risk sharing on the part
of the financial institution entirely illusory, as it is in all material respects a
fixed interest mortgage.206
4.  A Problem of Insurance
As derived under the Langdellian  modalities, the prohibition against
insurance  is  firm  and  absolute,  according  to  practitioners  of  Islamic
finance.  Commercial insurance both involves indirect investment in riba,
as most insurance companies place a large amount of their funds in inter-
est bearing accounts, and, more importantly, it involves payment of premi-
ums in exchange for a sum that may or may not ever be received based on
an entirely unpredictable future contingent event.207
Islamic finance has developed  an artifice known as a takaful, or soli-
darity, contract to circumvent the prohibition.20 8  Takaful derives from the
determination by some scholars that gratuitous contracts are exempt from
the rules of gharar2.09  Pursuant to  takaful, a group of Muslims agrees to
protect  its  members  in  the  case  of casualty  or  loss  by  pooling  their
resources through making regular payments, in the form of premiums, to
be invested in Islamically acceptable commercial products.210  The scheme
then functions in theory  as  an Islamic  financial  institution would, with
"profits" shared  amongst the beneficiaries and the providers.211  When a
casualty or loss occurs, the participants each "gift" a portion of the asset
pool to the bearer of the loss.212
204.  See id. at 146-47.
205.  See id.
206.  See id.
207.  See id. at 150.  The gharar violation is more fundamental, as insurance compa-
nies presumably could avoid the receipt of riba more readily than they could the uncer-
tainty that constitutes their reason for existence. It should be noted, however, that some
have  argued  that  even under  current  concepts  of gharar, insurance  is  permissible
because it is not the payment of premiums in the hope of receiving a payoff in the future,
but rather payment for a particular, certain service that is easily valued, avoidance of
risk.  This is akin, under such a formulation, to paying a guard to protect one's goods.  It
suffices to say for purposes of this Article, however, that this position has not gathered
very much support at all within the Islamic finance community.  See Vogel and Haes,
supra note 6, at 150 (referencing work of Mustafa Zarqa).
208.  See id. at 151.
209.  See id. at 151.  For a classical reference, see IBN RUSHD,  supra note 147, at 399
("[A]lI  which  cannot  be  sold  legitimately  from the  standpoint  of gharar [may  be
gifted].").
210.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 151-52.
211.  See MOHD. MA'SUM  BILLAH,  PRINCIPLES &  PRACTICES OF TAKAFUL  AND  INSURANCE
COMPARED  25 (2001).
212.  See id. Many seemingly respected advocates of Islamic finance strive mightily to
find alternative  grounds upon which  the doctrine of tahaful might be grounded.  See
generally Mohd. Ma'sum Billah, Sources of Law Affecting 'Takaful', 2 INT'L J. ISLtAMIC  FIN.
SERVICES  4, available at http://islamic-finance.net/journals/journal8/mmbillahvol2no4.
pdf. These grounds vary from a Prophetic recommendation that one take precautionary2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
This approach is problematic for several reasons.  First, the gift seems
to require that an offeror be bound before the identity of the receiver of the
gift or the value of the gift is even known, a difficult proposition to sustain
as  a general  matter.213  Second,  the notion of  a group  of friendly and
brotherly Muslims agreeing to support each other in times of need becomes
especially difficult to sustain as economies of scale increase in size, and the
number of participants grows so that they no longer have any personal or
commercial  relationship  with  each  other.  However,  most  importantly,
institutions offering takaful products  are not acting gratuitously.214  The
donations made by the participants in the scheme function in all respects
like Islamic banking accounts.  This disingenuous reference  to charitable
activity  is inherently  deceptive to  prospective  purchasers of the product
and potentially damaging to regulatory  frameworks in the operable juris-
dictions.  This is a for profit contract, and a straightforward application of
the rules of ghararm  ust invalidate it if the modalities are taken seriously.
In some cases,  this descent into jurisprudential delusion is taken  a
step further.  Islamic financial institutions often purchase general commer-
cial insurance on the grounds that takaful insurance is not available to the
extent that  the bank needs  it, and commercial  necessity  demands  that
some form of insurance be available.215  Otherwise, the bank justifies the
purchase on the grounds that commercial insurance  itself can be consid-
ered a form of takaful.216  The former approach is essentially an admission
that the Langdellian modalities have failed to address commercial realities
despite their willingness  to employ the most transparent of techniques  to
achieve  standard  financial  objectives.  The  latter  approach  is  even  less
grounded in commercial realities, as a legal doctrine that relies on the clas-
measures to ensure that a camel does not flee to Prophetic blessings upon those who
remove hardships from Muslim brothers.  See id.  By and large, none of them is sensible
enough to rebut, other than to indicate that they deal with recommended measures that
have absolutely nothing to do with gharar. One of the most popular alternative grounds
appears to be based upon the Muslim penal doctrine known  as aqilah, pursuant to
which particular members of a tribe are jointly responsible  for the payment  of blood
money to the family of a victim killed by the tribe.  See id.; see also BILLAH,  supra note
211,  at  3-6; Yon  Bahiah  Wan Aris, Takaful-An  Option to Conventional  Insurance: A
Malaysian Model (2004), available at http://www.icmif.org/2k4takaful/site/documents/
an%20option%20to%20conventional%20insurance.pdf;  Muhammad Ayub, Takaful- An
Alternative to Insurance, available at http://www.sbp.org.pk/departments/ibd/Takaful.
pdf. Precisely what such an obligation in the penal law has to do with contractual rules
concerning gharar mystifies the author, and the fact that respected Islamic professors
and directors of banking operations make such logically fatuous claims demonstrates
the Islamic banking community's discomfort with the bases upon which the practice of
takaful rests.
213.  This approach certainly would violate the classical rules concerning gifts, which
require at least an offer and acceptance by a known individual of a known object.  See
IBN RUSHD, supra note 147, at 361.
214.  Takaful contracts  are generally  offered  by large  financial  institutions  in the
Islamic world.  See, e.g.,  International Cooperative  and Mutual Insurance Federation,
Takaful Directory, http://www.icmif.org/2k4takaful/site/directory.asp.
215.  See VOGEL & HAYES,  supra note 6, at 152.  The Islamic Development Bank, per-
haps the world's largest Islamic bank, adopts this approach.  See id.
216.  See id.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
sification of standard commercial insurance providers as charitable institu-
tions is patently absurd.
C.  Langdellianism  and Islamic Finance
In their consequential  failures, Langdellianism  and Islamic jurispru-
dential theory mirror each other almost entirely.  Part I of this Article men-
tioned  four  primary causes  for the  fall of Langdellianism:  (1) failure  to
articulate its own  ontological constituent units;  (2)  inability to admit the
possibility  of inconsistent  rules  within  the  modality  which  necessarily
resulted in judicial discretion; (3)  separation from the experiential realities
in which the law operates, leading to willful abandonment of its principles
by judges and juries alike;  and (4) imperviousness to change in a rapidly
changing social and economic environment.  All of these, save the first, are
equally  applicable in the Islamic context.
Proponents  of the  modalities  will  often  apply  doctrines  in  wildly
inconsistent manners.  For example, they will decry as defeatist or apolo-
getic any suggestion that istihsan, or any other doctrine, should be used to
exempt money loans from a hadith that deals fundamentally with trades of
items, such as precious metals and foodstuffs, which are not the contempo-
rary basis of currency.  Yet proponents permit the practice of istisna, all but
obliterating  the  former fundamental  principle  that sales  of  nonexistent
objects are forbidden, which is a far greater use of istihsan2. 17  The quasi-
scientific approach appears not to provide the level of certainty intended.
When this implicit discretion is insufficient to achieve a desired result,
even  proponents of the modalities will ignore  the methodological  princi-
ples  to which  they  claim  obedience.  This departure  from legal  require-
ments might be achieved directly, by requiring a lessee to pay for upkeep of
property  he leases notwithstanding the Islamic prohibition, or indirectly,
by creating such nonsensical concepts as charitable insurance.  In either
event, as with Langdell in the American context, the modalities are often
unworkable  and consequently  unheeded  despite claims  of adherence  to
them.
Finally, the Islamic Langdellian modalities are impervious to the types
of changes required to develop a sensible commercial jurisprudence.  The
rules  of riba and gharar are now ironclad through  reductive understand-
ings of ijma and cannot be altered without abandoning the modality.  As a
217.  These stark inconsistencies often arise from the fact that the modern proponents
of Islamic  finance tend  to presume  all classical jurists have  applied the  Langdellian
modalities faithfully,  and, in a process  known as takhayyur, pick and choose among
disparate classical rules, like spare parts at a junkyard, selecting that which seems more
convenient and in keeping with commercial reality.  See An-Na'im, supra note 124, at 45
(describing takhayyur). For example, as the classical Hanafi jurist, Kasani, provides for
the practice of istisna in his writings, proponents of Islamic finance accept and substan-
tially expand the practice.  See KASANI,  supra note 156; see also Muhammad AI-Bashir
Muhammad Al-Amine,  Istisna' and its Application in Islamic Banking, 16 ARAB L.Q. 22
(2001).  Compare supra note 128 (discussing a late classical rule with no basis for sup-
port in the  Langdellian modalities that is nonetheless  relied upon by proponents  of
Islamic financ).2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
result, jurists continue to struggle with concepts as basic as insurance and
interest on debt, developing extensive artifices to  address them while the
modern  commercial  world  races  ahead  with  financial  and  commercial
innovations far more complex.  The author does not doubt that further arti-
fice and fiction may develop to deal with commercial innovation.  However,
it will become less and less clear what the benefits of Langdellian jurispru-
dential theory precisely  are, while the increasing transaction costs caused
by the unnecessary complexity will surely come under hightened scrutiny.
Those who looked to Islamic  finance to create a more just and equitable
system  will no doubt  begin to  look elsewhere,  as  the shari'a developed
under the Langdellian hermeneutic is not meeting the needs of Muslims.
TV.  Alternative Approaches
The task remains to determine whether the shari'a can play a salutary
role in the commercial lives of the Muslim body politic, and, if so, exactly
what  type  of jurisprudential  approach  should  replace  the  Langdellian
modality that currently dominates.218
Continuing the comparison to American intellectual and academic tra-
dition further than this Article has so far could invite something akin to the
more extreme forms of American Legal Realism in the Islamic juristic tradi-
tion.  Such an approach would consider doctrine entirely irrelevant to rule-
making, rendering questions as to whether a particular  transaction were
riba or bai an exercise  in "transcendental nonsense."219 Jurisprudence  of
this sort would  pay heed  solely to  policy-based  notions of fairness  and
social justice, social, political and commercial reality, and whatever other
factors, including personal biases and prejudices, might matter to the deci-
sion-maker.  This would not be likely to succeed in the Islamic world.220
Muslims, as a general matter, probably would not ignore all of traditional
Islamic doctrine  in  fashioning  a code of conduct.  Most  Muslims would
probably regard an approach that advocated a complete departure from the
Qur'an and the hadith as entirely illegitimate from  an Islamic perspective,
regardless whether it reflected notions of fairness and social justice.221
218.  Realistically, modern commercially successful nations will not reformulate their
entire banking structures on Islamic principles at any point in the near future, regardless
of how  those principles are defined.  However,  as  is currently  the  case in Malaysia,
nations could very well tolerate, and even encourage, a separate Islamic financial system
operating alongside the conventional one. See WARDE, supra note 9, at 123.  The current
section therefore contemplates the possibility of such a parallel approach.
219.  Felix S. Cohen, Transcendental Nonsense and the FunctionalA pproach, 35 COLUM.
L. REv. 809, 820 (1935).
220.  Cf. Jackson, supra note 38 (developing an approach drawn largely from Roberto
Unger and Stanley Fish).
221.  Of course, this approach would be somewhat marginal within the judiciary in
the American context as well, because total disregard for the orthodox bases on which
judges render decisions, such as sound interpretation of constitutional text, is hardly
characteristic  of the manner in which  most opinions are written.  Professor  Fletcher
properly points out that American legal culture tends to view the Constitution as similar
to a religious text in many ways, such as its reluctance to seek amendments, its refusal to
delete amended text even when the text is offensive to modern sensibilities, and its his-Cornell International Law Journal Vol.  40
In light of this, it is important to  establish principles for alternative
approaches towards Islamic finance that would ensure both credibility and
achievement of ontological objectives.222 These would lay the groundwork
for,  but  would  not establish  in exact  detail,  alternative  methodologies.
Four basic principles are apparent,  and each is discussed in turn.
A.  Qur'anic Maxims
The methodology necessary to reformulate Islamic finance could and
should claim strict adherence to the Qur'an's text.  Given the lack of defini-
tion afforded to riba, the Qur'an's passages present no obstacle to a sensi-
ble jurisprudence that harmonizes commercial reality with some modicum
of social justice.  In fact, the prohibition of riba can contribute to the crea-
tion  of a social justice framework.  Other verses  that permit  commerce,
urge believers  to honor their contracts,  and forbid games of chance seem
equally salutary standing on their own, posing no impediment to the crea-
tion of a sound modern economy.223
toric internal battles between literalists and those who seek to follow the spirit rather
than the letter of the text.  See George P. Fletcher, Three Nearly Sacred Books in Western
Law, 54 ARK. L. REv.  1, 3-8 (2001).
222.  The approach herein is primarily jurisprudential, advocating alternative means
of developing legal doctrine to serve functional ends.  The author would be remiss for
this Article not to  mention parallel  efforts by the economist  Professor El-Gamal  to
develop economic proposals to conform to what EI-Gamal describes as the "spirit" of the
riba and gharar prohibitions.  EI-Gamal, supra note 174, at 12-15.  Professor El-Gamal
argues that a solution for Islamic banks and insurance companies would be to adopt the
mutual form, where the depositors are themselves the shareholders to the extent of their
deposits.  Id. at 15.  The managers of mutual institutions avoid excessive and potentially
exploitative risk-taking in commercial transactions because they face no need to raise
stock prices.  Id. While there is much to be said in favor of EI-Gamal's ideas, gaps in his
ideas exist from his understandable decision not to confront legal doctrine, as this Arti-
cle seeks to do.  Specifically, it is difficult to see absent a functional jurisprudence how
El-Gamal's vague notions of "spirit" could be realized in practice. The dominant formal-
ists would insist that their practice is no less Islamic given its compliance with shari'a
and, absent jurisprudential  reformulations, little could be said in response to such a
claim.
223.  This is emphatically not the case with respect to other legal realms where some
of the Qur'an's passages do create substantial problems.  These include the plainly gen-
der discriminatory verses on inheritance, see QUR'AN 4:11; the sanctioning of polygamy,
see QUR'AN 4:3; spousal abuse in certain circumstances, see QUR'AN 4:34; severe corpo-
ral punishment for consensual sexual activity, see QUR'AN 24:2; and the suggestion of
some verses, contradicted by others, to kill unbelievers wherever they might be found,
see QUR'AN 9:5.  But see QUR'AN  16:126 (urging tolerance even of unbelievers who com-
mit some sort of transgression).  Reform-minded methodologies have been advanced to
address  these  issues.  See,  e.g.,  An-Na'im,  supra note  64, at  52-60  (discussing  the
approach of a prominent Sudanese jurist calling for abrogation of the problematic verses
on the grounds that earlier contradictory verses speak to the fundamental dignity of all
persons and were meant to be universal, while the problematic passages related to rules
delivered to a specific society at a specific time); Bernard K. Freamon, Slavery, Freedom,
and the Doctrine of Consensus in Islamic Jurisprudence, 11 HAuv. HUM.  RTs. J. 1, 56-64
(1998) (arguing persuasively for a liberalized version of ijma to take precedence  over
Qur'anic verses  that presuppose the existence  of slavery).  Nevertheless, despite these
attempts, to the extent that Qur'anic maxims are not followed in Islamic nations, it is not
because of a comprehensive reexamination of the verses, but rather their replacement
with secular codes. See WEiss, supra note 35, at 188. This has led An-Na'im to advocate2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
B.  The Roles of Hadith, Istihsan, and Istislah: An Examination of
Sanhuri and Sadr
While significant portions of the hadith may be apocryphal, they are
generally deemed to be the utterances of the Apostle of God and, therefore,
constitute a  significant part  of any Islamic jurisprudence.  Moreover,  as
much of the ritual aspects of Islamic practice are bound to the hadith, any
attempt to divorce Islam from the hadith would so unmoor the traditional
bases of Islamic thought that the religion would be scarcely recognizable to
224
its adherents.
However, unlike the Qur'an, absolute compliance  to the terms of the
hadith and, more importantly, their reductionist expansion through qiyas is
not possible if a sensible alternative modality is to be constructed.  If hadith
prohibiting the sale of the fish in the sea and the trade of precious metals
with unilateral  excess in value  are not only followed  but interpreted and
expanded through the doctrine of qiyas in the manner of modern Islamic
finance, then the same, or similar, problems as exist now will inevitably re-
emerge.  The  hadith must be taken  seriously as  constituent elements  of
Islamic doctrine, and qiyas need not be abandoned in its entirety, but the
roles of istislah and istihsan in applying the hadith itself must be substan-
tially increased.225  This has considerably more purchase among the Mus-
an alternative Islamic solution that might be termed secular, in which the shari'ai s not
the positive law of the State.  Abdullahi An-Naim, Shari'a and Positive Legislation: Is an
Islamic State Possible or Viable?, in 5 YEARBOOK OF ISLAMIC AND MIDDLE  EASTERN LAW 30-
31 (Eugene Cotran and Chibli Mallat eds., 1999). An-Na'im points out that the develop-
ment of the shari'a,w  ith its divergent opinions among jurists in the classical era, clashes
conceptually with the manner in which positive legislation is enacted by a state.  The
political organs of a state, including its legislature, cannot really be expected to select
among the various conflicting juristic rules constituting the shari'a and deem whatever
politically expedient solution emerged to be the Divine Command of God.  See id. at 32-
36. An-Na'im's work is bold and noteworthy, though orthogonal to the purposes of this
Article.  Even if one were to assume a total separation  of positive legislation from the
shari'a, an alternative Islamic financial system functioning alongside that of the State, as
is the case in Malaysia currently, could still play a salutary role in Islamic societies and
ideas on alternative modalities would still prove useful in the context of Islamic finance.
224.  See, e.g.,  RiSALA, supra note 70,  i 535-37, 613-18 (pointing out correctly that
the hadith often provides context to Islamic ritualistic practice).
225.  It should also be noted that an increasingly visible role for istislah and istihsan is
not an idea that has been invented by this author.  For example, Professor John Esposito
has spoken favorably about both istihsan and istislah.  See John L. Esposito, Perspectives
on Islamic Law Reform,  13 N.Y.U. J. INT'L L. & POL. 217,  241-42 (1980); see also AN-
NA'IM, supra note 64, at 51 (referring to a fourteenth century jurist with similar ideas).
Moreover, much of this notion of reformulating  the competing roles of qiyas, istihsan
and istislah is often subsumed under the rubric of a call for ijtihad, or independent
juristic reasoning.  See, e.g., Esposito, supra note 225, at 241-42; MALLAT, supra note 17,
at 124-26 (describing Sadr's theory in terms that sound remarkably like a form of istis-
lah).  This call arises from the fact that Muslim legend holds that at some point at the
end of the  12th century jurists  agreed by  ijma that there was no purpose  to further
development  of modalities  and rules,  and supposedly  "closed  the  doors"  of ijtihad.
COULSON,  supra note 65,  at 81,  202; contra Wael B. Hallaq,  Was  the Gate of Ijtihad
Closed?, 16 INT'LJ. MIDDLE E. STUD. 3, 4 (1984) (suggesting that the fabled "closing of the
doors" never in fact happened).  Rather than reason independently,  later jurists were
expected to follow faithfully the theories of their predecessors through a process known
as taqlid.  See ORIGINS,  supra note 69,  at  121-23  (describing the distinction betweenCornell internationalL aw Journal Vol. 40
lim  body  politic  than  any  suggestion  that  the  Qur'an's  verses  be
reevaluated, and seminal jurists and legal  scholars, such as Sanhuri and
Sadr, have taken ginger steps in this direction.
1.  Sanhuri's Definitional Approach
Sanhuri has an alternative interpretation of the historic prohibition of
riba that is built upon  both the  sanctity  of the  Qur'an  and substantial
respect for the hadith.226  For ease of reference, and because of its emphasis
on determining what the hadith are precisely supposed to mean in light of
Qur'anic verse,  the author calls this approach the "definitional" approach
or theory.
Sanhuri argues that the language  of the Prophetic  hadith on riba al-
jahiliyya, along with a reading of the Qur'anic verses on the subject, sug-
gests that the central Qur'anic prohibition concerned only the form of riba,
where a debtor was told on the due date of his loan that he either needed to
make payment in full or the amount due would increase.227 While Sanhuri
does not disregard  the prohibitions  in the hadith on delayed  or unequal
exchanges that lead to the interest prohibition, he does suggest that they
are prohibitions  of means (tahreem wasa'il), and that their purpose is to
prevent commercial actors from circumventing the central Qur'anic prohi-
bition  (tahreem maqasid) of riba al-jahiliyya.228  Therefore,  Sanhuri  rea-
sons, as the prohibitions on trade are of means,  they may be set aside in
cases  of need (haja), unlike  the central intended prohibition, which may
never be set aside.229  Sanhuri indicates that need is a preponderance  of
the public interest (al maslaha al rajiha), which in the modern era clearly
points to permitting debt.230  Therefore, the only riba prohibition would be
on agreements to increase the value of a loan in exchange for an extension.
The argument turns the Langdellian modalities on their head.  Rather
than search the hadith for the fundamental principles, Sanhuri looks first
to the  Qur'an,  then  defines  on  the basis  of the  Qur'an  and the  hadith
exactly what policy the Qur'anic provision is meant to further and subse-
quently reduces the Prophetic hadith not centered on the Qur'anic prohibi-
tion to some sort of subsidiary repealable status, implicitly to be evaluated
ijtihad and taqlid). The prominent jurist Muhammad Abdu in the early part of the twen-
tieth century called for the doors of ijtihad to be reopened, and this has become a battle
cry of sorts for reform of every conceivable variety.  See, e.g., COULSON, supra note 65, at
201-02; IRSHAD  MANji,  THE TROUBLE WITH ISLAM:  A MUSLIM'S  CALL FOR REFORM  OF HER
FAITH 158-86 (2003) (using the term ijtihad to propose broad changes to the substance
of shari'a, including abrogation of Qur'anic verses).  While the term ijtihad hardly has
any definable methodology attached to it, in the modern era, proponents of ijtihad, such
as Sadr and Abdu, generally seek an expansive use of reason to develop creative Islamic
solutions to the problems of modern society while still remaining essentially faithful to
the Qur'an and hadith. See MALLAT,  supra note 17, at 124. This effectively is a reorgani-
zation of the relative priorities of istislah, istihsan, and qiyas.
226.  See SANHURI,  supra note 120.
227.  See id. at 241-42.
228.  See id. at 242.
229.  See id. at 242-43.
230.  See id. at 243.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
on the basis of istislah or istihsan.231  Sanhuri's definitional solution is not
entirely satisfactory, as it seems to prevent or complicate debt restructur-
ing, which is a non-exploitative practice, and does nothing to reformulate
riba in a manner that accords with contemporary notions of social justice.
However,  it  lays  the  groundwork  for  a  possible  approach  that  shows
promise.
Though Sanhuri  does not apply  his definitional  theory to gharar, it
could apply equally well.  The Qur'anic prohibition clearly refers to games
of chance  and divination,  as  opposed to  commercial  activity,  and  this,
therefore,  is the intended  prohibition.232  Prohibitions against particular
commercial uncertainties,  such as the sale of a pregnant camel, are effec-
tively prohibitions of means to prevent parties from being able to circum-
vent  the intended  prohibition  through  artifice.233  Therefore,  the hadith
may  be set aside  given  the need  for commercial  transactions involving
uncertainty.  This would limit gharars o that it did not impose any substan-
tial constraints  on commercial  practices,  but would not allow gharar to
serve any social justice function either.
2.  Sadr's Contextual Approach
The Iraqi Shi'i jurist, Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, is one of the founders
of  Islamic  economics,  a  staunch  opponent  of  interest,  and  a  highly
respected  jurist,  primarily  among  Shi'is.  Sadr  suggested  a  flexible
approach to hadith different from Sanhuri's.234  Sadr's Islamist credentials
are beyond doubt, and in addition to his works on economics and bank-
ing,235 he is also considered to have had a role in the drafting of the Iranian
constitution.236  Despite this, Sadr's revolutionary steps in the direction of
a liberal and anti-formalist approach to Islamic jurisprudence is an impor-
tant part of his legacy that cannot be gainsaid.237
231.  Sanhuri's approach  also reflects a certain civil law mentality given his crucial
role in developing the civil codes in various Middle Eastern nations.  Professor Fletcher
has noted in a highly  influential  article  that those  steeped in common law  culture
engage in a type  of "flat" thinking that emphasizes broad  notions of reasonableness,
while civilians prefer a "structured" approach wherein particular absolute rights, or in
this case prohibitions, are established, but limited and qualified by doctrine.  George P.
Fletcher, The Right and The Reasonable, 98 HAnv. L. REV.  949 (1984).  This certainly
seems to be the case here, as Sanhuri has established a blanket prohibition  and then
created particular exceptions based on "need," while the author's immediate common
law reaction  to Sanhuri's ideas turned to whether a multi-pronged balancing test con-
cerning the reasonableness of the transaction might be a better approach.  In any event,
as Sanhuri and Sadr are highly influential figures in the Islamic world, the author pre-
fers to engage their ideas to develop a sensible modality rather than simply adopt a pure
flat approach with no precedent in Islamic jurisprudence.
232.  See SANHURI,  supra note 120.
233.  See id.
234.  See, e.g., Freamon, supra note 19, at 340-41 (describing Sadr's influence among
Shi'ites); MALLAT, supra note 17, at 124 (discussing his influence among Sunnis).
235.  See supra note 17.
236.  See Freamon, supra note 19, at 341.
237.  Sadr was killed by Saddam Hussein in early April  1980, and he can hardly be
faulted with all that went wrong in Iran, or Islamic finance, after his death.  See Mot-
tahedeh, supra note 72, at 31.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
One of Sadr's revolutionary proposals regarding hadith,238 which the
author shall call the "contextual" approach or theory, involved an implicit
bifurcation of Muhammad's activities conducted or advocated in speech or
action, and those he is deemed to have accepted by failing to object when
the practice was undertaken by others.239  Sadr argues that the latter must
be evaluated in light of the circumstances in which the practice in question
arose, and that failing to do so would be to commit the grievous jurispru-
dential error of "divorc[ing]...  the practice from its conditions and circum-
stances. '240  For example, if Muhammad  said nothing when  a particular
sick person drank something in his presence, then that would not make the
consumption  of  the  particular  item  permissible  for  all time.241  Study
would have to be undertaken to determine whether Muhammad was per-
mitting  an exception based on an extraordinary  disease, for example,  or
whether  other  conditions  rendered  the  implied permission  exceptional
rather than general.242  Sadr argues that it is impossible simply to isolate a
particular activity from the circumstances in which it arose.243  This is an
implicit call for istislah to play a more significant role in jurisprudence.244
However,  Sadr limits  his  theory  to  tacit  approvals  by  Muhammad,  not
hadith where  Muhammad  clearly  stated  his  approval  of  a  particular
245
activity.
As with Sanhuri, Sadr shows an unmistakable willingness to lower cer-
tain hadith from their historic role as the source of fundamental principles,
and his  continued  popularity notwithstanding  this stance is notable.246
Moreover, his hadith-limiting  contextual approach is capable of significant
development  if expanded to  spoken  hadith.  The problematic  manifesta-
tions of the doctrines  of riba and gharar could be readily obliterated and
replaced with more appealing interpretations.  However, the expanded con-
textual approach has its difficulties, among them a lack of interpretive con-
trol, which the next section addresses.
238.  Sadr advocated another idea concerning hadith that is considerably more radical;
namely, that the statements made by Muhammad in his role not as Divine Apostle, but
as judge  and  administrator  of his community,  are  not permanently  binding on the
Islamic community.  lqtisaduna, supra note 17, at 262.  This idea opens entirely new
possibilities and implications respecting hadith that are far too extensive to discuss here.
239.  See IQTISADUNA, supra note 17, at 370-71.
240.  Id. at 370-72 (translated by author).
241.  See id. at 374.
242.  See id.
243.  See id.
244.  Sadr's calls for broader use of istislah are also implicit when he declares the need
to develop a jurisprudence based not only on ethics (ikhlaqiyya), but also on realism
(waqi'iyya), therefore distinguishing what he derides as Marxism developing  idealistic
and fanciful rules that assume selflessness and sinlessness and disregard the condition
of human beings.  See id. at 266.  Sadr's assault on Marxist theory brings to mind the
ideas of another pragmatist operating in the United States, Oliver Wendell Holmes, who
famously derided the notion of law as being some sort of idealistic "brooding omnipres-
ence in the sky."  Southern Pacific Company v. Marie Jensen, 244 U.S. 205, 222 (1917)
(Holmes, J., dissenting).
245.  See IQTISADUNA, supra note 17, at 372-75.
246.  See, e.g.,  Rodney Wilson, The Contribution of Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr to Con-
temporary Islamic Economic Thought, 9 J. ISLAMIC  STUD. 46, 46-47 (1998).2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
C.  Assertion of Interpretive Control within an Alternative  Modality
1.  A Problem of "Subjectivity"
Professor  Fazlur Rahman  has  expressed  some concerns  about  pro-
posed expansive uses of istislah, noting in particular that it could lead to
the creation of undue subjectivity.247  Sadr echoes the criticism and clearly
struggles in Iqtisaduna to achieve a balance between the expansive form of
creative  jurisprudential  thinking  that  he  deems  necessary  to  build  an
Islamic economic system,  and what he calls  dhatiyya, or  subjectivity.248
The concern is that the assertion of some interpretive  control will devolve
into incoherence,  with generalized  Qur'anic verses  effectively ignored  or
interpreted  in  a  way  that  merely  suits  the  particular  interpreter's
preferences.
Sanhuri's  definitional  approach  manifests clear  interpretive  control,
though it also  continues  to  inhibit the  development  of Islamic  finance.
Sadr's contextual approach, if expanded to spoken hadith, is far more flexi-
ble, but could also create considerable problems regarding lack of interpre-
tive control, as every hadith would then be reopen to evaluation with the
only question of continued  applicability being whether changed  circum-
stances warranted it. It is difficult to see how this would not devolve into a
jurisprudence of convenience and be dismissed as such.
2.  Proposed Synthesis of Definitionalism and Contextualism
However,  a synthesis of the two  approaches  is possible.  One could
apply Sanhuri's more reductive  definitional method in principle, but in a
slightly modified form in instances where the Qur'an did not define any
particular  practice as  forbidden but rather  defined a  more general  stan-
dard.  After applying this definitional  approach  and reaching the logical
conclusion  that Sanhuri did, the jurist could apply Sadr's  contextual the-
ory to outline  the prohibited practices  at issue in a  more  contemporary
fashion.
To take the example of riba, the argument would follow Sanhuri's defi-
nitional approach and define the Qur'anic prohibition, the intended prohi-
bition, to be riba al-jahiliyya. Sanhuri  originally stopped here because he
reasoned  that riba in the Qur'an was defined  strictly as riba al-jahiliyya,
and the Qur'anic ban could therefore  not be disturbed.249  However,  the
argument could proceed, adopting Sadr's contextual theory that the partic-
ular intended prohibition of Muhammad's time is no longer an exploitative
practice.250  Using a liberalized form of qiyas interspersed with istislah or
istihsan, the extended conclusion would be that the prohibited activities of
the Qur'an would no longer be the renegotiation of a debt but rather prac-
tices that are analogous to the intended prohibition in Muhammad's time
247.  See Fazlur  Rahman,  Toward Reformulating  the Methodology of Islamic Law,  12
N.Y.U. J. INT'L L. & POL. 219, 223 (1979).
248.  See IQTISADUNA,  supra note 17, at 364-90.
249.  See SANHURI,  supra note 120, at 172-73.
250.  See IQTISADUNA, supra note 17, at 40-41.Cornell International Law Journal Vol. 40
but adapted to contemporary society.251  These would be situations where
a party with enormous leverage over a second party exploits that leverage
to its considerable gain and the first party's considerable loss.  As for the
prohibitions of means, Sadr's contextual approach could be used to deter-
mine other practices similar to the hadith under current circumstances that
might be used as artifices to circumvent the intended prohibition.  Trades
that appear massively  exploitative and one-sided, without direct evidence
of excessive leverage, could be one example.  This may be broad as a defini-
tional matter, but hardly creates impossibly wide interpretive  parameters
over the term riba. Moreover, the synthesis promotes social justice by limit-
ing  the  exploitative  practices  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  yet  still
defines those practices in a commercially  practicable manner.
Gharar could be approached similarly,  but with somewhat  different
results.  The  intended  prohibition,  as  derived  under  the  definitional
approach, would be modern  manifestations  of games  of chance,  whose
parameters  seem rather self-evident.  However,  in evaluating  the prohibi-
tion of means under the contextual approach, it is possible to imagine cer-
tain limitations on commercial activity.  The basis for the limitation would
be that the risks that certain activities entail do not justify the commercial
purposes of the enterprise, and would thereby provide a means to circum-
vent the intended prohibition.252
These  are  simply  illustrative  examples;  an  entire  modality  would
require  considerably  further  exposition and  methodological  rigor by  an
interpretive  community.  However, by these examples, the author attempts
to  show  how an experientially  driven jurisprudence,  grounded in tradi-
tional Islamic doctrine, could develop sensible legal rules without devolv-
ing into either  the logic-driven  quasi-scientific  obsessions  of Langdell  or
the nihilism of Critical Legal Theory.
D.  Fairness and Social Justice in an Islamic Context
Given the importance  to its ontology,  Islamic  banking is effectively
senseless unless it provides some form of social justice and fairness.  As
financial institution patrons  are likely Muslim, it is reasonable  to assume
that whatever form of social justice the institution exhibits  should have
particular Islamic characteristics.  Riba and gharar, sensibly interpreted to
prohibit particularly risky or exploitative  practices, are not the only doc-
trines that might be used to promote this sort of fairness and social justice
within an Islamic  context,  though they are  among  the most significant.
Banks might take  the mutual form as  well to ensure  their adherence  to
251.  This type of analogy is far removed from the original form of qiyas by which a
rule was not so much modified as expanded.  Nevertheless,  the reasoning is analogical,
and the use of the term qiyas is intentional, attempting to reflect some sort of proposed
stability in the development of jurisprudential thought.
252.  For example, this is not an unreasonable conclusion to reach with respect to day
trading.  The author also emphasizes again that these rules need not be enacted as law
but rather could function as part of a voluntary financial or commercial system operat-
ing alongside a conventional one.  See supra note 218.2007  Langdellianism and the Failures of Islamic Finance
these new principles, as El-Gamal suggests.253  In addition, given  the his-
toric  recognition  of interest-free  loans  as  acts  of charity,  Islamic  banks
could also be required to devote a small portion of their portfolio towards
such loans to  those in need.  Islamic banks could refrain from investing
assets in Islamically prohibited industries, such as those related to alcohol
or gambling, and donate to legitimately charitable causes.  Many of these
doctrines  are easy to develop and achieve, the only issue being their com-
mercial practicability.
Conclusion
Islamic finance, as currently developed under the Langdellian  formal-
ism that defines Islamic jurisprudence, is an intellectually  bankrupt con-
struct.  It has  shown itself to  be little more  than an incoherent  web  of
medieval rules, a convenient and specific blindness respecting those rules
in particular contexts, and an obfuscatory set of measures intended to lend
the entire affair a patina of genuine religious legitimacy.  The goal was the
creation of a fairer economic system rooted fundamentally  in partnership
profit-sharing.  However,  Islamic  finance  results  in  a  system  rife  with
unnecessary  complexities  and inconsistencies,  decidedly more expensive
than  its  standard  commercial  analogues  and  more  deceptive  given  its
highly exaggerated assertions of fairness, equity and, in some cases, char-
ity.  This has resulted from the application of formalistic interpretive sys-
tems with alleged origins in the jurisprudential theories of Shafi'i.  As with
the Langdellians  in the United States, the quest for certainty, uniformity,
and clarity, without regard to changing circumstances or considerations of
policy, has led to the development  of rules that simply cannot be applied
directly, or even  sensibly.
While  an  approach  towards  commercial  jurisprudence  that  draws
from  more  radical  trends within  the  American  Legal  Realist  paradigm
seems impossible in the Islamic context, an alternative modality does seem
possible, so long as it remains within particular parameters, among them a
legitimate claim to faithful adherence to Qur'anic verse, substantial respect
for the hadith, and sufficient systematization and methodological  rigor to
avoid what  some Islamic jurists might  deem  subjectivity.  More work  is
required to develop these ideas further.
Some may accuse the author of lifting longstanding prohibitions in the
Islamic framework merely to satisfy global commercial demand.  However,
it seems clear from current experience that at some level the demands of
the marketplace will reign supreme under any modality.  The only question
is whether to adopt a system that acknowledges this reality while retaining
a distinctively Islamic character infused with populist notions of social jus-
tice and fairness, or to deceive the Muslim populace with elaborate obfus-
catory  measures  intended  to  retain  the  form  of  profit-sharing  while
concealing the substantive reality of debt and risk-based finance.
253.  See supra note 222.