THE GHOST THAT SLAYED  THE MANDATE
Kevin C. Walsh*
Virginia v. Sebelius is a federal lawsuit in which Virginia has challenged
PresidentO  bama's signature legislative initiative of health care reform. Virginia
has sought declaratorya nd injunctive relief to vindicate a state statute declaring
that no Virginia resident shall be requiredt o buy health insurance. To defend this
state law from the preemptive effect offederal law, Virginia has contended that
the federal legislation'si ndividual mandate to buy health insurance is unconstitu-
tional. Virginia's lawsuit has been one of the most closely followed andp olitical-
ly salientf ederal cases in recent times. Yet the very features of the case that have
contributedt o its political salience also require its dismissalf or lack of statutory
subject matter jurisdiction. The Supreme Court has placed limits on statutory
subject matter jurisdiction over declaratoryj udgment actions in which a state
seeks a declarationt hat a state statute is not preempted by federal law-precisely
the reliefs ought in Virginia v. Sebelius. These statutory limits are a sea wall;
they keep out, on statutory grounds, some suits that should otherwise be kept out
on Article III grounds. The statutory and constitutionall imits on federalj urisdic-
tion over suits like Virginia v. Sebelius insulatef ederal courtsf rom the strongp o-
liticalf orces surrounding lawsuits that follow from state statutes designed to
createf ederalj urisdiction over constitutionalc hallenges by states to federal law.
This Article identifies previously neglectedj urisdictional limits, shows why they
demand dismissal of Virginia v. Sebelius, and explains why it is appropriatef or
federalc ourts to be closed to suits of this type.
INTRODUCTION  ....................................................... 56
I.  VIRGINIA'S PURSUIT OF HEALTH CARE FREEDOM IN FEDERAL COURT.......58
II. No, VIRGINIA, THERE Is No FEDERAL JURISDICTION .................... 60
A.  No Parens PatriaeS tanding....................................60
B. No Statutory Subject Matter Jurisdiction  .......................... 61
C.  No Article III Case ofActual Controversy ......................... 67
D. Alternative JusticiabilityT  heories?...................  ............ 72
*  Assistant Professor, University of Richmond School of Law. Thank you to Wil-
liam Baude, Joseph Blocher, Samuel Bray, Richard Fallon, Jim Gibson, Abbe Gluck, Corin-
na Lain, Allison Orr Larsen, Caleb Nelson, James Pfander, Jack Preis, and Carl Tobias for
valuable feedback and helpful comments on earlier versions of this Article. Thank you, as
well, to Erin Barclay, Andrew Fulwider, Michael Matheson, and Amy Weiss for superb re-
search assistance.
5556 STANFORD  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
III. THE INSULATION ARISING OUT OF INCIDENTAL REVIEW.....................78
CONCLUSION  ..................................................... 83
POSTSCRIPT: A REPLY TO VIRGINIA'S MANDATE-CHALLENGE  TRIUMVIRATE ........ 85
INTRODUCTION
The situation presented  by a State's suit for a declaration of the validity of
state law is .. .not within the original jurisdiction of the United States district
courts.I
It must be remembered  that advisory opinions  are not merely advisory  opi-
nions. They are ghosts that slay.2
The  leading  constitutional  challenges  to  the recent  federal  health  care
reform legislation have involved a volatile mixture of powerful political forces
pressing for federal court validation. In these suits, elected state officials have
aimed to obtain accelerated, abstract review of the legislation's constitutionali-
ty. Mere minutes after President Obama signed the Patient Protection and Af-
fordable Care Act into law, Virginia filed one of the first lawsuits,  Virginia ex
rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, challenging the constitutionality of one of the Act's
key provisions.3 The first district court decision holding this provision uncons-
titutional came  in  Virginia v. Sebelius less than nine months later.4  In an at-
tempt to "fast-track"  the case for immediate Supreme Court review,  Virginia
1. Franchise Tax Bd. v. Constr. Laborers Vacation Trust, 463 U.S. 1, 21-22 (1983).
2. Felix Frankfurter, A Note on Advisory Opinions, 37 HARv. L. REv.  1002,  1008
(1924).  I recognize that "slew"  is the accepted past tense of the irregular verb "to slay."  I
have gone back and forth between "slew"  and "slayed" in successive drafts of this Article.
Bryan Garner continues to classify "slayed" as avoided in careful usage. BRYAN A. GARNER,
GARNER's  MODERN AMERICAN USAGE 752-53 (3d ed. 2009). Yet the usage has invaded the
Gray Lady at least once. See id. at 753 (quoting usage from the New York Times). And the
demise of "slew" is inevitable, even if not imminent. See David Derbyshire, How the Irregu-
lar Verb  Is Being  'Drived' to  Extinction, MAIL  ONuNE  (Oct.  11,  2007,  1:25  AM),
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-486935/How-irregular-verb-drived-extinction.html
(reporting on study conducted at Harvard University including "slew" in a class of infre-
quently used irregular verbs likely to have evolved into regular verbs within the next 500
years). Those who fault the analysis that follows for being overly wedded to precedent and
tied down by the past may take some solace in the avant-garde nature of this essay's titular
departure from stodgy old "slew."
3. See Kevin  Sack, Judge Voids Key Element of Obama Health Care Law, N.Y.
TIMES,  Dec.  14,  2010,  at  Al,  available  at  http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/14/
health/policy/14health.html ("Mr. Cuccinelli filed the lawsuit minutes after President Obama
signed the  law on March  23 and has been  discussing the case  on cable television  ever
since.").
4.  Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 728 F. Supp. 2d 768 (E.D. Va. 2010).
5. See Jennifer Haberkorn  & Sarah Kliff, Health Law Ruling Only the Beginning,
POLITICO (Dec. 14, 2010, 7:23 AM), http://www.politico.com/news/stories/1210/46344html
("Within hours of the ruling, Cuccinelli called for the judicial process to be 'fast-tracked,'
essentially bypassing the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals and moving directly to the U.S. Su-January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 57
filed a petition for certiorari  before judgment in the  Fourth Circuit Court of
Appeals.6 The Supreme Court denied the petition, but Virginia's  lawsuit re-
mained in the lead, as the first to be argued in a court of appeals. Although it
ended up being the last case decided in the first wave of mandate challenges to
hit the federal appellate  courts, the Fourth Circuit's ultimate holding that Vir-
ginia lacked  standing brought into public view jurisdictional problems  facing
state challenges to the mandate, problems that had previously escaped wide no-
tice.
Virginia's lawsuit presents on its face a prominent and critically important
question of federalism:  did Congress exceed the limits of its enumerated legis-
lative powers and thereby trench on a domain reserved by the Constitution to
state  power?  But the lawsuit also presents  a previously less  recognized  but
equally important question of separation of powers: is it within the federal judi-
cial power to determine in this lawsuit whether Congress exceeded its legisla-
tive powers?
The core claim of this Article is that federal court adjudication  of Virgin-
ia's lawsuit to enforce limits on federal legislative power exceeds the limits of
federalj udicial power. Due to limitations that the Supreme Court has placed on
federal  jurisdiction  under  the  Declaratory  Judgment  Act in  Franchise Tax
Board v. Construction Laborers Vacation Trust7 and Skelly Oil Co. v. Phillips
Petroleum Co.,8 there is no statutory subject matter jurisdiction over Virginia's
claim. In mandating dismissal of Virginia's lawsuit, these cases stop a slide into
accelerated,  abstract review that is inconsistent with traditional limitations on
federal judicial power.
The claim that there is no statutory subject matter jurisdiction in Virginia v.
Sebelius may seem incredible at first, given that Virginia's complaint seeks re-
lief from a federal law administered by federal officials, on the ground that the
federal law violates the Federal Constitution. That may be why nobody thought
to address it in the district court. But the claim's soundness becomes apparent
once  the nature  of Virginia's lawsuit  is brought  into proper  focus:  Virginia
seeks a declaration that its state law is not preempted. The Supreme Court has
held, however, that "[t]he  situation presented by a State's suit for a declaration
preme Court. Two top  Virginia Republicans,  Gov.  Bob McDonnell and House Minority
Whip Eric Cantor, joined in the request."). Although joined by others in the call for expe-
dited review after the ruling, Attorney General Cuccinelli's office had floated the idea of a
"fast-track" to the Supreme Court more than a week prior to the ruling. See Jim Nolan, Va.
May Seek Quick Care Ruling; Cuccinelli Considers Asking Supreme Court to Hear Case
Directly, RICH. TIMES-DISPATCH,  Dec. 5, 2010, at Al.
6. See Petition for Writ of Certiorari Before Judgment, Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v.
Sebelius, 131  S. Ct. 2152 (2011) (No. 10-1014), 2011 WL 465746.
7. 463 U.S.  1 (1983).
8. 339 U.S.  667 (1950).58 STANFORD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
of the validity of state law is .. .not within the original jurisdiction of the Unit-
ed States district courts."9
The jurisdictional issues surrounding  Virginia v. Sebelius are but the most
recent flashpoint  of a recurrent phenomenon  in American political  life-the
challenge of legislation in federal court almost immediately after enactment and
before it has a chance  to take deep root. The federal judiciary's  handling of
these challenges  over time, in turn, has influenced the  shape of jurisdictional
doctrine, as succeeding generations invoke legal processes and respond to their
opponents'  perceived abuses of these processes. Thus, while Virginia v. Sebe-
lius is just one case, the implications of the jurisdictional arguments at issue ex-
tend far beyond it.
The case squarely presents the question of whether federal jurisdiction can
be premised on a state statute designed to obtain a federal declaratory judgment
by expressing disagreement with federal law-notwithstanding the established
precedents of FranchiseT ax Board and Skelly Oil, and the longstanding ban on
advisory opinions. To allow federal jurisdiction on this basis would cross an
important line and would result in a greater intermixture  of politics  and law
than already exists in constitutional adjudication involving divisive political is-
sues. I argue that this line should not be crossed. But my initial contribution is
to demonstrate that this line actually exists.
I.  VIRGINIA'S PURSUIT OF HEALTH CARE FREEDOM IN FEDERAL COURT
Christmas 2010  arrived twelve days early  for Virginia Attorney General
Ken Cuccinelli and the top lawyers in his office. Around noon on December
13, Judge Henry Hudson of the United States District Court for the Eastern Dis-
trict of Virginia ruled for Virginia in its case against the mammoth health care
reform legislation that President Obama had signed into law a little less than
nine months earlier. Judge Hudson held that Congress exceeded the limits of its
legislative powers in enacting the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.10
This decision was the first to hold the Act unconstitutional.
Virginia v. Sebelius is a spare, go-it-alone  affair in which Virginia is the
sole plaintiff."  The single count in the complaint is that one statutory provi-
sion-the individual  mandate,  or minimum  essential  coverage  provision-is
unconstitutional.12 Although  Virginia's  claim  appears  narrow,  its  object  is
more ambitious: to take down the entire Act. The instrument for accomplishing
this objective is inseverability. This potent doctrine provides that the entire Act
must fall if a part of it (like the individual mandate) is unconstitutional, and the
9. Franchise Tax Bd, 463 U.S. at 21-22.
10.  Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 728 F. Supp. 2d 768, 788 (E.D. Va. 2010).
11.  See Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 1, Virginia v. Sebelius, 728
F. Supp. 2d 768 (No. 3:10CV188), 2010 WL 1038397.
12. Id. at 5-6.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 59
remainder  is  incapable  of functioning  independently,  or  Congress would not
have enacted the remainder of the Act without that unconstitutional part.13
Virginia's lawsuit aims to vindicate Virginia's Health Care Freedom Act, a
mandate-exemption  statute that provides that no individual can be required to
buy health insurance.14 Directly responding  to the pending federal  individual
mandate, both houses of the Virginia legislature passed the Health Care Free-
dom Act just weeks before President Obama gigned the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act into law.15 Answering the criticism that its enactment was
just a political stunt (given that state law must give way to federal under the
Supremacy Clause), Attorney General Cuccinelli stated in the press that the sta-
tute could support Virginia's standing to sue in federal court.16 And when Vir-
ginia filed its lawsuit just minutes after the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act became  law, the complaint  premised its claim on the Health Care
Freedom Act.
Virginia seeks a declaratory judgment that its state law remains valid not-
withstanding the individual  mandate in the federal  law, along with  injunctive
relief prohibiting enforcement  of the entire Patient Protection  and Affordable
Care Act.17 Although state law that conflicts with federal law is preempted, an
unconstitutional federal statute cannot preempt a valid state statute. In Virginia
v.  Sebelius, then, Virginia  contends that its state  statute is  valid because the
conflicting federal statute is unconstitutional.'8
13.  See Free Enter. Fund v. Pub. Co.  Accounting Oversight  Bd.,  130 S.  Ct. 3138,
3161-62 (2010) (explaining that the challenged statute could remain fully operative as law
without unconstitutional restrictions on removal and that the Court therefore "must sustain
its remaining provisions  '[u]nless  it is evident that the Legislature would not have enacted
those provisions ...independently of that which is [invalid]."' (alterations in original) (quot-
ing New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 186 (1994));  see also Kevin C. Walsh, Partial
Unconstitutionality,8 5 N.Y.U.  L. REv. 738, 743-44 (2010) (discussing the requirements of
severability doctrine).
14.  See VA. CODE ANN.  § 38.2-3430.1:1  (2011).  The statute contains certain excep-
tions not relevant here.
15.  See  What's Happening at the Capitol Today? Health-Insurance Mandates Re-
jected, RICH. TIMEs-DISPATCH, Mar. 11, 2010, at A9 ("The General Assembly told President
Barack Obama and Congress yesterday that they cannot make Virginians buy health insur-
ance. Gov. Bob McDonnell said he will sign the legislation. The Associated Press said Vir-
ginia is the first state to vote to reject federal mandates.").
16.  See Andrew Cain, Cuccinelli: No Insurance Mandate; He Says He'd Defend Vir-
ginians from Required Health Care, RICH. TIMEs-DISPATCH,  Feb. 4, 2010, at  A7 ("We'd
have a conflict of laws  and then the attorney general-me-would be in a position of de-
fending the Virginia law and also attacking the constitutional problems with the proposed
health-care bill as it stands.").
17.  Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 11, at 6-7.
18.  In addition to Virginia, many others also promptly filed suit, including a collection
of several states led by Florida, along with a smattering of private individuals and organiza-
tions. See Amy Goldstein, Status of Legal Challenges to Obama Health Care Overhaul,
WASH.  POST  (Jan.  31,  2011),  available  at  http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp
-srv/special/health-care-overhaul-lawsuits  (describing twenty-five  lawsuits challenging the
constitutionality of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act). As these suits have dc-60 STANFORD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
Although Virginia's Health Care Freedom Act may at first have seemed to
provide the Commonwealth  with a quick ticket on a solo trip to invalidate the
individual mandate, a closer look leads to the opposite conclusion. This analy-
sis reveals that Virginia should be shown the exit from federal court precisely
because Virginia seeks to vindicate its state statute in a declaratory judgment
action.  A  straightforward application  of established  doctrine  requires dismis-
sal-not only because Virginia lacks standing (as the Fourth Circuit ultimately
concluded),  but also because there is  no statutory  subject matter jurisdiction
and Virginia's lawsuit amounts to a request for a forbidden advisory opinion.
II.  No, VIRGINIA, THERE Is No FEDERAL JURISDICTION
The jurisdictional analysis that follows has four parts: the unavailability of
parens patriae standing, the absence of statutory subject matter jurisdiction, the
absence of jurisdiction under Article III, and an analysis of alternative justicia-
bility theories.
A.  No Parens PatriaeS tanding
The starting point for analysis of federal jurisdiction over Virginia's law-
suit is that Virginia must either sue on its own behalf or not at all. Massachu-
setts v. Mellon prevents Virginia from suing on behalf of its own citizens to en-
join the Secretary of Health  and Human Services  from enforcing  the  federal
individual mandate against those citizens.19 The Supreme Court held in Mellon
veloped, the most prominent have been the first two filed by states: Virginia v. Sebelius and
Florida ex rel. Attorney General v. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. Of these
two lawsuits, Virginia's initially led the way because it moved at a faster clip. But Floridav .
HHS was not far behind. Judge Vinson's eventual holding in that case-that the entire Act
was  unenforceable  because  the individual  mandate  was  unconstitutional  and  inseverable
from the remainder  of the Act-maintained the continued prominence  of that case along
with Virginia's. Florida ex rel. Bondi v. U.S. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 780 F. Supp.
2d  1256,  1305 (N.D.  Fla. 2011). When these cases reached the appellate level, Virginia's
began as the most prominent because it was the first to be argued before a court of appeals.
But the case faded from the foreground when the Sixth and Eleventh Circuits issued rulings
on the constitutionality of the mandate before the Fourth Circuit did. In Thomas More Law
Center v. Obama, a divided Sixth Circuit held that private-party plaintiffs failed to show that
the individual mandate was facially unconstitutional. See Thomas More Law Ctr. v. Obama,
651 F.3d 529, 540 (6th Cir. 2011), petition for cert.f iled, 80 U.S.L.W.  3065 (U.S.  July 26,
2011) (No. 11-117). In Florida v. HHS, by contrast, a divided Eleventh Circuit held that the
individual mandate was unconstitutional (but severable from the remainder of the Act). Flor-
ida ex rel. Attorney Gen. v. U.S.  Dep't Health & Human Servs., 648 F.3d 1235,  1328 (11th
Cir. 2011), cert. granteds ub nom. Florida v. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 80 U.S.L.W.
3199 (U.S.  Nov. 14, 2011) (Nos. 11-393,  11-398, 11-400).
19.  Massachusetts v. Mellon, 262 U.S.  447 (1923). Massachusetts brought suit against
the Secretary of the Treasury challenging a federal statute that appropriated funds to be spent
on the improvement of maternal and infant health. Id. at 479. The challenged act also created
a bureau to administer its provisions in cooperation with state agencies. Id  The Court un-January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 61
that "it is no part of [the State's] duty or power to enforce  [its citizens'] rights
in respect of their relations  with the Federal Government."20  The Court rea-
soned that the citizens of a state are also citizens  of the United States. To in-
voke "such protective measures as flow from that status,"21 individuals should
look to the federal government directly rather than rely on their states as inter-
mediaries.
Because of Massachusetts v. Mellon, Virginia may not proceed against the
federal government on behalf of its citizens as parens patriae.22 Indeed, this bar
is so well-established that Virginia appropriately conceded the point in its brief-
ing.23 Eschewing an unsound parens patriae theory, Virginia has relied on so-
vereign-interest standing. The premise of Virginia's claim of standing to attack
the individual mandate in federal court was the asserted need to defend the Vir-
ginia Health Care Freedom Act. As mentioned above, Virginia's Attorney Gen-
eral identified  an anticipated standing-conferring  function of the Virginia  sta-
tute as one reason to pass it, and this position prevailed in the district court.24
Yet neither the parties nor the district court nor the Fourth Circuit examined
whether  Congress has vested the federal courts with statutory subject matter
jurisdiction to adjudicate a state's claim of bare conflict between state and fed-
eral law in these circumstances. As the analysis in the next Part reveals, how-
ever, it has not.
B.  No Statutory Subject MatterJ urisdiction
Virginia's complaint asserts that the district court has jurisdiction over the
case under the general grant of federal question jurisdiction, 28 U.S.C.  § 1331,
and the Federal Declaratory Judgment Act, 28 U.S.C.  § 2201 .25  The difficulty
with direct reliance on § 1331 in a suit seeking declaratory relief is that the Su-
derstood Massachusetts's claim to be that its "rights and powers as a sovereign State and the
rights of its citizens have been invaded and usurped." Id.
20.  Id. at 485-86.
21.  Id. at 486.
22.  This bar on parens patriae standing is probably not constitutionally compelled, but
rather is best understood as a prudential limit that can be overcome by congressional action.
See Md. People's Counsel v. Fed. Energy Regulatory Comm'n, 760 F.2d 318, 321-22 (D.C.
Cir. 1985) (Scalia, J.) (holding that Massachusetts v.  Mellon set forth a prudential standing
requirement rather than a "core component" of constitutional standing doctrine).
23.  Plaintiffs Memorandum in Opposition to Motion to Dismiss at 12, Virginia ex rel.
Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 702 F. Supp. 2d 598 (E.D. Va. 2010) (No. 3:10CV188),  2010 WL
2417176 ("Virginia recognizes that Massachusetts v. Mellon stands for the proposition that
States cannot sue the federal government under parensp atriae principles because their citi-
zens are also citizens of the United States.").
24.  Virginia v. Sebelius, 702 F. Supp. 2d at 605-07.
25.  Complaint for Declaratory  and Injunctive Relief, supra note 11,  at 3 (citing 28
U.S.C.  § 1331  (2006), and mistakenly citing 28 U.S.C.  § 2001 (2006) instead of 28 U.S.C.
§ 2201 (2006)).62 STANFORD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
preme  Court has  interpreted  § 2201  as  placing  limits  on jurisdiction  under
§ 1331--limits that require dismissal of Virginia v. Sebelius.26
The limit most directly applicable to Virginia v. Sebelius is the one the Su-
preme Court imposed in Franchise Tax Board v. Construction Laborers Vaca-
tion Trust.27 FranchiseT ax Board was a declaratory judgment action filed by a
state agency in state court seeking a declaration that its tax law was not pre-
empted by ERISA.28 The Court had previously interpreted § 2201  to  include
certain limits on federal jurisdiction over  declaratory judgment actions.29 To
avoid the use of state declaratory judgment actions, removed into federal court,
as a way of circumventing limitations previously imposed on federal declarato-
ry judgment actions,  the Court determined that those limitations would apply
whenever a litigant sought to bring a state declaratory judgment action into fed-
eral court.30 Moreover, because removal jurisdiction is coextensive with origi-
nal jurisdiction, the holding of Franchise Tax Board regarding  the reach  of
§ 2201  applies not only to cases removed into federal  court, but also to those
filed there originally.31
Most  importantly for present purposes,  however,  the  Supreme  Court in
Franchise Tax Board did more than simply extend prior limitations on federal
declaratory judgments to state declaratory judgments. It imposed a new limita-
tion  on jurisdiction  that  applies  when  states seek  declaratory  relief  under
§ 2201.  The Court held that "[t]he  situation presented by a State's suit for a
declaration of the validity of state law is .. .not within the original jurisdiction
of the United  States district  courts."32 The Court contemplated  that  a  state
could instead enforce  its state  statute in state court, the state  court defendant
could then invoke the federal defense of preemption, and the state court would
26.  See Franchise Tax Bd. v. Constr. Laborers Vacation Trust, 463 U.S.  1, 18 (1983)
("Having interpreted the Declaratory Judgment Act of 1934 to include certain limitations on
the jurisdiction of federal district courts to entertain declaratory judgment suits, we should be
extremely hesitant to interpret the Judiciary Act of 1875 and its 1887 amendments [i.e., the
general grant of federal question jurisdiction] in a way that renders the limitations in the later
statute nugatory.").
27. Id.
28.  Id. at 5-7.
29. Id. at 18. The limits referred to in the text are those set forth in Skelly Oil, dis-
cussed below. See infra text accompanying notes 40-49.
30. See Franchise Tax Bd, 463 U.S. at 18-19 ("[W]e hold that under the jurisdictional
statutes as they now stand federal courts do not have original jurisdiction, nor do they ac-
quire jurisdiction on removal, when a federal question is presented by a complaint for a state
declaratory judgment, but Skelly Oil would bar jurisdiction if the plaintiff had sought a fed-
eral declaratory judgment." (footnote omitted)).
31.  See id at 21-22.
32 . Id.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 63
decide that question (with the potential for ultimate review in the United States
Supreme Court via a petition for a writ of certiorari).33
This holding squarely forecloses federal jurisdiction in Virginia v. Sebelius,
in which Virginia asks the court "to declare that § 1501 of PPACA is unconsti-
tutional because the individual mandate exceeds  the enumerated powers con-
ferred upon Congress," and also to "declare that [Virginia's Health Care Free-
dom Act] is a valid exercise of state power."34 As the district court noted (in
the course of analyzing a different point), the raison d'etre of Virginia's federal
declaratory judgment lawsuit is to determine the validity of Virginia law35 -
which is why FranchiseT ax Board requires dismissal.
One response to this line of argument may be to treat FranchiseT ax Board
as a sort of abstention decision. In Franchise Tax Board, the states'  ability to
litigate  their non-preemption claims  against the  declaratory judgment  defen-
dants in state  court was  foremost among the "good reasons why the federal
courts should not entertain  suits by the States to declare the validity of their
regulations  despite  possibly  conflicting  federal  law."36 The  Franchise  Tax
Board's inability to be a declaratory judgment plaintiff in a federal forum left
the Board with the ability to prosecute its action in a state court and to have the
issue of preemption litigated there.
By contrast, Virginia has not contended that it could bring a state court en-
forcement action against the federal government under its Health Care Freedom
Act. The district  court held that Virginia's  law was "declaratory"  in nature,
33. See id at 21 ("States ...have a variety of means by which they can enforce their
own laws in their own courts, and they do not suffer if the pre-emption questions such en-
forcement may raise are tested there.").
34. Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 11, at 6. Virginia also
asks for "such further and additional relief as the ends of justice may require including an
injunction against the enforcement of § 1501 in particular and PPACA as a whole." Id. at 6-
7. As this wording reveals, however, the request for an injunction is ancillary to the request
for declaratory relief. A court cannot reach the "further and additional" remedy of an injunc-
tion without making the declaration of state law validity that Franchise Tax Board holds to
be beyond the jurisdiction granted by Congress  in § 1331. Consequently, Virginia's claim
for the "further and additional relief' of an injunction, id at 7, cannot be independently sal-
vaged from its extrajurisdictional claim for declaratory relief. Furthermore, as explained in
more detail below, the federal court lacks Article III jurisdiction to issue the requested in-
junction.
35. Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 702 F. Supp. 2d 598, 605 (E.D. Va. 2010)
(explaining that the "primary articulated objective" of the lawsuit is "to defend the Virginia
Health Care Freedom Act from the conflicting effect of an allegedly unconstitutional  federal
law").
36. FranchiseT ax Bd., 463 U.S.  at 21. The Court determined that "[s]tates are not sig-
nificantly prejudiced by an inability to come to federal court for a declaratory judgment in
advance of a possible injunctive  suit by a person subject to federal regulation." Id The rea-
son for this lack of significant prejudice is that states "have a variety of means by which they
can enforce their own laws in their own courts, and they do not suffer if the pre-emption
questions such enforcement may raise are tested there." Id.64 STANFORD LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:55
meaning that it could not be directly  enforced against anybody.37 On this un-
derstanding of the Health Care Freedom Act, Virginia could not bring any en-
forcement action, because the Act does not impose a prohibition whose viola-
tion  would  be  actionable;  it  instead  supplies  an  immunity  against  being
obligated to obtain or maintain health insurance. In responding to different ju-
risdictional objections advanced by the federal  government and amici, howev-
er, Virginia argued in its appeal that the Attorney General of Virginia could
bring certain actions for injunctive relief to enforce the Health Care Freedom
Act. More specifically, Virginia argued that its Attorney General could bring an
action for injunctive relief against a locality that required the purchase of insur-
ance, or against an employer that required employees to purchase insurance as
a condition of employment.38 Even if the Attorney General could bring such
actions, however, state court suits against local governments or private employ-
ers would not raise the same preemption issue raised by the declaratory judg-
ment action against  the federal  government.  As the  federal  government  has
noted, nothing  in  the  Patient Protection  and  Affordable  Care  Act  prohibits
states "from barring local governments  and private employers from requiring
insurance."39 In the  hypothetical  enforcement  actions  identified by  Virginia,
then, federal law would not preempt the operation of state law.
Admittedly, the absence of a Virginia state court enforcement action like
that contemplated  by the  Supreme Court in Franchise Tax Board is a distin-
guishing feature of that case. But the distinction provides even more of a reason
to apply the rule of Franchise Tax Board and dismiss Virginia v. Sebelius. The
precedent forecloses statutory subject matter jurisdiction over a state's declara-
tory judgment  action to determine the validity  of a law  that a  state actually
could  enforce  in  state  court  against  the  declaratory  judgment  defendant.  It
would make little sense to read Franchise Tax Board as allowing for jurisdic-
tion over a state's declaratory judgment action to determine  the validity of a
state law that cannot be enforced against the federal declaratory judgment de-
fendants.
These considerations point to a further flaw with Virginia's lawsuit. Even
if one were to  distinguish Franchise Tax Board as embodying  nothing more
than some  sort of abstention  principle  (notwithstanding  the  Court's broader
formulation of its holding), Virginia's suit would still need to satisfy the test of
Skelly Oil.
It cannot. In Skelly  Oil, Justice  Frankfurter wrote  in his  opinion for the
Court that the Declaratory Judgment Act "enlarged the range of remedies avail-
37.  Virginia v. Sebelius, 702 F. Supp. 2d at 605.
38.  Appellee's Opening and Response  Brief at  14-15,  Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v.
Sebelius, 656 F.3d 253 (4th Cir. 2011) (Nos. 11-1057,  11-1058), 2011 WL 1115016.
39.  Response/Reply Brief for Appellant at 8, Virginia v. Sebelius, 656 F.3d 253 (Nos.
11-1057, 11-1058), 2011 WL 1338077.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 65
able in the federal courts but did not extend theirj urisdiction."40A   declaratory
judgment could provide a remedy, but only in cases  in which the underlying
dispute would have been within federal jurisdiction. As applied in later cases,
the Skelly Oil approach to § 2201 allows for federal jurisdiction over only those
declaratory judgment actions in which either the declaratory judgment plaintiff
or the declaratory judgment defendant could have brought a nondeclaratory ac-
tion against the other party.41 As matters now stand, then, federal jurisdiction
over a declaratory judgment action brought under § 2201 "depends  on the an-
swer to a hypothetical question: had the Declaratory  Judgment Act not been
enacted, would there have been a nondeclaratory action (i) concerning the same
issue, (ii) between the same parties, (iii) that itself would have been within the
federal courts' subject matter jurisdiction?'A2
Virginia cannot satisfy the Skelly Oil test because  it possesses no right to
nondeclaratory relief against enforcement of the individual mandate by the Sec-
retary of Health and Human Services.43 Virginia may not seek an injunction
prohibiting the  Secretary's enforcement  of the individual  mandate against its
citizens; that would be a parens patriae action forbidden  by Massachusetts v.
Mellon. Nor may Virginia seek an injunction  prohibiting the  Secretary's  en-
forcement  of the individual mandate against Virginia; the individual mandate,
by its terms, is not enforceable against Virginia--only against individuals.44
40.  Skelly Oil Co. v. Phillips Petroleum Co., 339 U.S. 667, 671 (1950) (emphasis add-
ed); see also id. at 671-72 ("The Declaratory Judgment Act allowed relief to be given by
way of recognizing the plaintiffs right even though no immediate  enforcement of it was
asked. But the requirements of jurisdiction ... were not impliedly repealed or modified.").
41.  RICHARD H. FALLON, JR. ET AL.,  HART & WECHSLER'S THE FEDERAL COURTS AND
THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 805 (6th ed. 2009).
42.  Id. at 804.
43.  The discussion that follows addresses injunctive relief only, not damages. Virginia
would not be entitled to seek damages unless one fancifully imagines that it would be appro-
priate for the  Supreme  Court to create  some sort of a Bivens claim based on the  Tenth
Amendment. See Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of Fed. Bureau of Narcotics, 403
U.S. 388 (1971).
44. See Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act § 1501, 26 U.S.C. § 5000A (Supp.
IV 2011)  (imposing minimum insurance coverage requirement on "applicable individuals");
Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 702 F. Supp. 2d 598, 605 (E.D.  Va. 2010) (stating
that Virginia is "a sovereign entity not required to purchase insurance under . ..the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act"); Plaintiffs Memorandum in Opposition to Motion to
Dismiss, supra note 23, at 18-19 ("As Secretary Sebelius concedes, Virginia will not be re-
quired to pay the penalty for failure to meet the Individual Mandate. . ..Virginia will incur
no direct financial liability under the challenged penalty provision ...."); Memorandum in
Support of Defendant's Motion to Dismiss at 1, Virginia v. Sebelius, 702 F. Supp. 2d 598
(3:10CV188),  2010 WL 2315702 ("[T]he only provision Virginia challenges in this litiga-
tion-Section 1501 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act . .. , which requires
individuals either to obtain a minimum level of health insurance or to pay a penalty if they
do not-will impose no obligations on the Commonwealth,  even after the law takes effect
some four years from now. The provision applies only to individuals, not the state govern-
ment."); id. at 13 (stating that the individual mandate provision "does not impose any obliga-
tions whatsoever on Virginia as a state").66 STANFORD  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
Injunctions do not run against statutes, but against  actors.  "If a case for
preventive relief be presented the court enjoins, in effect, not the execution of
the statute, but the acts of the official,  the statute notwithstanding."a' As the
wording of its complaint reveals,  Virginia accepts this basic principle.46 But
once this principle is applied to the individual mandate, Virginia's inability to
seek injunctive relief prohibiting the secretary's enforcement of that law against
Virginia  is clear.  The  reason  is simple:  If the secretary  can  take no action
against Virginia pursuant to the individual mandate, there is no basis for a fed-
eral court to enjoin "the acts of the official, the statute notwithstanding.'47 And,
as already mentioned, the individual mandate does not apply to Virginia-just
to individuals.
Nor can the Skelly Oil test be satisfied under these circumstances by hypo-
thesizing an action for declaratory  and injunctive relief by the federal govern-
ment against Virginia. There are certainly circumstances  in which the federal
government can bring such an action against a state. In a recent lawsuit against
Arizona, for example, the federal government sought to enjoin the enforcement
of a state law requiring state officers to enforce federal immigration law.48 But
Virginia's Health Care Freedom Act poses no similar specter of state interfe-
rence with the day-to-day operations of the federal government. Unlike Arizo-
na's law, Virginia's law does not authorize state officers to interfere with fed-
eral  operations.  As  mentioned  above,  the  only  two  types  of actions  for
injunctive relief that Virginia has asserted  it can bring  to enforce  the Health
Care Freedom Act-against localities or against private employers who make
the possession of insurance a condition of employment-do not interfere with
the federal  requirement  to possess  health insurance or pay a penalty. Conse-
quently, there is no basis for the federal court to seek to enjoin "the acts of the
official, the [state] statute notwithstanding.'49
The Fourth Circuit did not address statutory subject matter jurisdiction in
Virginia v. Sebelius; it did not need to given its conclusion that Virginia lacked
standing. The absence of explicit discussion of this issue should not be taken as
a signal that the statutory subject matter jurisdiction defects have no practical
relevance, either for Virginia v. Sebelius or for cases like it in the future.  Sup-
pose Virginia were able to show that the Fourth Circuit's standing analysis is
incorrect (although I doubt this can be done). The absence of statutory jurisdic-
tion would remain an obstacle to proceeding in Virginia v. Sebelius or in other
cases like it. More importantly, Franchise Tax Board would also remain an ob-
45.  Massachusetts v. Mellon, 262 U.S. 447, 488 (1923).
46.  Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 11,  at 7 (requesting
"an injunction against the enforcement of § 1501 in particular and PPACA as a whole" (em-
phasis added)).
47.  Mellon, 262 U.S. at 488.
48.  Complaint at  1, United States v. Arizona, 703 F. Supp. 2d 980 (D.  Ariz. 2010)
(No. 2:10-CV-1413), 2010 WL 2653363.
49.  Mellon, 262 U.S. at 488.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 67
stacle to any state's effort to obtain federal jurisdiction by enacting a statute
that-unlike Virginia's--could actually be enforced in a way that conflicts with
federal law. California's law in FranchiseT ax Board was a law of this type-a
tax law that the State wanted to use to collect revenue-and yet the Supreme
Court  held  that  the  State's  request  for  a  declaratory  judgment  of non-
preemption was outside of the limited jurisdiction granted to federal courts by
Congress.
C.  No Article III Case ofActual Controversy
The analysis up to this point has explained why--once Virginia is confined
to suing on its own behalf rather than as representative  of its citizens in a pa-
rens patriae capacity-there is no statutory subject matter jurisdiction over Vir-
ginia's lawsuit. While the holdings of Franchise Tax Board and Skelly Oil each
lead to this conclusion, a complete jurisdictional analysis does not stop at this
point. A more fundamental jurisdictional defect with Virginia's lawsuit is that it
is outside of the limited jurisdiction authorized by Article III.
The language of the Declaratory Judgment Act provides a clean path of en-
try into an analysis of the ways in which Virginia v. Sebelius runs afoul of Ar-
ticle  III limitations  on  federal  jurisdiction.  To  ensure  that the  Declaratory
Judgment  Act would not  enable  courts  to exceed  the bounds  of Article III,
Congress made the remedy of declaratory relief available only in "a case of ac-
tual controversy"50-language  that is to be interpreted as coextensive with the
case or controversy limitation of Article 111.51 For there to be an "actual contro-
versy" cognizable under the Declaratory Judgment Act and Article III,  a dis-
pute must be "definite and concrete, touching the legal relations of parties hav-
ing  adverse  legal  interests."52  The  dispute  must  "admit[]  of specific  relief
through a decree of a conclusive character, as distinguished  from an opinion
advising what the law would be upon a hypothetical state of facts."53
The fundamental problem in Virginia v. Sebelius is that both the individual
mandate in federal law and the mandate immunity in state law relate to the le-
gal  obligations  of individuals,  not states.  In essence,  Virginia  seeks  a ruling
about what law would apply if and when there is an actual controversy between
the federal government and a Virginia resident over the individual mandate.
50.  28 U.S.C.  § 2201 (2006).
51.  See MedImmune, Inc. v. Genentech, Inc., 549 U.S.  118, 127 (2007) ("[T]he phrase
'case of actual controversy' in the [Declaratory Judgment] Act refers to the types of 'Cases'
and 'Controversies'  that are justiciable under Article III.").
52.  Aetna Life Ins. Co. v. Haworth, 300 U.S. 227, 240-41 (1937)  (citations omitted);
see also id at 239-40 ("The Declaratory Judgment Act of 1934, in its limitation to 'cases of
actual controversy,'  manifestly has regard to the constitutional provision and is operative
only in respect to controversies which are such in the constitutional sense.").
53.  Id. at 241; see also MedImmune, 549 U.S. at 127 (adopting the foregoing descrip-
tions of the meaning of "actual controversy").68 STANFORD  LA WREVIEW [Vol. 64:55
The Supreme Court held in Muskrat v. United States that a bare request for
a judicial determination of the constitutional validity of an act of Congress is
not itself a "case"  or "controversy."54  Muskrat involved lawsuits brought by
certain Cherokee Indians who had an interest in property granted them by Con-
gress in 1902.55 Federal legislation enacted in 1904 and 1906 purported to di-
lute their property interests.56 They contended, however, that this later legisla-
tion was unconstitutional.57  Congress enacted  a statute authorizing claimants
under the  1902  statute to file  suit against the United States  in  the Court of
Claims, with appellate jurisdiction in the Supreme Court, to determine the con-
stitutional validity  of the  1904 and  1906 statutes.58 The Supreme  Court held
that suits filed against the United States pursuant to this statutory authorization
did not fall within the judicial power conferred in Article III.59 The Court ex-
plained that the "judicial power" granted in Article III "is the power of a court
to decide and pronounce a judgment and carry it into effect between persons
and parties who  bring a case  before  it for decision."60 Although  the United
States was a defendant, the United States had "no interest adverse to the clai-
mants," who sought not to assert a property right against the government or to
demand compensation, but rather to determine the constitutional validity of leg-
islation.61
The Court's critical reasoning in Muskrat came in its analysis of the legal
effect of the judgment requested in the case. The Court observed that the only
judgment required in the proceeding  "is to settle the doubtful character  of the
legislation in question."62 That judgment would not bind "private parties, when
actual litigation brings to the court the question of the constitutionality of such
legislation."63 The Court continued: "In a legal sense the judgment could not be
executed, and amounts in fact to no more than an expression of opinion upon
the validity of the acts in question."64
The judgment requested in Virginia v. Sebelius possesses the same defect.
The district court's determination that the individual mandate is unconstitution-
al had no binding legal  effect on anyone  subject to the individual  mandate,
whether in Virginia or elsewhere. The general rule (with exceptions not rele-
54.  Muskrat v. United States, 219 U.S. 346, 361 (1911).
55.  Id. at 348-49.
56.  Id at 349.
57.  Id
58.  Id. at 349-50.
59.  Id. at 363.
60.  Id. at 356 (quoting SAMUEL FREEMAN MILLER, LECTURES ON THE CONSTITUTION OF
THE UNITED STATES 314 (1893)).
61.  Id. at 361.
62.  Id. at 361-62.
63.  Id. at 362.
64.  Id.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 69
vant here) is that a judgment binds only the parties.65 That binding effect does
not amount to much in a case like Virginia v. Sebelius because the sole party
challenging the individual mandate is a party against whom it could not be en-
forced. An injunction against enforcement of the mandate against nonparties-
Virginia residents-would run into the Mellon bar on states suing the federal
government to protect their residents from the operation of federal law.
Nor would the district court's judgment in  Virginia v. Sebelius have any
binding effect in a later case. A private individual in a later suit could not wield
the decision against the federal government through the doctrine of nonmutual
offensive  issue preclusion, because  that  doctrine  cannot be  used against the
federal government.66  Moreover, the district court's decision set no precedent
binding in later cases, because "federal district judges, sitting as sole adjudica-
tors, lack authority to render precedential decisions binding other judges, even
members of the same court."67 Simply put, Virginia's lawsuit does not present
a "case  of actual controversy"  under the Declaratory Judgment Act or Article
III because it does not ".admi[t] of specific relief through a decree of a conclu-
sive character, as distinguished from an opinion advising what the law would
be upon a hypothetical state of facts."68
Presenting a different rationale for the same conclusion that Virginia v. Se-
belius is outside Article III, the federal government-supported on this point by
an array of academic  amici on appeal-argued that Virginia lacked standing.
Stripped to its essentials, the basic argument is that states cannot circumvent
the Mellon bar on parens patriae standing by passing a state law that disagrees
with federal law; the abstract clash between federal and state law does not con-
stitute a legally cognizable injury.69
Nothing  in  the  foregoing  advisory  opinion  analysis  contradicts  the no-
standing position put forward by the federal government and academic  amici,
which I believe to be sound.70 In a trio of cases decided in the 1920s, before
modem  standing  doctrine  had  assumed the  shape  it  now  has, the  Supreme
Court held to be outside of Article III various state claims that a particular pro-
65.  See, e.g, Taylor v. Sturgell, 553 U.S. 880, 893 (2008) ("[W]e have often repeated
the general rule that 'one  is not bound by a judgment in personam in a litigation in which he
is not designated as a party or to which he has not been made a party by service of process.'
(quoting Hansbury v. Lee, 311 U.S. 32, 40 (1940))).
66. See United States v. Mendoza, 464 U.S. 154, 162-63 (1984).
67.  Am. Elec. Power Co. v. Connecticut,  131 S. Ct. 2527, 2540 (2011).
68.  Medlmmune, Inc. v. Genentech, Inc., 549 U.S.  118, 127 (2007) (alteration in orig-
inal) (quoting Aetna Life Ins. Co. v. Haworth, 300 U.S.  227, 241 (1937)).
69. Brief for Appellant at 25, Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 656 F.3d 253 (4th
Cir. 2011)  (Nos. 11-1057,  11-1058), 2011 WL 686279; see also Brief of Amici Curiae Pro-
fessors of Federal  Jurisdiction in Support of Appellant at 6, Virginia v. Sebelius, 656 F.3d
253 (Nos. 11-1057,  11-1058), 2011 WL 792210.
70.  For a more critical assessment of the government's standing arguments, see Kathe-
rine Mims Crocker, Note, Securing Sovereign State Standing, 97 VA. L. REV. 2051 (2011).70 STANFORD  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
vision of federal law is beyond the federal government's authority.71 Those de-
cisions built on Georgia v. Stanton, in which the Court dismissed a state's bill
in equity for lack of jurisdiction because the rights at issue were "merely politi-
cal rights, which do not belong to the jurisdiction of a court, either in law or
equity."72
In my  view,  understanding  the jurisdictional  defect in  advisory-opinion
terms rather than in lack-of-cognizable-injury  terms better captures the jurisdic-
tional problem with  Virginia v. Sebelius. The problem with the asserted injury
is that it is entirely abstract when considered apart from the application of the
mandate to Virginia residents. The advisory opinion framework brings this fea-
ture of the lawsuit into sharp relief.
Moving from the academic's to the advocate's point of view, however, the
standing framework admittedly has the virtue of being more familiar to the ju-
diciary. Yet familiarity  with standing doctrine  in general does  not guarantee
correct analysis of the state standing issues peculiar to that corner of standing
doctrine. These distinctive doctrinal twists render standing doctrine-itself no-
toriously murky-even more susceptible to incorrect application with respect to
questions of state standing.
The district court concluded that Virginia possessed standing because it al-
leged a sovereign  injury from the clash between  federal  and state law.73 The
court relied principally on a Tenth Circuit decision stating that "[fjederal  regu-
latory action that preempts state law creates a sufficient injury-in-fact to satisfy
this prong"  of a  standing analysis.74 Virginia's briefing  also identified  addi-
tional cases from other circuits in which preemption formed part of the injury-
71.  In Texas v. Interstate Commerce Commission, the Court described the question of
whether matters addressed in federal legislation challenged by Texas "fall within the field
wherein Congress may speak with constitutional authority, or within the field reserved to the
several States" as "an abstract question of legislative power." 258 U.S.  158,  162 (1922).  Si-
milarly, in Massachusetts v. Mellon, the Supreme Court not only held that Massachusetts
lacked parens patriae standing against the federal government, but also held that the State
could not sue the federal government on its own behalf. 262 U.S.  447, 484-85 (1923).  The
Court contrasted "rights of person or property" within the Court's jurisdiction, with "abstract
questions of political power, of sovereignty, of government," outside of the Court's jurisdic-
tion. Id. Finally, in New Jersey v. Sargent, the Court dismissed the State's bill in equity upon
concluding that "its real purpose is to obtain a judicial declaration that, in making certain
parts of the  Federal Water Power Act . . . Congress exceeded  its own authority and en-
croached on that of the state." 269 U.S. 328, 334 (1926).  New Jersey's bill in equity, said the
Court, "does not show that any right of the State, which in itself is an appropriate subject of
judicial cognizance, is being, or about to be, affected prejudicially by the application or en-
forcement of the Act." Id.
72.  73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 50, 76 (1868).
73.  Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius,  702 F. Supp.  2d 598, 606-07 (E.D.  Va.
2010).
74.  Id. at 607 (quoting Wyoming ex rel. Crank v. United States, 539 F.3d 1236, 1242
(10th Cir. 2008)) (internal quotation marks omitted).January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 71
in-fact to provide standing.75 In none of these cases, however, was the clash be-
tween federal and state law entirely abstract, as it is in Virginia v. Sebelius.
Certainly, a fight against  federal preemption  can amount to a justiciable
case in some circumstances. But the circuit court decisions relied upon by the
district court and Virginia were not pure declaratory judgment actions leading
to no binding legal effect. The states in those cases relied on statutory authori-
zations to sue that were defined in such a way that the states'  challenges in-
volved the legality of a particular action by an agency of the federal govern-
ment that had interfered with some particular activity of the states themselves
(such as issuing permits, promulgating regulations, or undertaking enforcement
actions).76 Each challenge involved an adverse officer or agency whose action
could be declared void or enjoined to redress the injury that the federal  gov-
ernment's particular challenged action had inflicted on the state.77 In Virginia
v. Sebelius, by contrast, Virginia had no statutory basis for judicial review apart
from the Declaratory Judgment Act; the Commonwealth complained of no par-
ticular agency action that could be directed against it; and the resulting district
court judgment about the constitutionality of the mandate had no binding legal
effect on anybody actually subject to the individual mandate.
The Fourth Circuit's opinion ordering dismissal of Virginia v. Sebelius for
lack of jurisdiction framed the jurisdictional defect as the absence of a judicial-
ly cognizable  injury sufficient to provide Virginia with standing.78 More par-
ticularly, the court concluded that "Virginia lacks standing to challenge the in-
dividual  mandate  because  the  mandate  threatens  no  interest  in  the
'enforceability'  of the [Virginia Health Care Freedom Act] ."79 The Fourth Cir-
cuit's determination that Virginia lacks standing leads to the same outcome as
75.  Plaintiffs Memorandum in Opposition to Motion to Dismiss, supra note 23, at 16
(citing Crank, 539 F.3d at 1242; Tex. Office of Pub. Util. Counsel v. FCC,  183 F.3d 393,
449 (5th Cir.  1999); Alaska v. U.S. Dep't of Transp.,  868 F.2d 441,  443 n.1  (D.C.  Cir.
1989); Ohio ex rel. Celebrezze  v. U.S.  Dep't of Transp.,  766 F.2d 228, 232-33  (6th Cir.
1985)).
76.  See Crank, 539 F.3d at 1242-44 & n.6 (engaging in judicial review of an ATF de-
termination pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act (APA)  section 704, which states
that "[algency action made reviewable by statute and final agency action for which there is
no other adequate remedy in a court are subject to judicial review" (quoting 5 U.S.C.  § 704
(2006)); Tex. Office of Pub. Util. Counsel, 183 F.3d at 405 (engaging in judicial review of
final orders  of the Federal Communications  Commission pursuant to 28 U.S.C.  §§  2342,
2344 (2006), and the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.  § 402(a) (2006)); Alaska, 868 F.2d at
444-45 (engaging in judicial review of orders of the Department of Transportation pursuant
to the APA and the Aviation Act, which includes "a body politic" or a "representative the-
reof' within the class of persons entitled to judicial review); Celebrezze, 766 F.2d at 232-33
(engaging in judicial review of a regulation and interpretive rule pursuant to the APA and the
Hazardous Materials Transportation Act).
77.  See cases cited supra note 76.
78.  Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 656 F.3d 253, 266 (4th Cir. 2011), petition
for cert.f iled, 80 U.S.L.W.  3221 (U.S. Sep. 30, 2011) (No. 11-420).
79.  Id. at 269.72 STANFORD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
the foregoing analyses of statutory subject matter jurisdiction and advisory opi-
nion doctrine. But those analyses also suggest reason for caution in identifying
the justiciability problem as a lack of cognizable injury alone.
The reason for caution is this: A state's claim could satisfy the Fourth Cir-
cuit's requirement for a judicially cognizable sovereign injury and yet still not
amount to an Article III case or controversy or fall within the limited statutory
jurisdiction of the federal courts. Suppose that state law were to prohibit private
employers from requiring insurance as a condition of employment, and federal
law were simultaneously to require private employers to provide insurance as a
condition  of employment.  This clash  between  federal  and  state  law  would
threaten the enforceability of a state law, and thereby satisfy what appears to be
the Fourth Circuit's test for a judicially cognizable sovereign  injury. It would
not necessarily follow from this configuration of state and federal law that the
state would have a justiciable  declaratory judgment claim against the federal
government in an Article  III court. Such a claim might be best understood as
seeking an advisory opinion about which law would govern if and when either
the state or the federal government sought to enforce its prohibition or require-
ment against a covered employer. The point of making this observation is not to
criticize the Fourth Circuit's analysis on its own terms, but rather to contend
that a focus on standing analysis alone runs the danger of missing other juris-
dictional  defects  that  do  not  fit  neatly  into  the  three-part  in-
jury/causation/redressability  framework of modern standing doctrine.
D.  Alternative Justiciability Theories?
The analysis up to this point has examined the arguments aired in Virginia
v. Sebelius. The result of that analysis is that there is neither statutory subject
matter jurisdiction nor Article  III jurisdiction over  Virginia v. Sebelius. That
result is a good one, as the arguments in the final Part below aim to establish.
But before getting to those arguments  about the normative desirability of the
result, it remains necessary to consider any other jurisdictional arguments that
might be advanced to bring a suit like Virginia v. Sebelius into federal court. If
alternative avenues to adjudication of a state challenge to federal law allow an
easy way around the doctrines applied above, then the normative desirability of
the appropriate outcome in Virginia v. Sebelius would be ultimately beside the
point.  Accordingly,  this  Subpart  addresses  the jurisdictional  arguments  ad-
vanced  in Florida ex  rel. Attorney  General v.  United States Department of
Health & Human Services,80 a more sprawling case that has spawned additional
theories for the justiciability of states' challenges to the individual mandate.
80. 648 F.3d 1235 (1 Ith Cir. 2011), cert. granted sub nom. Florida v. Dep't of Health
& Human Servs., 80 U.S.L.W. 3199 (U.S. Nov. 14,2011) (Nos. 11-393,  11-398, 11-400).January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 73
Floridav . HHS is a lawsuit filed on behalf of several states the same day as
Virginia v. Sebelius.81 After the initial filing, the case grew to include as plain-
tiffs twenty-six states or state officials acting on behalf of the people of a state,
two private individuals, and the National Federation of Independent Business-
es. 82 At the motion to dismiss stage, Judge Vinson in Florida v. HHS did not
address state standing to challenge the individual mandate. Instead, Judge Vin-
son decided only that the private  individuals in that case had standing to chal-
lenge the individual mandate, remaining silent on the issue of state standing to
challenge  this  provision.83  When  the case  proceeded  to  summary judgment,
however, Judge Vinson held that two states, Idaho and Utah, had standing to
challenge the individual mandate because they had "passed legislation seeking
to protect their citizens from forced compliance with the individual mandate."84
In so holding, Judge Vinson relied directly on the analysis in Virginia v. Sebe-
lius.85
The reliance  on two states'  antimandate  laws was flawed for reasons de-
scribed above with respect to Virginia's law. Even if correct, however, the ju-
risdictional analysis in Floridav . HHS relying on the existence of antimandate
laws would be insufficient to support jurisdiction over the challenges brought
by states lacking antimandate laws. Accordingly, the states advanced two addi-
tional jurisdictional theories that a complete analysis should address.
The states'  lead theory is one of indirect injury through Medicaid enroll-
ment. The states have argued that they will be injured because they will incur
costs when some individuals choose to comply with the individual mandate by
enrolling in a state Medicaid program.86 This allegation of indirect injury is in-
sufficient as a matter of law. In Florida v. Mellon, the State of Florida sought to
challenge a federal tax on the ground that the federal tax would "have the result
of inducing potential tax-payers to withdraw property  from the state, thereby
diminishing  the subjects upon which  the  state power  of taxation may  oper-
ate."  The Court held that the State could not go forward with the suit because
the State was not in immediate danger of sustaining "any  direct injury as the
81.  Complaint, Florida ex rel. Bondi v. U.S.  Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 780 F.
Supp. 2d 1307 (N.D. Fla. 2011) (No. 3:10-cv-91-RV/EMT), 2010 WL 1038209.
82.  Second Amended Complaint, Floridav . HHS, 780 F. Supp. 2d 1307 (No. 3: 10-cv-
91-RV/EMT), 2011 WL 247074.
83.  Florida ex rel. McCollum v. U.S. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 716 F. Supp.
2d 1120, 1144-47 (N.D. Fla. 2010).
84. Floridav . HHS, 780 F. Supp. 2d at 1272.
85.  See id. ("I agree with Judge Hudson's thoughtful analysis of the issue and adopt it
here.").
86.  Opening/Response Brief of Appellee/Cross-Appellant  States at 67-68, Florida ex
rel. Attorney Gen. v. U.S. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 648 F.3d 1235 (11th Cir. 2011)
(Nos. 11-11021,  11-11067), 2011 WL 1944107.
87.  Florida v. Mellon, 273 U.S.  12, 17-18 (1927).74 STANFORD LAWREVIEW [Vol. 64:55
result of the enforcement of the act in question."88 In short, the Court drew a
line between direct and indirect injury, and held that it lacked jurisdiction be-
cause the claimed injury to the state fisc arising by virtue of the actions of pri-
vate citizens in response to the federal law was indirect.89
A line between direct and indirect injury may be open to criticism, but it is
administrable enough to foreclose the claimed injury to states resulting from
individuals'  compliance with the minimum  essential coverage provision. Un-
less there is some line, moreover, the bar on parens patriae standing against the
federal government  would disappear. As Ann Woolhandler and Michael  Col-
lins have explained, the line between direct and indirect injuries can be useful
as a way of focusing attention on whether a state plaintiff is advancing legally
protected interests that deserve a federal judicial forum.90
It is also worth noting that the states' claimed injury from enforcement of
the mandate against state residents is not only indirect, but also derivative of
the rights of state residents. If Congress exceeded its authority in enacting the
individual mandate, then the individuals against whom the federal government
could seek to enforce the mandate could "assert injury from governmental ac-
tion taken in excess  of the authority  that federalism defines."91 The Supreme
Court has recently clarified that the rights asserted in such an action "do not be-
long to a State," but would belong personally to affected individuals.92 As the
Supreme Court stated in Bond v. United States (decided after the district courts
ruled on state standing in  Virginia v. Sebelius and Florida v. HHS), "An indi-
vidual has a direct interest in objecting to laws that upset the constitutional bal-
ance between the National Government and the States when the enforcement of
those laws causes injury that is concrete, particular, and redressable."93
88.  Id. at 18 (emphasis omitted). The Court also noted that the claimed injury was not
imminent. Id.
89.  The federal government has also argued in Floridav . HHS that the claimed injury
is speculative, and neither actual nor imminent. According to the federal government, the
premandate  status quo already imposes costs on the states in the form of uncompensated
care; moving more people into insurance, for which states will bear some cost through Me-
dicaid, may result in a net reduction of costs borne by the states. See Memorandum in Sup-
port of Defendants'  Motion to Dismiss at 31,  Florida v. HHS, 780 F. Supp. 2d 1256 (No.
3:10-cv-91-RV/EMT),  2010 WL 2663348 (addressing state injury-to-fisc standing theory).
This consideration underscores the soundness of the federal government's reliance on circuit
court decisions holding that the indirect economic effects of certain federal legislation on the
state fisc were "so distantly related to the wrong for which relief is sought, as not to be cog-
nizable for purposes of standing."  Id. at 31-32 (quoting Pennsylvania v. Kleppe, 533 F.2d
668, 672 (D.C. Cir. 1976)); see also Iowa ex rel. Miller v. Block, 771 F.2d 347, 353-54 (8th
Cir. 1985) (holding that a state lacked Article III standing to sue on its own behalf because
the effect on the state fisc was too attenuated).
90.  See Ann Woolhandler & Michael G. Collins, State Standing, 81 VA. L. REv. 387,
491 n.420 (1995); see also id. at 505-08 (explaining in more detail the benefits of a focus on
legally protected interests in assessing state standing).
91.  Bond v. United States, 131 S. Ct. 2355, 2363-64 (2011).
92.  Id. at 2364.
93.  Id.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 75
Although Bond does  not squarely  address the  issue of state standing, the
Court's opinion carefully distinguishes between the state interests protected by
federalism, on the one hand, and the availability of a federal judicial forum to
vindicate  those interests, on the other hand. The derivative nature of the alle-
gedly standing-conferring  injury identified by the states in Florida v. HHS sup-
plies a prudential reason to deny such a forum to the states to challenge the in-
dividual mandate.94
The states'  second theory of standing in Floridav . HHS depends on the al-
leged inseverability  of the individual  mandate.  The states  have  asserted that
they suffer injury from other provisions in the Act that regulate them as states,
such as the Medicaid and employer mandate reforms. They argue that this in-
jury can be remedied through invalidation of the entire Act, which would fol-
low from a holding that the individual mandate is unconstitutional and insever-
able.95 In  short,  the  states  attempt to  use an  assertion  of inseverability  to
leverage their acknowledged  standing to challenge parts of the Act that do ap-
ply to them into standing to challenge a part that does not.
The states'  standing-through-asserted-inseverability  argument  relies  on a
misreading of the Supreme Court's decision in Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock.96
The Supreme Court in Alaska Airlines addressed the severability of a legisla-
tive veto provision from a statute that governed  the transition to  deregulated
operation of airlines.97 A group of airlines challenged regulations regarding the
rehiring of employees  who had been furloughed  or otherwise  terminated.
They contended that the  statute authorizing the promulgation of those regula-
tions contained an invalid legislative veto.9  The states in Florida v. HHS have
described Alaska Airlines as a case in which the Court adjudicated a claim that
an "entire statute was invalid as a result of [an] unconstitutional legislative veto
94.  Woolhandler and Collins explain further:
As part of the existing common law of standing, the fact that other potential litigants are the
more immediate objects of alleged illegal behavior and have incentives to sue is a factor
weighing against finding a litigable interest. A related and unexceptionable presumption is
that constitutional rights ordinarily belong to people even when the question concerns the
structure of govemment. To the extent that individuals have legally protected interests and
incentives to sue, state standing would usually be derivative of that of its citizens-as it is in
tax collector standing and many applications of parens patriae standing. Accordingly,  in
these areas state standing need not readily be recognized.
Woolhandler & Collins, supra note 90, at 507-08 (footnotes omitted); see also Ill. Dep't
of Transp. v. Hinson, 122 F.3d 370, 373 (7th Cir. 1997) (Posner, C.J.) ("The main contempo-
rary reason for having rules of standing, besides minimizing judicial caseloads and judicial
interference with the life of the nation, is to prevent kibitzers, bureaucrats, publicity seekers,
and 'cause'  mongers from wresting control of litigation from the people directly affected
.(coitmatiitotends )).
95.  Opening/Response Brief of Appellee/Cross-Appellant States, supra note 86, at 68.
96.  See id at 68-69 (arguing for standing based on inseverability in reliance on Alaska
Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U.S. 678, 684-86 (1987)).
97.  Alaska Airlines, 480 U.S. at 680.
98. Id. at 681-83.
99. Id. at 682-83.76 STANFORD  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
provision,  where plaintiffs  alleged injury based on other portions of the sta-
tute."00 This description  is misleading.  The unconstitutional  legislative veto
was contained in one of the statutory provisions governing how the challenged
regulations themselves  were to be promulgated. As the trial court in that case
explained, "the statutory language directly links the admittedly unconstitutional
provision  [i.e., the  legislative veto] with the specific grant of rulemaking au-
thority under attack."'of Alaska Airlines is therefore far removed from the cir-
cumstances facing the states who seek to challenge the individual  mandate in
Florida v. HHS on the basis of statutory provisions dealing with different mat-
ters in different  sections of comprehensive legislation.  The decision provides
no precedent for the use of inseverability to generate a justiciable challenge to a
statutory section that does not apply to the states seeking to challenge the indi-
vidual mandate in Florida v. HHS.
In  fact, precedent  points  in the  opposite  direction.  When  the  Supreme
Court has entertained assertions of inseverability in ascertaining the permissible
scope of a challenge, the Court has limited its consideration to asking whether
the particular provisions applicable  to the challenging party in that particular
case were inseverable. In Communist Party of the United States v. Subversive
Activities Control Board1,02 and Electric Bond & Share Co. v.  SEC,103  the
government  brought enforcement  actions  against organizations  that failed  to
register as required by statute. In both cases, the Supreme Court considered on-
ly whether the provisions that the federal government sought to apply in those
enforcement  actions were inseverable  from other parts of the challenged  sta-
tutes.104 The Court refused to consider other provisions that the  government
did not seek to apply in those cases.105
To  illustrate with a simple  example,  suppose a statute (A)  that is com-
posed of two provisions (X and Y).  Suppose, further, that X imposes enforcea-
ble obligations on P, but Y does not. P can use inseverability to seek the invali-
dation of XY on the ground that X is unconstitutional and it is inseverable from
Y. But P may not use inseverability to seek the invalidation of XY on the ground
that Y is unconstitutional and it is inseverable from X. Comparing this example
with the statutes in the Electric Bond & Share Co. and Communist Party cases,
the registration provisions correspond to X, and the other challenged provisions
100. Opening/Response Brief of Appellee/Cross-Appellant States, supra note 86, at 68-
69.
101.  Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Donovan, 594 F. Supp. 92, 96 (D.D.C.  1984), rev'd, 766
F.2d 1550 (D.C. Cir. 1985); see also id. at 95 ("[T]he Court is faced here not with a legisla-
tive veto provision which applies to an entire statute, but with a veto provision applicable to
one, and only one, particular section of a long and comprehensive piece of legislation.").
102.  367 U.S. 1 (1961).
103.  303 U.S. 419 (1938).
104. See Communist Party, 367 U.S. at 70-81; Electric Bond & Share Co., 303 U.S. at
433-39.
105. See Communist Party, 367 U.S. at 8 1; Electric Bond & Share Co., 303 U.S. at 443.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 77
correspond to Y. The Court considered the potential inseverability of XY using
X as a starting point, but refused to do so with respect to Y.B  ased in part on its
determinations  about X, the Court concluded  that the challengers brought an
unripe challenge or sought an advisory opinion on a hypothetical state of facts
with respect to Y.
This analysis of precedent depends on the premise that inseverability is not
reciprocal. The Supreme Court has not, so far as my research has revealed, ex-
plicitly observed that this is so. But the nonreciprocal nature of inseverability
flows logically from established doctrine. When determining whether removal
of a part will cause collapse of an entire edifice, it matters whether the part to
be removed is a corner stone or a cornice stone. Likewise, when a court asks
whether the constitutional remainder of a partially unconstitutional  statute may
function consistently with legislative intent after it holds a provision unconsti-
tutional, the answer depends on which provision has been held unconstitutional.
The Supreme Court's unwillingness to entertain an inseverability argument
arising out of statutory provisions inapplicable to the parties raising a constitu-
tional challenge  makes good sense. Federal statutes are often composed of all
manner of unrelated provisions. If a party affected by any one of those provi-
sions could gain standing  by pointing to  a constitutional defect  in any other
provision  (regardless  of whether  that other provision  could  ever be  applied
against that party), then standing doctrine would be reduced to a sport for clev-
er counsel.106  But federal courts do not exercise a general  supervisory power
over legislation. Judicial review is more like statutory Jenga, in which a court
removes only what it must while attempting to keep the rest standing.
If asserted inseverability were enough for standing, constitutional litigation
would have taken a different path long before now. For example,  the Supreme
Court almost certainly would have decided the constitutionality of the legisla-
tive veto before its use against Jagdish Rai Chadha provided him with standing
to challenge it.107 Just as it took a private individual affected by the exercise of
a legislative veto to bring a separation of powers challenge to it, so too will it
take a private individual  subject to the individual  mandate to challenge  it in
federal court.108 The next Part explains why this doctrinal state of affairs is a
good one.
106. Cf  Lewis v. Casey, 518 U.S.  343,  357  (1996)  ("The actual-injury requirement
would hardly serve the purpose ..  .of preventing courts from undertaking tasks assigned to
the political branches[,] if once a plaintiff demonstrated harm from one particular inadequa-
cy in government administration, the court were authorized to remedy all inadequacies in
that administration.").
107.  See INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S.  919, 968 (1983)  (White, J., dissenting) (explaining
that Congress had included a legislative veto in more than 200 statutes in the preceding fifty
years).
108.  Cf Bond v. United States, 131 S. Ct. 2355, 2365 (2011) ("[T]he claims of individ-
uals-not of Government departments-have been the principal source of judicial decisions
concerning separation of powers and checks and balances."). When the Eleventh Circuit de-
cided Florida v. HHS on appeal, it declined to address any of the arguments regarding the78 STANFORD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
III.  THE INSULATION ARISING OUT OF INCIDENTAL REVIEW
Virginia v. Sebelius was born in political warfare. The lawsuit exists be-
cause Virginia enacted the Health  Care Freedom Act, a state  law enacted to
counter a conflicting federal law by providing a vehicle for attacking the feder-
al law in federal court. As invoked in Virginia v. Sebelius, the function of this
antimandate  statute  has  been  to  move  debate  over  the  federal  individual
mandate  from the political realm to the legal realm. If successful, this move
would enable Virginia to obtain federal judicial validation of the constitutional
vision animating political and legal opposition to the individual mandate.
Although the occasion for this particular state law is the fight over health
care reform, that is just one area in which the states are pushing back against
the federal government.'09 If Virginia's statute suffices on its own to establish
federal jurisdiction, one can expect litigation-provoking statutes like the Health
Care Freedom Act to proliferate.
To treat such statutes as tickets into federal court, however, would deprive
the courts of an important buffer from political forces that federal justiciability
doctrine currently provides. That doctrine requires that constitutional adjudica-
tion be incidental to  resolution of a case  or controversy,  rather than  that the
case or controversy be incidental to resolution of a constitutional question.
absence of jurisdiction over the states' challenge to the individual mandate. Florida ex rel.
Attorney Gen. v. U.S.  Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 648 F.3d 1235,  1243 (11th Cir.
2011), cert. granteds ub nom. Florida v. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 80 U.S.L.W. 3199
(U.S. Nov. 14, 2011) (Nos. 11-393,  11-398,  11-400). The court reasoned that it is sufficient
that "at least one plaintiff has standing to raise each claim," a condition that was met by the
private plaintiffs with respect to the individual mandate. Id. The court correctly stated the
principle, but was too quick to rely on it and to dismiss as "academic," id, the justiciability
problems with the states' challenge to the individual mandate. That is because the Eleventh
Circuit's conclusion that the private plaintiffs'  challenge was within federal jurisdiction may
have been mistaken. In Liberty University, Inc. v. Geithner, the United States Court of Ap-
peals for the Fourth Circuit held that the Tax Anti-Injunction Act bars pre-enforcement chal-
lenges to the individual mandate. No. 10-2347, 2011 WL 3962915, at *14-16 (4th Cir. Sept.
8, 2011). The Eleventh Circuit did not address the Tax Anti-Injunction Act in its ruling. But
if the Fourth Circuit's conclusion in Liberty University is correct, then there is no federal ju-
risdiction over the private plaintiffs'  challenge to the individual mandate in Florida v. HHS,
and federal jurisdiction depends on the states' alternative standing theories.
109.  See The Tenth Amendment Nullification Movement, TENTH AMENDMENT CENTER,
http://www.tenthamendmentcenter.com/the- 10th-amendment-movement  (last visited Jan. 14,
2012) (providing resources for tracking state legislation challenging federal laws regulating
firearms, food, and marijuana, among other items). Some of the state legislation relies on an
asserted state authority to regulate intrastate commerce free of federal regulation. For exam-
ple, Texas has enacted a law providing that incandescent light bulbs manufactured in the
state are not subject to federal regulation. See TEX. Bus. & COM. CODE ANN.  § 2004.001
(West 2011). As of October 2011,  similar bills had been introduced in Arizona, Georgia,
Michigan, and South Carolina. See Chris Christoff, Bulbs Rally Lawmakers in Fightf or State
Rights, BLOOMBERG  (Oct.  16,  2011,  9:01  PM),  http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-10
-17/bulbs-rally-lawmakers-in-fight-for-state-rights.html.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 79
Insistence on constitutional adjudication as incidental to the resolution of a
case or controversy is one of the strengths of the American legal system. Alexis
de Tocqueville discerned early on that this feature of the system provided the
judiciary some insulation from the buffeting of political winds. The power giv-
en the judiciary in America, he observed, was not to censure legislation in the
abstract, but only to "refuse to admit [unconstitutional legislation] as a rule" in
deciding a case.110 Tocqueville recognized  that a less restricted power would
subject the judge exercising it to enlistment in political controversy, "and as the
champion or the antagonist of a party, he would have brought the hostile pas-
sions of the nation into the conflict." 1 1 The absence of a power to censure un-
constitutional  legislation in the abstract may be problematic  at times,  such as
when  delay creates  uncertainty, or when  individuals  are required  to comply
with a law later held to be unconstitutional. Tocqueville understood, however,
that Americans "have left the remedy incomplete, lest they should give it an ef-
ficacy that might in some cases prove dangerous."112
Tocqueville  was right. Justiciability doctrine functions in various ways to
insulate the federal judiciary-at least somewhat-from political forces. There
are longstanding debates over the legitimacy of consciously shaping justiciabil-
ity doctrine to achieve this end.'13 But if it were possible to invoke federal ju-
risdiction solely on the basis of a state statute opposing a particular rule of fed-
eral  law,  the  insulation  provided  by  that  doctrine  would  be  eliminated  in
exactly those cases where insulation from political pressures would be needed
most-those involving highly controversial issues that have mobilized a politi-
cal constituency to push successfully for state legislation designed to seek inva-
lidation of federal  law. This concern  is not why the Supreme Court  decided
Franchise Tax Board and Skelly Oil as it did, but it is nonetheless a strong rea-
son for courts to apply their holdings to foreclose suits like Virginia v. Sebelius.
110.  1 ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE,  DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA  101  (Phillips Bradley ed.,
Henry Reeve trans., Alfred A. Knopf 1980) (1835).
111.  Id. at 102. Protection from this enlistment arises out of the fact that the American
judge enters the political arena "independently of his own will. He judges the law only be-
cause he is obliged to judge a case. The political question that he is called upon to resolve is
connected with the interests of the parties, and he cannot refuse to decide it without a denial
of justice." Id. at 103.
112. Id. at 103.
113.  For a classic debate over the relative weight to be accorded  this consideration,
compare ALEXANDER M. BICKEL, THE LEAST DANGEROUS BRANCH: THE SUPREME COURT AT
THE BAR OF POLITICS 111-98 (1962) (discussing various means by which the Supreme Court
can and should accommodate  its enforcement  of constitutional principle  to political and
practical  realities),  with  Gerald  Gunther,  The Subtle Vices of the "Passive Virtues "-A
Comment on Principle and Expediency in Judicial Review, 64 COLUM. L. REV. 1, 25 (1964)
(identifying problems with Bickel's accommodationism). It is also worth noting here, as Sa-
muel Bray has observed, that the "passive virtues" advocated by Bickel-which are "'me-
diating techniques'  and devices for 'not doing"'-stand in some tension with the just.ifica-
tions offered  for the sort of "preventive  adjudication"  enabled by  declaratory  judgment
actions. See Samuel L. Bray, PreventiveA  djudication, 77 U. CHI. L. REv. 1275, 1314 (2010).80 STANFORD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
If federal jurisdiction can be premised solely on a state statute like Virgin-
ia's Health Care Freedom Act in this first case, it assuredly will not be the last.
And as the events surrounding the case have already borne out, the combination
of political pressures and abstract adjudication in a case like  Virginia v. Sebe-
lius can generate  strong currents. While the federal courts  can withstand  the
pull of those currents in any one case, there is a real risk that a proliferation of
such cases could generate currents too strong to withstand.
Consider the effects of Virginia v. Sebelius at the district court level alone.
Immediately upon issuance of a judgment in Virginia's favor, legal and politi-
cal figures  across the  nation hailed the  decision as a game  changer that ce-
mented the seriousness of the constitutional objections leveled against the indi-
vidual  mandate.114  Others,  it  is  true,  sought  to  minimize  the  decision's
importance.115 But even these attempts at minimization are a testament to the
consequential nature of the decision. For example, Attorney General Eric Hold-
er and Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius apparently
thought the decision significant enough to publish a jointly authored op-ed in
the next day's Washington Post.116
114. See, e.g., Kevin Sack, Years of Wrangling Lie Ahead for Health Care Law, N.Y.
TIMES, Dec. 14, 2010, at A24 ("[T]he challenges from dozens of states to the law's constitu-
tionality can no longer be dismissed as frivolous,  as they were earlier this year by some
scholars and Democratic partisans."); Sheiyl Gay Stolberg, Just One Ruling, but an Outsize
One, N.Y. TImEs, Dec. 14, 2010, at A24 ("By the numbers, President Obama is beating op-
ponents of his signature health care bill two to one in federal court. Of the three district court
judges who have ruled on the merits of constitutional challenges to the landmark Affordable
Care Act, two have sided with Mr. Obama. But from a political standpoint, the only case that
really matters is the one Mr. Obama lost on Monday.");  Randy Barnett, A Noxious Com-
mandment,  N.Y.  TIMEs  RooM  FOR  DEBATE  (Dec.  13,  2010),
http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2010/12/13/a-fatal-blow-to-obamas-health-care
-law/an-unconstitutional-commandment  ("The days of calling the constitutional challenges
to the Affordable Care Act 'frivolous'  and 'political'  are now officially over. Judge Hud-
son's ruling that the individual insurance mandate is unconstitutional  is a milestone in the
legal process of deciding whether Congress has the power to command every person in the
United States to enter into an economic relationship with a private company."); Ashby Jones,
The Health Care Law Under the JudicialK nife: Some Early Reactions, WALL ST. J. L. BLOG
(Dec.  13,  2010, 2:20  PM),  http://blogs.wsj.com/law/2010/12/13/the-health-care-law-under
-the-judicial-knife-some-reactions  ("This  is a momentum-changer  that will further tarnish
the Obama administration as it faces serious legal challenges to the President's most note-
worthy legislative accomplishment, which now faces a 112th Congress filled with Republi-
cans! who have pledged to repeal the unpopular health care reforms." (quoting Jordan Seku-
low, Director of Policy at the American Center for Law & Justice)).
115.  See Jennifer  Haberkorn  & Scott Wong,  Health Ruling Is GOP  Rallying Cry,
POLITICO (Dec. 14, 2010, 6:52 AM), http://www.politico.com/news/stories/1210/46319.html
("Lawmakers  pounced on the news Monday that a federal judge has struck down health
reform's individual  mandate-with Republicans welcoming  it as a body blow to 'Obama-
care' and Democrats dubbing it a detour on the road to reform.").
116.  Eric H. Holder, Jr. & Kathleen Sebelius, Op-Ed., Health Reform Will Survive Its
Legal Fight, WASH. PosT, Dec. 14, 2010, at A23.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 81
In the political realm, the district court's  decision in  Virginia v. Sebelius
became a rallying point for legislators opposed to the Patient Protection and Af-
fordable Care Act, and assertions about the Act's unconstitutionality became a
staple in arguments for its repeal. The district court's decision had a significant
effect  in the  legal realm as well, although  not as outsized  as in the political
realm. Legal commentators on both sides of the issue gravitated to the district
court's opinion as a focal point for analysis, even while these commentators
(and the district court itself) recognized that the decision is not binding on any
other court and is not the final word on the matters it addresses.
The decision's many effects cannot, in truth, be neatly divided between the
legal  and political realms.  Given the nature of the case, any effort to draw a
clear boundary between the two realms and then to assign some features of the
case to one or the other breaks down. To what realm, for instance, should one
allocate  the Internet  display advertisements  by Attorney  General Cuccinelli's
political committee that ran both on the day that summary judgment was argued
and also on the day that the summary judgment decision was handed down?'17
It might be tempting to  dismiss these advertisements  as purely political.  But
that quick characterization  would neglect the  extent to which the  legal  skir-
mishing in Virginia v. Sebelius is just one front in a larger battle of ideas about
the Constitution-one  in which the line between legal and political has never
been neatly drawn.118
117. On October 18, 2010, the author of this Article observed display advertisements
for Ken Cuccinelli's political website on news and commentary sites while Virginia's solici-
tor general was in Judge Hudson's courtroom for arguments over summary judgment. The
advertisements  contained a headshot of Virginia's Attorney General, with the message that
"liberty  is  under  attack,  and  I  am  attacked  for defending  it."  See Stop the Mandate,
CUCCINELLI.coM,  http://www.cuccinelli.com/petition/landing/supportpetition.html  (last vi-
sited Jan. 14, 2012). The link took visitors to a page headlined "Stop the Mandate," with the
message: "Hi  I'm Ken Cuccinelli and  15 minutes after President Obama signed the health
care law my office filed suit to overturn the individual mandate. Will you join me?" Id. The
page invited visitors to sign a petition and linked to a donation page.
As on the day summary judgment was argued in Virginia v. Sebelius, so too on the day
that summary judgment was granted: Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli's political
committee sponsored display advertisements trolling for supporters and donations, this time
touting victory and basking in the validation provided by the ruling. See Ben Smith, Cucci-
nelli  Fundraising off  Health  Care  Win,  POLITICO  (Dec.  13,  2010,  3:41  PM),
http://www.politico.com/blogs/bensmith/121 0/Cuccinelli  fundraising  off health  care  win
.html ("That didn't take long: Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli is already capitaliz-
ing on today's health care victory with a big online fundraising push, with this image on top
of the Drudge Report and on Google Ads across the political web. The ad takes supporters to
a petition ...  which harvests their emails and then, naturally, to a 'Donate'  button.").
118.  Indeed, this is how Attorney General Cuccinelli and his political director have ex-
plained the advertisements. See Rosalind S. Helderman,  Va. Attorney General Cuccinelli's
Strategy Looks Good in Light ofRuling, WASH. POST, Dec. 14, 2010, at B I ("'There's a bat-
tle of ideas going on here,'  [Attorney General Cuccinelli] said. 'The formal battle is going on
in court. There's also a battle for hearts and minds the citizenry [sic]. I'm trying to educate
folks about why we're doing this."'); id. (describing political director Noah Wall's explana-82 STANFORD  LA WREVIEW [Vol. 64:55
Moreover,  even  if one  were  to view  the  lawsuit as  largely political,  it
would be mistaken to characterize it as an activist Attorney General's one-man
crusade. The Health Care Freedom Act passed through Virginia's General As-
sembly on a bipartisan basis.'19 And the popular sensibility addressed by the
Virginia legislature was not peculiarly Virginian. A nationwide poll in August
2010 revealed that 70% of Americans had an unfavorable view of the individu-
al  mandate,  including  52%  of Americans  who  characterized  their  view  as
strongly  unfavorable.120  Legal measures  opposing  various  aspects  of health
care reform were introduced in over forty state legislatures in 2009 and 2010,
and Virginia was just one of seven states to enact opposition to an individual
mandate  into  state  law  in  2010.121  Oklahoma, which  added  an antimandate
provision to its constitution in 2010, filed a go-it-alone lawsuit similar to  Vir-
ginia v. Sebelius, in reliance on its constitutional amendment.122
State standing to challenge the individual mandate is not exclusive of indi-
vidual standing, of course, and the first appellate  court ruling on the constitu-
tionality of the individual mandate  came in a case with no state plaintiffs.123
Yet the prominence of the state challenges has tinted the individual liberty as-
pect of limits on federal legislative power with the hue of political posturing.
This coloring affects perceptions not only of the litigants but also of the federal
courts themselves.
The portion of the Fourth Circuit opinion that drew the sharpest response
from Virginia's Attorney General in reacting to the opinion after it was issued
was the court's explanation of its refusal to accept a theory that would turn each
state into "a roving constitutional watchdog of sorts."124 According to Attorney
General Cuccinelli, "This was exactly a role that the Founding Fathers planned
tion that "the goal of the ads was not to raise money but to encourage supporters to sign a
petition expressing support").
119. See Olympia Meola & Tyler Whitley,  Va. Response to Overhaul Practicala nd
Ideological, RICH. TIMES-DISPATCH,  Sept. 26, 2010, at Al  (stating that four Senate Demo-
crats voted with Republicans in passing the Health Care Freedom Act); What's Happening at
the Capitol Today?, RICH. TIMES-DISPATCH, Mar. 11,  2010, at A9 (noting that a majority of
thirty-nine House Democrats voted with Republicans in passing the Health Care Freedom
Act).
120. HENRY J. KAISER FAMILY FOUND., KAISER HEALTH TRACKING POLL 7 (2010).
121.  See Richard Cauchi, State Legislation and Actions Challenging CertainH  ealth Re-
forms,  2009-2010,  NAT'L  CONF.  ST.  LEGISLATURES  (Mar.  14,  2011),
http://www.ncsl.org/?Tabld=22375;  Richard  Cauchi,  State Legislation and Actions Chal-
lenging Certain Health Reforms, 2011, NAT'L CONF.  ST.  LEGISLATURES  (Sept.  9, 2011),
http://www.ncsl.org/?tabid=18906.  The other states enacting a mandate-exemption statute in
2010 were Arizona, Georgia, Idaho, Louisiana, Missouri, and Utah. Id.
122.  Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 1, 2, 7, Oklahoma ex rel. Pruitt
v. Sebelius, No. 6:1 1-cv-00030-RAW (E.D. Okla. Jan. 21, 2011); see also Kevin Sack, Ok-
lahoma: State Will Challenge Health CareL aw, N.Y. TIMES, Jan. 8, 2011, at A14.
123.  See Thomas More Law Ctr. v. Obama, 651 F.3d 529, 529 (6th Cir. 2011), petition
for cert.f iled, 80 U.S.L.W. 3065 (U.S. July 26, 2011) (No. 11-117).
124.  Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 656 F.3d 253, 272 (4th Cir. 2011), petition
for cert.filed, 80 U.S.L.W. 3221 (U.S.  Sep. 30, 2011) (No. 11-420).January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 83
for the  states to have."125 The Attorney  General's statement  continued:  "As
James Madison wrote, under the Constitution, 'the  power surrendered  by the
people is first divided between two distinct governments . . . . Hence a double
security arises to the rights of the people. The different governments [state and
federal] will control each other. ... "' 26
Attorney General Cuccinelli's invocation  of a truncated  version of Madi-
son's statement in Federalist No. 51 captures the essence of what was wrong
with Virginia v. Sebelius from the outset. The "double security" famously de-
scribed by Madison consists of both federalism (i.e.,  the division into two dis-
tinct governments)  and separation  of powers (i.e.,  the  distribution of federal
power to distinct departments). The ellipses in the portion quoted by Attorney
General Cuccinelli reveal that something is missing, and that something turns
out to be Madison's discussion of separation of powers.127 The omission cap-
tures in miniature the problem with Virginia's rush to assert a federalism objec-
tion in federal court relying solely on Virginia's Health Care Freedom  Act: it
neglected  the limits placed  on the federal judicial power in Article III of the
Constitution. These limits, as the Supreme Court has repeatedly explained, are
essential to the Constitution's distribution of legislative, executive, and judicial
power "among distinct and separate departments."l 28
CONCLUSION
Because Virginia  is not the only state to have enacted opposition to  the
federal individual mandate into state  law, and because health care is just one
125.  Press Release, Office of the Attorney Gen., Cuccinelli Expresses Disappointment
in  Fourth  Circuit's  Ruling  in  Health  Care  Case  (Sept.  8, 2011),  available at http://
www.oag.state.va.us/Media%20and%2ONews%20Releases/NewsReleases/Cuccinelli/9811
Health  CareRuling.html.
126.  Id. (alteration in original) (quoting THE FEDERALIST No. 51, at 323 (James Madi-
son) (Clinton Rossiter ed., 1961)).
127.  The sentence immediately preceding the language quoted by the Attorney General
states: "In a single republic, all the power surrendered by the people is submitted to the ad-
ministration of a single government; and the usurpations are guarded against by a division of
the government into distinct and separate  departments."  THE FEDERALIST  No.  51  (James
Madison), supra note 126, at 323. The next sentences read as follows (with the language ab-
sent from the Attorney General's press release marked by a strike-through):
ir.t he 80HIzm~fzd Fopublie ef Am~ie,  the power surrendered by the people is first divided
between two distinct governments, and thef  the  allotted to  zaeh subdivided ameng
distifiet and separate  deparrn~~ts. Hence a double security arises to the rights of the people.
The different governments will control each other, at the samz time that eaeh  will be een
trailed by se
Id.; Office of the Attorney Gen., supra note 125.
128.  THE FEDERALIST No. 51 (James Madison), supra note 126, at 323; see also, e.g.,
DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 547 U.S.  332, 341 (2006) ("This Court has recognized that
the case-or-controversy limitation is crucial in maintaining the 'tripartite allocation of pow-
er' set forth in the Constitution."  (quoting Valley Forge Christian Coll. v. Ams. United for
Separation of Church & State, Inc., 454 U.S. 464, 474 (1982))).84 STANFORD  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
issue on which the states are pushing back against the federal government, the
correct approach to federal jurisdiction in a case like  Virginia v. Sebelius has
broad significance.  This Article  has  explained why current doctrine  requires
dismissal,  and has  further suggested  why this  is desirable  from  the point of
view of the federal courts.
The arguments in this Article do not reduce to an argument for a rule of
federal jurisdiction that would authorize federal court refusal to entertain claims
because  state officials  may  be using the forum to further their own political
ambitions. Such a rule would be impossible to apply, given the inevitable  in-
termixture  of political and legal considerations  in  actions brought by elected
public officials. And, after all, elected  public officials should be eager to en-
force the will of the people as expressed in their laws. Moreover, even if such a
rule  could be applied, it  would be a bad idea to  have it.  The use of federal
courts as  vehicles of political ambition is an  important source  of the courts'
power to maintain  some control over determinations  of constitutional  mean-
ing.129
Nor do the arguments in this Article stem from angst about messy public
debates  over constitutional  meaning. The worry, instead, is about what might
flow from the immediate thrusting of all such debates into federal courts with-
out regard to established jurisdictional doctrine. The aim is to preserve the rules
of federal jurisdiction that enable the federal judiciary to stand firm against the
political  and cultural  waves  that continually  cast  questions  of constitutional
meaning out of the swirling tides of political processes onto the hard land of the
judicial domain. The law should not prevent these questions from ever coming
ashore, but should instead ensure that they arrive there in a way that does not
threaten erosion of the shore into the sea.
Curbing the overt politicization of abstract review in federal court was not
the intended function of the Court's rulings  in Skelly  Oil and Franchise Tax
Board. But  that  may  nevertheless  be  the  most  beneficial  function  of
straightforwardly  applying  to  Virginia v.  Sebelius the Supreme Court's pro-
nouncement that "[t]he  situation presented by a State's suit for a declaration of
the validity of state law is . . .not within the original jurisdiction of the United
States district courts."130
The declaratory judgment remedy has many virtues, but Felix Frankfurter
was right to worry early on that its casual acceptance could cause federal courts
to issue forbidden advisory opinions. The district court's decision in Virginia v.
Sebelius is a case in point. Virginia's lawsuit conjured, for a time, the phantom
feared by Frankfurter-a ghost that slays.131 As long as the courts remain vigi-
129.  See generally KEITH  E.  WHITTINGTON,  POLITICAL  FOUNDATIONS  OF  JUDICIAL
SUPREMACY: THE PRESIDENCY, THE SUPREME  COURT, AND CONSTITUTIONAL LEADERSHIP IN
U.S. HISTORY 18 (2007).
130.  Franchise Tax Bd. v. Constr. Laborers Vacation Trust, 463 U.S.  1, 21-22 (1983).
131.  See Frankfurter,s upra note 2, at 1008.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 85
lant, however, there  is reason to hope that neither this poltergeist nor similar
spectral beings will haunt the halls of the federal courts.
POSTSCRIPT: A REPLY TO VIRGIA'S MANDATE-CHALLENGE TRIUMVIRATE
Attorney General  Cuccinelli, Solicitor General  Getchell, and Deputy At-
torney General Russell (collectively, the Attorney General) devote only a small
portion of their invited article to the arguments in  The Ghost That Slayed the
Mandate. This Postscript in reply can be correspondingly brief.
The Attorney  General  first attributes  significance to the fact that  "Fran-
chise Tax Board is a removal case."132 That feature of the case is irrelevant,
however, because removal jurisdiction depends on original jurisdiction. Fran-
chise Tax Board itself is a case that was not removable precisely because it was
not within the original jurisdiction of the federal district courts. Hence the Su-
preme Court's statement in that case that "[t]he situation presented by a State's
suit for a declaration of the validity of state law is . ..  not within the original
jurisdiction  of the  United  States  district  courts.  Accordingly,  the  same  suit
brought originally in state court is not removable either."133
The Attorney General next argues that the Franchise Tax Board objection
to statutory subject matter jurisdiction rests on the mistaken premise that the
only relief sought by Virginia is a declaration that its law is valid. That is inac-
curate. There has never been any question that Virginia also seeks to enjoin en-
forcement of the federal individual mandate.134 The problem is that the Attor-
ney  General's  claimed  right  to  come  into  federal  court  on  behalf of the
Commonwealth depends  on the  existence of Virginia's  antimandate  law. In-
deed, the Attorney General conceded this point in arguing that "[t]he  Virginia
law transforms Tenth Amendment issues of the sort found to be merely abstract
in Mellon into an immediate and concrete dispute within the ambit of the sove-
reign  standing  cases."135  The  Attorney  General  is right  to  recognize  that a
state's naked claim that the individual mandate exceeds  Congress's power is
"merely abstract."  The Attorney General is wrong, however, to assert that the
mere coexistence  of conflicting  statutes is  sufficient to transform a disagree-
ment over sovereign authority from abstract to concrete.
132. Kenneth T. Cuccinelli et al., State Sovereign Standing: Often Overlooked, but Not
Forgotten, 64 STAN. L. REv. 89, 117 (2012).
133.  FranchiseT ax Bd., 463 U.S. at 21-22.
134. See, e.g., Brief of Amicus Curiae Kevin C. Walsh in Support of Appellant Seeking
Reversal at 9, Virginia ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius, 656 F.3d 253 (4th Cir. 2011)  (Nos. 11-
1057, 11-1058), 2011 WL 773573 [hereinafter Walsh Brief] (arguing that the relief Virginia
seeks in addition to a declaratory judgment of state law validity "cannot be independently
salvaged from its fatally flawed claim for declaratory relief'); supra text accompanying note
16 ("Virginia seeks a declaratory judgment that its state law remains valid notwithstanding
the individual mandate in the federal law, along with injunctive  relief prohibiting enforce-
ment of the entire healthcare reform Act.").
135.  Appellee's Opening and Response Brief, supra note 38, at 18 (emphasis added).86 STANFORD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
The Attorney General next claims that "[n]o  serious argument can be made
that the federal courts lack the jurisdiction to find federal statutes unconstitu-
tional."136 I disagree.  Every lawsuit that seeks an advisory opinion  about the
constitutionality  of a federal  statute  is outside  of federal jurisdiction.  Every
constitutional challenge to a federal statute in which the plaintiff lacks standing
is one in which the federal courts lack the jurisdiction to find federal statutes
unconstitutional. Quite simply, the claim that a federal law is unconstitutional
is not a sufficient condition for federal jurisdiction in all circumstances.
The Attorney General's response to the Skelly Oil argument for lack of ju-
risdiction lacks  a critical  ingredient. The Skelly  Oil argument  has two steps.
First, I argue Virginia must show that it is entitled to seek some type of nondec-
laratory relief. The Attorney General does not dispute the argument at this first
step. Second, I argue that there is no type of nondeclaratory relief that Virginia
is authorized to seek. The Attorney General does not dispute that Virginia may
not  seek  injunctive  relief either  (i) to  enjoin  application  of the  individual
mandate  to Virginia's citizens, or (ii)  to  enjoin application  of the individual
mandate to Virginia itself. But the Attorney General  nevertheless asserts that
applying Skelly Oil to demonstrate the absence of statutory subject matter juris-
diction in Virginia v. Sebelius "falls into the fallacy of the excluded middle."137
To support this assertion with argument, it would be necessary for the Attorney
General to show that Virginia is entitled to seek some type of nondeclaratory
relief other than what my analysis has shown to be unavailable. This the Attor-
ney General neither does, nor even attempts.
Instead, the Attorney General contends that my formulation of the Skelly
Oil argument "misunderstands  and misstates the nature of the sovereign injury
suffered and claimed by Virginia."138 That is incorrect.139 Regardless, the con-
tention is nonresponsive. Disputing how to characterize Virginia's injury does
not answer  the Skelly  Oil objection  grounded  in Virginia's  inability to  seek
nondeclaratory relief without running afoul of some other jurisdictional barrier
(like the Mellon bar on parens patriae standing against the federal government
or the prohibition of advisory opinions).
The Attorney General  asserts at one point that my Fourth Circuit amicus
curiae brief "focused exclusively on the standing question." 40 Like The Ghost
That Slayed the Mandate, however,  the bulk of the amicus filing focused  on
statutory  subject matter jurisdiction, while the Article  III analysis  addressed
advisory opinion doctrine and the redressability prong of standing analysis.141
Although  most  of the  Attorney  General's  arguments  about  state  sovereign
136. Cuccinelli et al., supra note 132, at 118.
137. Id.
138. Id.
139. See supra text accompanying notes 22-24.
140.  Cuccinelli et al., supra note 132, at 116.
141.  See Walsh Brief, supra note 134, at i.January 2012]  GHOST THAT SLA YED THE MANDATE 87
standing do not deal with  the other jurisdictional problems  identified  in The
Ghost That Slayed the Mandate, those standing arguments nevertheless merit a
brief reply.
The Attorney General equates a state's authority to defend its laws when
attacked in a case or controversy with the existence of a case or controversy
any time federal law and state law conflict on paper. That is a fundamental er-
ror. The Attorney General writes:
Virginia claims a right to legislate and has actually legislated in an area that is
now also occupied by PPACA's mandate and penalty. If the mandate and pe-
nalty  exceed  the limits of congressional  power, the  federal law is  invalid.
Thus, there is an actual case or controversy with respect to that issue that is
not dependent on the remedy provided by the Declaratory Judgment Act. 142
The argument appears to be that there is a case or controversy because state
and federal law conflict, and the federal law is invalid if it is unconstitutional.
Thus formulated, the Attorney General presents nothing more than a words-on-
paper conflict between state and federal law. The Attorney General's inability
to  explain away  the  abstract nature  of the  complaint-generating  conflict  re-
mains.
A  right to  defend a state  law attacked  in an existing  controversy  is not
equivalent to a right to use that state law to generate  a case or controversy to
attack conflicting federal law. The difference between the two is apparent when
one looks at the Attorney General's principal modem authority on state sove-
reign standing, Diamond v. Charles.143
The Supreme Court's decision in Diamond v.  Charles capped a case that
began  shortly  after Illinois enacted  a  statute  regulating  abortion.144  Doctors
who performed abortions challenged that statute as unconstitutional in a federal
lawsuit against state officials charged with enforcing it.145 Diamond, a doctor
opposed to abortion, intervened on the enforcement officials'  side to defend the
law.146  The district  court preliminarily,  and  later permanently,  enjoined  en-
forcement of various provisions of the challenged  statute.147 The court of ap-
peals affirmed the injunction against enforcement of three provisions and fur-
ther held that an additional provision's enforcement should be enjoined.148 The
enforcement officials for Illinois chose not to appeal to the Supreme Court, but
intervenor-defendant Diamond filed a notice of appeal and jurisdictional state-
ment.149 The Supreme Court held that, in the absence of an appeal from the Il-
linois enforcement  officials, there was no case  or controversy upon  which it
142.  Cuccinelli et ai., supra note 132, at 118-19.
143.  476 U.S. 54 (1986).
144. Id. at 57.
145. Id.
146. Id at 57-58.
147. Id. at 58-61.
148. Id. at 61.
149. Id.88 STANFORD  LAW REVIEW [Vol. 64:55
could rule.150 The Court reasoned that, "[bjecause the State alone is entitled to
create a legal code, only the State has the kind of 'direct stake'  identified in [the
Court's  standing  doctrine]  in  defending  the  standards  embodied  in  that
code."'51
The Attorney General draws from Diamond v. Charles the proposition that
"in defending its code of laws, a State has standing that others might lack."152
That proposition is unexceptionable so far as it goes. But it does not mean that
a state has standing as a plaintiff to bring a suit to vindicate its law from con-
flicting federal law. The case or controversy in Diamondv . Charles did not de-
pend on an abstract conflict between state and federal  law. Rather, as the Su-
preme Court noted, the case  or controversy  was "[t]he  conflict between  state
officials empowered to enforce a law and private parties subject to prosecution
under  that  law."153  The  analogous  case  or  controversy  in  the  individual
mandate context would be one between federal officials empowered to enforce
the individual mandate and private parties subject to that mandate. That bears
no resemblance to Virginia v. Sebelius, a state action against federal officials to
challenge a provision not enforceable against the State of Virginia. Indeed, Vir-
ginia v. Sebelius does not include as a party anyone against whom the mandate
could be enforced.
At bottom,  Virginia v. Sebelius does not present a "case" or "controversy"
under Article  III.  Whether one arrives  at that  conclusion  by  application  of
standing doctrine  or advisory  opinion doctrine, the conclusion  about constitu-
tional jurisdiction remains the same. These Article III problems compound the
jurisdictional problems under Franchise Tax Board and Skelly  Oil set forth at
length above.
150. Id. at 62-71.
151.  Id. at 65 (citation omitted).
152.  Cuccinelli et al., supra note 132, at 109.
153. Diamond, 476 U.S. at 64.