ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Behind the Mask of Method: Political Orientation
and Constitutional Interpretive Preferences
Joshua R. Furgeson Æ Linda Babcock Æ
Peter M. Shane
Publishedonline:5October2007
(cid:1)AmericanPsychology-LawSociety/Division41oftheAmericanPsychologicalAssociation2007
Abstract Debate about how to best interpret the Consti- Legal scholars and judges often write as if their conclu-
tution often revolves around interpretive methodologies sions about the meaning of the Constitution follow from a
(e.g., originalism or expansive interpretation). This article principled choice of rules for constitutional interpretation.
examines whether individuals’ political orientation inﬂu- For example, some judges believe the Constitution’s
ences the methodologies they prefer to use to interpret the modern meaning should be interpreted expansively, while
Constitution. We study this proposed relationship using a othersrelyonamorerestrictiveinterpretationofthetext’s
surveyoffederallawclerksandanexperimentalstudywith original meaning. Lawyers commonly use rules like these
collegestudents.Thesurveyresultsindicatethat,compared tounderstandtheConstitution,anditisoftenarguedthata
to conservatives, liberal clerks prefer the current meaning comprehensive set of interpretation rules, an interpretive
or the most plausible appealing meaning of the constitu- methodology,canimproveconstitutional decision-making.
tionaltext,whileconservativesprefertheoriginalmeaning Legal scholars value methodologies for providing consis-
of the text. Liberal clerks also prefer to interpret the tency across different cases and ultimately the objectivity
Constitution much more expansively. The second study and fairness that result from a consistent application of
manipulates the policy implications of expansive inter- rules.
pretation and ﬁnds this manipulation differentially affects Methodological reasoning is also used as a shield
liberals’ and conservatives’ expansiveness preferences. against claims of political bias. When overturning laws,
judges assert that their rulings are determined by a meth-
Keywords Constitutional interpretation (cid:1) Originalism (cid:1) odologicalunderstandingoftheConstitution,nottheirown
Interpretive methodology policyvalues.Judicialnomineesproposethattheirpersonal
beliefs will be irrelevant to their future judicial decisions,
because they have methodological preferences to guide
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone their decisions. If scholars oppose constitutional rulings,
anddonot reﬂect the views of the ArgosyFoundationor any other they can be criticized on valid methodological grounds.
institution. Constitutional opinions based on wholly legal reasoning
are more convincing and accepted (Burton 1992), and
J.R.Furgeson(&)
methodologies can provide such legal justiﬁcation.
ArgosyFoundation,555E.WellsSt.Suite1650,Milwaukee,
WI53202,USA The clean demarcation between methodological rea-
e-mail:josh@argosyfnd.org soningandpolicy-basedreasoningrequirestheassumption
that methodological choice is based only on constitutional
L.Babcock
values, and not on considerations of policy extraneous to
HeinzSchoolofPublicPolicyandManagement,Carnegie
MellonUniversity,5000ForbesAve.,Pittsburgh,PA15213, the Constitution. Otherwise, methodological reasoning
USA might just be policy reasoning behind a jurisprudential
e-mail:lb2k@andrew.cmu.edu
mask. This assumption seems reasonable since methodo-
logical preferences are often justiﬁed as a preference for
P.M.Shane
TheOhioStateUniversity,Columbus,OH,USA certainconstitutionalvalues,andthesejustiﬁcationsappear
123LawHumBehav(2008)32:502–510 503
entirely sincere. However, individuals are not always theoretical and empirical analysis in this article will focus
awareofthetruecauseoftheirbeliefs(NisbettandWilson on interpretation involving individual rights.
1977; Kunda 1990). If methodologies’ policy implications Lawyers typically justify their methodological prefer-
inﬂuence interpretive preferences, then methodologies are ences using jurisprudential values and the principles
notentirelynonpolitical reasoning,sincea methodological discussed in the Constitution. These justiﬁcations imply
choice may be unwittingly adopted to further an individ- that methodological preferences arise out of agreement
ual’s policy goals. with the basic values that underlie the methodologies, i.e.,
The idea that political orientation inﬂuences methodo- individuals decide which constitutional values are most
logical preferences is certainly not new (Ely 1980, p. 2; important and then choose the methodology that promotes
Brennan1990;Bork1990;Perry1994;Rakove1996,p.xv; those values. For example, an individual who favors the
Howard 1981, p. 176). However, there has been little value of legislative deference will likely favor restrictive
research demonstrating an empirical relationship between interpretation.
constitutional methodological preferences and political Psychological evidence indicates that abstract choices,
orientation (Cross 1997). The limited empirical work like methodological preferences, often result from initial
examining legal interpretive preferences often focuses on intuitions (Haidt 2001). We believe that methodological
nonconstitutional interpretation (Redding and Reppucci intuitions are based on the perceived policy outcomes of
1999; Scheb et al. 1991). For example, Redding and Rep- implementingamethodology,aconsiderationthatiseasily
pucci asked law students and judges whether ‘‘judges discernable and where individuals usually have clear,
shouldconstrueorinterpretthelawstrictlyandnarrowlyor preexisting preferences. This initial preference for a
more liberally and expansively’’ and found a signiﬁcant methodology causes individuals to react favorably to
relationship between preferences for expansive interpreta- arguments supporting their preference, while subjecting
tion and liberalism. However, other studies have found opposing arguments to more scrutiny (Kunda 1990; Daw-
mixed associations between political orientation and atti- son et al. 2002; Ditto and Lopez 1992; Ditto et al. 1998).
tudes toward judicial intervention (Scheb et al. 1991; This biased reasoning process ultimately results in a
Howard 1981), and one study ﬁnds, contrary to common cohesive, comprehensive explanation why one methodol-
belief, that liberal judges are more likely to engage in ogy is preferred (Simon et al. 2001). Individuals may be
originalist interpretation (Sisk et al. 1998). This inconclu- unaware of their policy preferences’ impact on their intu-
sive literature probably exists because methodological itions or reasoning.
preferences were typically an ancillary topic in previous The particular values underlying each source tend to
studies and there were often confounds. favor speciﬁc types of policies, and this tendency is
quickly realized. For example, the value of stability that
underlies originalist interpretation (Kay 1996) uses the
Psychological Mechanisms beliefs of historical individuals to understand the Consti-
tution, and thus will result in more traditional, and often
In this article, we study two dimensions of a coherent sociallyandeconomicallyconservativepolicies.Thevalue
interpretative methodology: source and breadth of inter- of progress, motivating current meaning interpretation,
pretation. Source refers to the type of information the emphasizes modern norms and will often result in more
judge should use to understand the constitutional language liberal policies. Once individuals associate a value with
whenitisunclear.Fivepotentialsourcesarestudiedinthis preferred policy implications, an initial preference for that
article: original intent, original meaning, current meaning, value and the associated source forms, without the indi-
plausible appealing meaning, and precedents (see Phelps vidualnecessarilyrealizingthepolicy-basedoriginoftheir
and Gates 1991; Bobbit 1982, for similar classiﬁcations). preference.
Breadth of interpretation refers to how broadly the appli- Inasimilarmanner,breadthpreferencesaredetermined
cable constitutional language should be interpreted (Perry byarealizationofthelikelypolicyimplicationsofjudicial
1994; Dworkin 1986; Bork 1990; Scalia 1997; Tribe and restraint. A clear, and quickly recognizable difference
Dorf 1992). The Constitution can be interpreted expan- between expansive and restrictive interpretation is that
sively, meaning, for example, the interpreter uses the restrictive strongly emphasizes judicial restraint. Paradig-
values that inspire constitutional provisions and also pro- matic Supreme Court rulings, especially Roe v. Wade,
tects fundamental rights that may not be explicitly provide a context for determining the likely policy out-
mentioned, or the Constitution can be interpreted restric- comes of emphasizing judicial restraint. We believe that
tively, meaning the interpreter understands provisions as because modern paradigmatic Supreme Court decisions
theyhavetraditionally beeninterpretedandonlyoverturns have resulted in predominantly liberal outcomes, individ-
a law if the law clearly violates a speciﬁc provision. The uals will typically perceive judicial restraint to favor
123504 LawHumBehav(2008)32:502–510
conservative outcomes.1 There is evidence that opinions randomly selected to receive a mailing (Wants 2003). The
about the Supreme Court can be affected by the policy mailingwasaddressedto‘‘LawClerkintheChambersof’’
implications of a Supreme Court decision (Mondak 1991; followed by the judge’s name. Each mailing included a
see also Grosskopf and Mondak 1998). cover letter, a survey, an addressed return envelope with
In this article, two studies employing two different postage, and a pocket edition of the United States Consti-
methods were used to examine the relationship between tution.Thecoverletterinformedclerksthattheirresponses
political orientation, our proxy for policy preferences, and wereanonymousandtheycouldcompletethesurveyusing
interpretive preferences. Study 1 surveyed federal law the enclosed paper survey or using an identical version
clerks to examine whether a relationship exists between postedontheInternet.Thirty-twopercent(N = 162)ofthe
political orientation and interpretive preferences. We contacted chambers completed the survey, and data from
hypothesize that conservatives will be more likely than 156 surveys were analyzed (two judges completed the
liberalstofavororiginalintentandoriginalmeaning,while survey and four clerks who failed to follow instructions
liberals will be more likely than conservatives to favor were excluded). Roughly 41% of the respondents were
current meaning. The policy implications of precedents or female, 7% were African–American, 6% were Asian–
the text’s most plausible appealing meaning are unclear American, and 4% were Latino.
and we have no a priori hypotheses about any ideological
differences in preferences for these sources. We also
hypothesize that the more liberal the clerk the more they Materials
will prefer expansive interpretation, and the more conser-
vative the clerk the more they will prefer restrictive The survey was composed of three sections. The ﬁrst
interpretation. section asked clerks to rank the inﬂuence of ﬁve potential
Study 1 aims to establish a real-world relationship sources on their constitutional decision-making. The sec-
between policy preferences and interpretive preferences ond section asked clerks to indicate their level of
among one population of interest. As with most observa- agreementwithmultiplestatementsabouthowexpansively
tional work, it is possible that any relationship in Study 1 the Constitution should be interpreted. The ﬁnal section
could be explained by a third factor that causes both measured demographic characteristics and political
political orientation and interpretive preferences. Study 2 orientation.
used experimental methods to establish the proposed The instructions for the ﬁrst section described the pur-
mechanism by manipulating the policy implications of poseofsourcepreferences.Clerkswerethenprovidedwith
judicial restraint and examining whether this manipulation ﬁve‘‘traditional’’typesofadditionalinformationandwere
inﬂuenced preferences for expansive interpretation. We asked to place a number next to each source with the
hypothesize that for liberals, exposure to a Supreme Court purpose of ranking the source ‘‘in order of its inﬂuence on
ruling that had a liberal policy consequence will increase your constitutional decision-making.’’ Respondents were
their preferences for expansive interpretation compared to instructed to give two or more sourcesthe same ranking if
when they are exposed to a conservative Supreme Court they believed the sources would have the same amount of
ruling. We expect the opposite pattern for conservatives— inﬂuence. Finally, they were instructed to place an X next
that exposure to a Supreme Court ruling that had a liberal to a source if they believed that the source should not be
policyconsequencewilldecreasetheirrelativepreferences used at all to interpret the Constitution. The survey pre-
for expansive interpretation. sented ﬁve sources: original intent, original meaning,
current meaning, plausible appealing meaning, and prece-
dents.Toensurethatpreferenceswerebasedoncontentnot
Study 1: Survey of Law Clerks presentation, the source descriptions were similar in
format.
Participants The second section asked clerks to read six statements
about constitutional interpretation. Each statement mea-
Participants were law clerks employed by district and sured a slightlydifferent aspectof the respondent’s beliefs
appellate federal judges throughout the United States about whether constitutional clauses should be interpreted
(excluding the Fifth Circuit). Five hundred judges were as protecting broad principles or speciﬁc rights. After
readingeachstatement,clerkswereaskedtoselectwhether
they‘‘stronglydisagree,’’‘‘moderatelydisagree,’’‘‘slightly
1 If one assumes that the paradigmatic cases of the ﬁrst half of the
disagree,’’ were ‘‘neutral,’’ ‘‘slightly agree,’’ ‘‘moderately
twentiethcenturywasLochnerv.NewYork198U.S.45(1905),our
agree,’’ or ‘‘strongly agree.’’ Numbers were later assigned
hypothesiswouldimply thatliberalsofthaterawere morelikely to
favorjudicialrestraint. totheresponsessuchthatstronglyopposewascodedas–3
123LawHumBehav(2008)32:502–510 505
and strongly support was coded as +3 and intervening Table1 Multinomial logistic results for source preferences
numbers were matched with appropriate terms (half the (N=138)
statements were phrased so that agreement indicated a Variable B SEB Riskratio
preference for restrictive interpretation, and these respon-
Intercept:originalintent –1.576** .351
ses were reverse coded). Responses to the six statements
were averaged toform anoverall preference for expansive Intercept:originalmeaning –.812** .274
interpretation (alpha = .80). Intercept:currentmeaning –2.734** .768
Inthelastsection,clerksansweredquestionsabouttheir Intercept:plausible –4.256** 1.293
appealingmeaning
gender, race, and two items that measured their political
Liberal:originalintent –.050 .193 .951
orientation.Theﬁrstitemwasacommonideologymeasure
Liberal:originalmeaning –.592** .155 .553
that asked clerks to rate their political views on a liberal–
Liberal:currentmeaning 1.221** .348 3.391
conservative continuum (‘‘Below is a scale on which the
Liberal:plausible 1.580** .552 4.853
political views that people might hold are arranged from
appealingmeaning
extremely liberal to extremely conservative. Where would
you place yourself on this scale?,’’ Knight 1999). The Note:Thebaselinesourceisprecedents
seconditemaskedparticipantsthedegreetowhichtheyfelt **p\.01
closertotheDemocraticorRepublicanparties(seeBarnes
et al. 1988). Numbers were assigned to the labels clerks variablewasequalto1forthesourcerankedﬁrstand0for
actually chose in the following manner: Extremely Liberal all other sources. Responses from those participants who
andVeryClosetoDemocratswerecodedas+3,Extremely rankedtwoormoresourcesastheirﬁrstchoice(n = 18)or
ConservativeandVeryClosetoRepublicanswerecodedas did not have a ﬁrst choice (n = 1) were excluded from the
–3, and intervening numbers were matched with appro- analysis because these participants did not have a unique
priate terms. The responses to these two questions were ﬁrst preference, an assumption of the model (N = 138).
averaged to form a measure of political orientation The independent variable was Liberal, the clerk’s political
(r = .90). To facilitate presentation, we also classiﬁed the orientation,createdbyaveragingtheideologyandpartisan
clerks into three groups based on their orientation. If the measures. The results are mostly consistent with our
clerk’s average response to the ideology and partisan hypotheses (see Table 1 and Fig. 1): liberalism was posi-
questionwasgreaterthanthescalemidpoint,theclerkwas tivelyassociatedwithaﬁrstpreferenceforcurrentmeaning
classiﬁed as a liberal (n = 107); if the average response (risk ratio = 3.39, z(130) = 3.82, p\.01) and negatively
was less than the midpoint, the clerk was classiﬁed as a associatedwithaﬁrstpreferencefororiginalmeaning(risk
conservative (n = 41); and if the average response was at ratio = .55, z(130) = 2.86, p\.01), but there was no sig-
the midpoint the clerk was classiﬁed as neither (n = 8). niﬁcant relationship between political orientation and ﬁrst
Finally, clerks were asked to list the Supreme Court deci- rankings of original intent (risk ratio = .95, z(130) = 0.26,
sion that ‘‘ﬁrst comes to mind’’ when they thought about p[.50). There was a positive relationship between liber-
expansive constitutional interpretation. Our theory implies alism and preferences for plausible appealing meaning
that clerks will be more likely to list rulings resulting in (risk ratio = 4.85, z(130) = 3.51, p\.01), but no clear
liberal policy outcomes, especially Roe v. Wade. relationship between liberalism and preferences for prece-
dents (Cramer’s V = –.02, v2(1, N = 130) = 0.06,
p[.80).
Results Our hypothesis also implies that clerks would be more
likely to fully reject a source if they disliked its policy
The source rankings were analyzed with multinomial implications. Five binomial logistic regressions were used
logisticregression(seeTable 1).Thistypeofregressionis to analyze rejection preferences. The dependent variable
used to analyze preferences when an individual faces a wascodedas1ifaclerkrejectedasourceand0ifnot,and
choice with more than two options.2 The dependent the independent variable was Liberal. Liberal clerks were
Footnote2continued
2 The multinomial logistic model does make the assumption of modelswerebothinappropriateinthiscontext.Ultimately,thelarge
IndependenceofIrrelevantAlternatives(IIA).Thisassumptionstates differences in liberals’ and conservatives’ source preferences are
that adding another potential choice will not change the ratio of compelling evidence of ideological effects, even if the signiﬁcance
choice probabilities between existing alternatives. In this case, both testsaresomewhatquestionable.Effectsizesforthismodelarecal-
original intent and original meaning (and potentially precedents) culatedasriskratiosthatcanbeinterpretedinthefollowingway:a
favortraditionalvalues,implyingthattheassumptionwouldlikelybe riskratioforcurrentmeaningof3.39meansthatforeachonepoint
violated.Therearetwootherdiscretechoicemodelsthatdonotmake increaseinLiberal,thelikelihoodofchoosingcurrentmeaningover
the IIA assumption, nested logit and multinomial probit, but these precedents(thebaselinechoice)increasesby3.39.
123506 LawHumBehav(2008)32:502–510
Discussion
60% 54% Conservatives
Liberals
First Choice 4500%% 32% 38% 36% Traenhldaetsipeoonrlesihtsiuicplatlsbeeotsrwtiaeebneltniastchioo,nnf.sotriHttuohtweioeﬁnvraesltri,ntiatmenreyp,rsaeitgicvnleeiﬁaprcraeenmfetpreriernisccuealstl
ng  30% from this survey cannot be used to infer that interpretive
ki
an preferences are caused by political orientation or policy
nt R 20% 16% preferences. It is possible that another factor causes both
Perce 10% 8%9% 7% political orientation and interpretive preferences or that
0% 0% thereisacomponent ofpoliticalorientationbesidespolicy
0%
preferences that causes the association between political
 Original  Original Current Appealing Precedents
Intent Meaning Meaning Meaning orientation and interpretive preferences (e.g., simpler rea-
soning, see Tetlock et al. 1985; but see Gruenfeld 1995).
Fig.1 Source preferences by political orientation (N=130). Note:
Thisﬁgureonlydisplaysﬁrstpreferencesforthoseclerkswhohada Study 2 experimentally tested whether policy preferences
uniqueﬁrstpreferenceandanidentiﬁablepoliticalorientation can inﬂuence initial expansiveness preferences.
signiﬁcantly less likely to reject current meaning and
plausibleappealingmeaningthanconservativeclerks(odds Study 2
ratio = .499, z(154) = 4.25, p\.01 and odds ratio = .573,
z(154) = 4.60,p\.01).Forexample,while27%and39% The goal of Study 2 was toexamine whether changing the
of conservatives rejected current meaning and plausible policy implications of expansive versus restrictive inter-
appealing meaning respectively, only 3% and 8% of lib- pretation changes participants’ preferences about using an
erals did. Less than 5% of clerks rejected either original expansive versus restrictive interpretation. This was done
intent or original meaning and there were no signiﬁcant by experimentally manipulating the Supreme Court deci-
ideological differences in the rejection of these sources sionsanindividualthinksaboutwhileevaluatingthemerits
(both p-values[.50). No clerk rejected using precedents. of judicial restraint, the key value underlying expansive-
The relationship between breadth of interpretation ness preferences. In this study, undergraduates were
preferences and political orientation was analyzed using presented with a Supreme Court ruling that either imple-
OLS regression with the same independent variable, Lib- mented a liberal policy (Roe v. Wade) or a conservative
eral, and with average expansiveness preference as the policy (Bush v. Gore). The ruling the participant received
dependent variable. We hypothesized that the more liberal was randomly assigned. Although the constitutional rea-
the participant the stronger the preference for expansive soning in Bush v. Gore and Roe v. Wade is very different,
interpretation, and the coefﬁcient on Liberal was sub- for purposes of this experiment the pairing is appropriate
stantial, statistically signiﬁcant (b = .75, t(156) = 14.25, because these two decisions were likely to elicit strong,
p\.01) and positive, consistent with our hypothesis. The opposing partisan reactions and the participants were
R2 was .57, indicating that fully 57% of the variation in undergraduates who were likely unaware of any legal dif-
expansiveness scores can be explained solely by political ferences between the cases. After receiving their assigned
orientation.Finally,whenaskedtochoosethedecisionthat ruling, participants were provided with descriptions of
‘‘ﬁrst came to mind’’ when they thought of expansive expansive and restrictive interpretation and asked which
interpretation,over45%oftheclerksthatlistedadecision method they preferred. All participants received identical
listedRoev.Wadeand14%listedGriswoldv.Connecticut, information, except for the Supreme Court ruling.
anotherreproductiverightscase.Roughly90%ofthecases
listed resulted in liberal policy outcomes.3
Participants
3 Thefollowingdecisionswereclassiﬁedasresultinginconservative
policy outcomes: Alden v. Maine 527 U.S. 706 (1999), Bowers v. Participantswere170undergraduateandgraduatestudents
Hardwick 478 U.S. 186 (1986), Bush v. Gore 531 U.S. 98 (2000),
at Carnegie Mellon University and Duquesne University
Lochnerv.NewYork,Terryv.Ohio392U.S.1(1968),andUnited
who were paid $10 to participate. Students were chosen,
States v. Lopez 514 U.S. 549 (1995). Three decisions were not
classiﬁed as either liberal or conservative because of the current because unlike lawyers or even law students, these par-
consensus across the political spectrum as to the merits of these ticipantswereunlikelytohavealready formedinterpretive
decisions. Namely, Marbury v. Madison 5 U.S. 137 (1803) and
preferences and were also less likely to be familiar with
Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer 343 U.S. 579 (1952) are
previous Supreme Court decisions. If participants in this
today all-but-universally regarded as correct, while Dred Scott v.
Sanford60U.S.393(1857)isnowuniversallyregardedaswrong. study already hadastrong awarenessofpreviousSupreme
123LawHumBehav(2008)32:502–510 507
Court rulings, the experimental manipulation would not theparticipant’sconditionandtheothercoderwasunaware
have the potential to alter perceptions of the Court’s pre- of both the investigators’ hypotheses and the participant’s
vious rulings. Eleven participants were excluded from the condition. The coders resolved initial disagreements by
analyses for various reasons (e.g., they were law students discussion.
or were not U.S. citizens). Fifty-ﬁve percent of the par- The following page contained the dependent measures.
ticipants were female, 19% were Asian–American, 9% Participants responded to ﬁve statements measuring their
were African–American, and 5% were Latino. breadth preferences. The ﬁve statements were about: their
overall preference, whether judges should respect legisla-
turesmore,ifexpansiveinterpretationwasmoreconsistent
Materials with their values, whether judges should protect the broad
constitutional values they believe inspire the Constitution,
ParticipantswereexposedtotheirassignedSupremeCourt andwhetherthecountry wouldbebetteroffifjudgesused
ruling twice at the beginning of the experiment. Upon restrictiveinterpretation.ParticipantsrespondedonaLikert
arrival each participant was given a consent form and a scale with numerical endpoints –3 and +3. After reverse
bookletcomposedoftheexperimentalmaterials.Thecover coding responses to the second and ﬁfth questions, the
ofthebookletcontainedanalteredNewYorkTimesarticle responses to the ﬁve statements were averaged (alpha =
describingeithertheRoev.WadeorBushv.Goredecision .87) to form an overall expansiveness preference.
(ﬁrstexposure)alongwithotherlegalreferences.Afterthe On the next page participants answered a series of
consent forms were completed and collected, each partic- questions measuring whether they understood and
ipant was given sufﬁcient time to read the cover and was remembered the differences between restrictive and
then told to open the booklet and begin. The ﬁrst page of expansive interpretation. In general, participants were able
thebookletinformedparticipantsaboutjudicialreviewand to remember the concepts presented and to differentiate
constitutional interpretation. Each of the concepts was between the two types of interpretation; 76% correctly
illustrated using either the Roe v. Wade or Bush v. Gore answered all three-comprehension questions. The partici-
ruling (second exposure). The policy implication of the pants who did not demonstrate an adequate understanding
relevant ruling was described in detail. by accurately answering all three questions were excluded
After reading their assigned ruling, participants were (N = 121).
informed that judges often use interpretive methodologies Participants were next asked to use a seven-point scale
to encourage consistency in their constitutional decision- to describe how much they liked, disliked, or were neutral
making. The instructor then told participants that they toward the policies that resulted from Roe v. Wade and
would be asked about their preferences for two types of Bush v. Gore. These measures were used to verify that
methodologies:expansiveandrestrictive.Participantswere liberals liked Roe v. Wade more than Bush v. Gore and
nextprovidedwithdeﬁnitionsforrestrictiveandexpansive conservatives liked Bush v. Gore more than Roe v. Wade.
interpretation. Each deﬁnition consisted of three state- Participants then answered questions about their race, age,
ments, and the language and format was similar for both and gender. Finally, participants completed the same ide-
deﬁnitions. Participants were then told that supporters of ologyandpartisanmeasuresusedinStudy1(r = .81).The
restrictive interpretation believe that it is more democratic average response to these two questions formed our polit-
because unelected judges defer to decisions by elected ical orientation variable.
legislators, and that supporters of expansive interpretation We predict that preferences for expansiveness will
believe that it is more democratic because independent depend on the participants’ political orientation and the
judges protect individual rights. case they received. Speciﬁcally, we hypothesize that for
To promote thoughtfulness and provide insight into liberals, exposure to Roe v. Wade will lead to a greater
participant reasoning, the next page of the booklet asked preference for expansive interpretation, relative to expo-
participants to think about and then list reasons why they sure to Bush v. Gore. For conservatives, we predict the
preferred one type of interpretation. They were also oppositepattern:thatexposuretoRoev.Wadewillleadto
remindedthattheywouldbeenteredinarafﬂewitha$100 a lower preference for expansive interpretation, relative to
prize if their reasoning was judged satisfactory. Partici- exposure to Bush v. Gore.
pants were given two-thirds of a page to write reasons
explainingtheirpreferences.Thesereasonswereevaluated
and classiﬁed by two independent coders (kappa = .73) to Results
determine whether the primary reason was to respect
democratically elected institutions or whether the partici- As expected, liberals in this study strongly liked Roe v.
pant provided another reason. One coder was unaware of Wade(M = 2.18,SD = 1.06)andmoderatelydislikedBush
123508 LawHumBehav(2008)32:502–510
v. Gore (M = –1.95, SD = 1.51), and these opinions were expansive interpretation. Another regression was con-
signiﬁcantlydifferentt(79) = 19.43,p\.01;conservatives ducted to examine whether a similar interaction occurred
moderately liked Bush v. Gore (M = .74, SD = 1.99) and when participants were only responding to the one state-
moderately disliked Roe v. Wade (M = –.83, SD = 2.49), ment(Item2reverse-coded)thatspeciﬁcallyreferredtothe
and the differences were signiﬁcant t(33) = 2.76, p\.01. principle of legislative deference, a core concept of inter-
All these values are also signiﬁcantly different from the est. Again, the interaction was signiﬁcant (b = .40,
neutral point on the scale: for liberals, Roe v. Wade t(117) = 3.31, p\.01) and the predicted effect was in the
t(79) = 15.81, p\.01 and Bush v. Gore t(79) = 11.56, hypothesized direction. When the participant was exposed
p\.01; for conservatives: Roe v. Wade t(33) = 1.93, toRoev.Wade(relativetoBushv.Gore),themoreliberal
p = .06 and Bush v. Gore t(33) = 2.16, p\.05. the participant the lower the support for legislative
WehypothesizedthatbeingpresentedwithRoev.Wade deference.
as opposed to Bush v. Gore would increase liberals’ pref- To examine whether written justiﬁcations were affected
erences for expansive interpretation and reduce bytheexperimentalmanipulationandpoliticalorientation,
conservatives’ preferences. To test this hypothesis, we alogisticregression(thedependentvariablewasequalto1
estimated a regression where the dependent variable was if the participant listed respecting democratic institutions
the expansiveness preference measure, the participant’s and 0 if not) was conducted using the same independent
average response to the ﬁve questions measuring prefer- variables as the previous analyses. The results reveal a
ences for expansive interpretation. The independent signiﬁcant interaction (odds ratio = .272, z(117) = 2.40,
variableswere:RW,avariableequalto1iftheparticipant p\.05) between political orientation and being presented
waspresentedwiththeRoev.Waderulingandequalto0if withRoev.Wade(seeTable 3).Speciﬁcally,liberalswere
the participant was presented with Bush v. Gore, Liberal less likely to cite respecting elected institutions when
the participant’s political orientation created by averaging exposed to Roe v. Wade as opposed to Bush v. Gore
the ideology and partisan measures, and an interaction (M = 0% for Roe v. Wade; M = 15.6% for Bush v. Gore,
between RW and Liberal. Our hypothesis implies that the z(80) = 2.44, p = .01), while conservatives were insigniﬁ-
coefﬁcient on the interaction will be negative. cantly more likely to cite respecting elected institutions
The coefﬁcient on the interaction was negative and when exposed to Roe v. Wade as opposed to Bush v. Gore
signiﬁcantly different from zero (b = .31, t(117) = 2.49, (M = 29.4% for Roe v. Wade; M = 17.6% for Bush v.
p = .01) indicating that being exposed to Roe v. Wade (as Gore, z(34) = 0.81, p[.40).
opposed to Bush v. Gore) affected liberals’ expansiveness
preferences differently than conservatives’ expansiveness
preferences(seeTable 2andFig. 2).Thecoefﬁcientonthe Discussion
interactionindicatesthatwhentheparticipantwasexposed
to Roe v. Wade, as opposed to Bush v. Gore, the more Data from this study indicate that being exposed to Roe v.
liberal the participant the higher the support for an Wade (as opposed to Bush v. Gore) shifted liberals’ and
conservatives’ expansiveness preferences in opposite
directions. For liberals, exposure to a Supreme Court
Table2 Summary of regression analysis for expansiveness prefer-
ence(N=121) decision that was consistent with their policy preference
increased their support for expansive interpretation and
Variable B SEB b
reduced their support for legislative deference. For con-
Generalexpansivenesspreference servatives, exposure to a Court decision that differed from
Intercept .632** .199 their policy preferences reduced their support for an
RW –.494 .291 –.166 expansive interpretation and increased their support for
Liberal –.013 .106 –.014 legislative deference.
RW·Liberal .407* .164 .306 As the participants were not lawyers, these results
Speciﬁcpreferenceforlegislativedeference cannot be used to assert that lawyers’ and judges’ expan-
Intercept –.511** .197 siveness preferences are caused by the policy implications
RW –.348 .288 –.115 of previous Supreme Court rulings. Similarly, the use of
Liberal –.007 .105 –.007 only one experimental manipulation presenting two, par-
RW·Liberal .535** .162 .395 ticularcontrastingcasesmeansthatfurthertestsareneeded
to determine robustness. However, the goal of this study
Note:Theitemmeasuringlegislativedeferencewasreverse-codedto
was only to establish that beliefs about previous Court
beconsistent with theoverall expansiveness preference (i.e.,a pref-
erenceforlegislativedeferencemeansmorenegativenumbers) rulings could inﬂuence initial preferences for legislative
*p\.05,**p\.01 deference and judicial intervention.
123LawHumBehav(2008)32:502–510 509
Fig.2 Expansivepreferenceby
2
politicalorientationandcase Bush v. Gore
(N=121) e Roe v. Wade
c
n
ere 1
ef
Pr
ss  0
e
n
e
v
nsi -1
a
p
x
E
-2
Extremely Moderately Slightly Neutral    Slightly      Moderately Extremely
ConservativeConservativeConservative (n=7) Liberal  Liberal  Liberal 
(n=6) (n=13) (n=15) (n=12) (n=44) (n=21)
Political Orientation
Table3 Logistic results for deference to democratic institutions survey was not mailed to a speciﬁc clerk, but any clerk
(N=121) workingforthejudge).Third,thisresearchonlyexamined
Variable B SEB Oddsratio two components of an interpretive methodology, source
and breadth preferences, and it focused speciﬁcally on
Intercept –1.505* .343
breadth preferences regarding individual rights. Fourth,
RW –1.178 .881 .347
researchshouldexaminewhetherjudgesconsistentlyusea
Liberal –.145 .184 .931 particular methodology to reach decisions, even when
RW·liberal –1.359* .579 .272 using the methodology would result in outcomes that
*p\.05 conﬂict with their policy preferences (see Howard and
Segal 2002; Phelps and Gates 1991).
General Discussion The second study used experimental methods to exam-
ine whether political orientation inﬂuences initial breadth
The empirical results were consistent with our hypothesis of interpretation preferences. The data indicate that
thatpoliticalorientationinﬂuencesthelegalreasoningthat manipulating the perceived policy implications of judicial
forms interpretive preferences. The survey of law clerks restraint can change initial preferences. The more conser-
found a strong and robust association between political vative the participant, the less likely they were to prefer
orientation and interpretive preferences. Liberal clerks expansive interpretation if they had been presented with
were more likely than conservative clerks to prefer the Roe v. Wade compared to Bush v. Gore, and the reverse
currentmeaningandthemostplausibleappealingmeaning was true for liberals.
of the constitutional text, while a majority of conservative Further research is needed to determine the robustness
clerks preferred the original meaning of the Constitution. of the relationship. For example, robustness could be
There were also large and signiﬁcant ideological differ- demonstrated using a stimulus sampling approach that
ences in breadth of interpretation preferences: the more varies case primes and examines multiple constitutional
liberal the clerk, the more likely they were to favor values. Moreover, this study only examined how initial
expansive interpretation, and the effect size was large. interpretivepreferencesareaffectedbyashortpresentation
Although these results substantially conformed to our of information. While the ﬁrst study in this article exam-
hypothesis, this was a ﬁrst study and important gaps ined more established interpretive preferences, neither
remain.First,onlyfederallawclerksweresurveyed.Some study explored the cognitive processes that convert initial
of the ﬁndings in this study may be unique to law clerks leanings into ﬁrm preferences. Future work could also
(e.g., law clerks may especially value precedents because study whether individuals are aware of how their policy
they are responsible for ensuring that their judge’s rulings preferences inﬂuence their methodological preferences.
conform to precedents). Future studies should include If future research conﬁrms that political orientation
judges, obviously the population of most interest. Second, inﬂuencesmethodological preferences,thisdoesnotimply
while the response rate to this study was acceptable by that methodological reasoning should be discouraged.
social science norms, it is certainly possible that nonre- Methodologiesencouragelawyersandjudgestousesimilar
spondents might have different interpretive preference reasoning across different cases, and thus foster consis-
patterns than the clerks who did complete the survey (it tency and predictability, two values that should be
wasnotpossibletocontacteachclerkmultipletimesasthe promoted in the law. Moreover, there is no plausible
123510 LawHumBehav(2008)32:502–510
nonpolitical alternative to methodological decision-mak- decisionmaking.JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology,
ing. Studies usually ﬁnd that judges’ rulings in legal cases 68,5–20.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social
areassociatedwiththeirpoliticalorientation(Pinello2001;
intitutionistapproachtomoraljudgment.PsychologicalReview,
Sisk and Heise 2005). 108,814–834.
Theseresultsdo,however,implythatmethodologiesare Hand,L.(1952).InI.Dillard(Ed.),Thespiritofliberty:Papersand
notapoliticalconstitutionalreasoning.Currentlythereisno addressesofLearnedHand.NewYork:Knopf.
Holmes,O.W.(1918).Naturallaw.HarvardLawReview,32,41–47.
clear answer about what might reduce the inﬂuence of
Howard, J. W. (1981). Courts of appeals in the federal judicial
policy preferences. Encouraging lawyers to focus on legal system: A study of the second, ﬁfth, and District of Columbia
considerations will not work if legal reasoning is circuits.Princeton:PrincetonUniversityPress.
unknowingly biased by political orientation (Rowland and Howard,R.M.,&Segal,J.A.(2002).Anoriginallookatoriginalism.
LawandSocietyReview,36,113–138.
Carp 1996; Schroeder 2002). Maybe more skepticism, and
Kay, R. S. (1996). ‘‘Originalist’’ values and constitutional interpre-
less certainty would help (Holmes 1918; Hand 1952, p. tation.HarvardJournalofLawandPublicPolicy,19,335–340.
190). Although there is relative agreement that policy Knight,K.(1999).Liberalismandconservatism.InJ.P.Robinson,P.
preferencesshouldhaveaminimaleffectonlegaldecision- R. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of political
attitudes(pp.59–148).NewYork:AcademicPress.
making,thereisstilldisagreementabouthowtoreducethe
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological
inﬂuence of policy preferences. Building a consensus will Bulletin,108,480–498.
require more data and a better understanding of the cog- Mondak,J.J.(1991).SubstantiveandproceduralaspectsofSupreme
nitive processes that cause policy preferences to be Court decisions as determinants of institutional approval.
AmericanPoliticsQuarterly,19,174–188.
inﬂuential.
Nisbett,R.,&Wilson,T.D.(1977).Tellingmorethanwecanknow:
Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review, 84,
Acknowledgments We thank Jeff Dominitz, Daniel Feiler, Gary 231–259.
Franko, Joan Kiel, Jennifer Lerner, Carlos Raad, George Taylor, Perry,M.J.(1994).TheConstitutioninthecourts:Laworpolitics?
WilliamVogt,andKaiZheng. NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress.
Phelps, G. A., & Gates, J. (1991). The myth of jurisprudence:
Interpretive theory in the constitutional opinions of Justices
References RehnquistandBrennan.SantaClaraLawReview,31,567–596.
Pinello, D. (2001). Linking party to judicial ideology in American
courts:Ameta-analysis.JusticeSystemJournal,20,219–254.
Barnes,S.H.,Jennings,M.K.,Inglehart,R.,&Farah,B.(1988).Party
Rakove, J. N. (1996). Original meanings: politics and ideas in the
identiﬁcation and party closeness in comparative perspective.
makingoftheConstitution.NewYork:VintageBooks.
PoliticalBehavior,10,215–231.
Redding,R.E.,&Reppucci,N.D.(1999).Effectsoflawyers’socio-
Bobbitt, P. (1982). Constitutional fate: Theory of the Constitution.
political attitudes on their judgments of social science in legal
NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress.
decisionmaking.LawandHumanBehavior,23,31–54.
Bork,R.H.(1990).ThetemptingofAmerica:Thepoliticalseduction
Rowland,C.K.,&Carp,R.A.(1996).Politicsandjudgmentinfederal
ofthelaw.NewYork:FreePress.
districtcourts.Lawrence,KS:UniversityofKansasPress.
Brennan, W. (1990). The great debate: Interpreting our written
Scalia, A. (1997). A matter of interpretation. Princeton: Princeton
Constitution.Washington,DC:TheFederalistSociety.
UniversityPress.
Burton, S. J. (1992). Judging in good faith. Cambridge, UK:
Scheb, J. M., Bowen, T., & Anderson, G. (1991). Ideology, role
CambridgeUniversityPress.
orientations, and behavior in the state courts of last resort.
Cross, F. B. (1997). Political science and the new legal realism.
AmericanPoliticsQuarterly,19,324–335.
NorthwesternUniversityLawReview,92,251–326.
Schroeder, C. H. (2002). Causes of the recent turn in constitutional
Dawson, E., Gilovich, T., & Regan, D. T. (2002). Motivated
interpretation.DukeLawJournal,51,307–361.
reasoning and performance on the Wason selection task.
Simon, D., Pham, L. B., Le, Q. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (2001). The
PersonalityandSocialPsychologyBulletin,28,1379–1387.
emergence of coherence over the course of decision making.
Ditto, P. H., & Lopez, D. F. (1992). Motivated skepticism: Use of
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
differential decision criteria for preferred and nonpreferred
Cognition,27,1250–1260.
conclusions. Journal ofPersonality andSocialPsychology, 63,
Sisk, G. C., & Heise, M. (2005). Judges and ideology: Public and
568–584.
academic debates about statistical measures. Northwestern
Ditto, P. H., Scepansky, J. A., Munro, G. D., Apanovitch, A.M., &
UniversityLawReview,99,743–803.
Lockhart, L. K. (1998). Motivated sensitivity to preference-
Sisk, G. C., Heise, M., & Morriss, A. P. (1998). Charting the
inconsistent information. Journal of Personality and Social
inﬂuences on the judicial mind: An empirical study of judicial
Psychology,75,53–69.
reasoning.NewYorkUniversityLawReview,73,1377–1500.
Dworkin,R.(1986).Law’sEmpire.Cambridge,MA:BelknapPress.
Tetlock,P.E.,Bernzweig,J.,&Gallant,J.L.(1985).SupremeCourt
Ely, J. H. (1980). Democracy and distrust: A theory of judicial
decision making: Cognitive style as a predictor of ideological
review.Cambridge,MA:HarvardUniversityPress.
consistency. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48,
Grosskopf,A.,&Mondak, J.J.(1998).Doattitudestowardspeciﬁc
1227–1239.
Supreme Court decisions matter: The impact of Webster and
Tribe, L., & Dorf, M. (1992). On reading the Constitution.
Texas v. Johnson on public conﬁdence in the Supreme Court.
Cambridge:HarvardUniversityPress.
PoliticalResearchQuarterly,51,633–654.
Want Publishing Company. (2003). Want’s federal-state court
Gruenfeld,D.H.(1995).Status,ideology,andintegrativecomplexity
directory.
on theU.S. Supreme Court: Rethinking the politics of political
123