PROPERTY OF THE MIT PRESS
FOR PROOFREADING, INDEXING, AND PROMOTIONAL PURPOSES ONLY
The End of Ownership
Personal Property in the Digital Economy
Aaron Perzanowski and Jason Schultz
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:66)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:22) (cid:26)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:29)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:48)PROPERTY OF THE MIT PRESS
FOR PROOFREADING, INDEXING, AND PROMOTIONAL PURPOSES ONLY
For Clem, who at least gets my record collection—AP
For Kate & Elliott, my two favorite booksneaks—JS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:66)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:24) (cid:26)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:29)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:48)PROPERTY OF THE MIT PRESS
FOR PROOFREADING, INDEXING, AND PROMOTIONAL PURPOSES ONLY
Contents
Acknowledgments  ix
1  Introduction 1
2  Property and the Exhaustion Principle  15
3  Copies, Clouds, and Streams  35
4  Ownership and the Fine Print  57
5  The “Buy Now” Lie  83
6  The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  103
7  DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  121
8  The Internet of Things You Don’t Own  139
9  Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life  155
10  Ownership’s Uncertain Future  169
Notes  195
Index  241
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:66)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:26) (cid:26)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:29)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:48)Acknowledgments
This project grew out of a series of our academic articles: “Digital Exhaus-
tion,” UCLA Law Review 58 (2011): 889–946; “Copyright Exhaustion and 
the Personal Use Dilemma,” Minnesota Law Review 96 (2012): 2067–2143; 
“Legislating Digital Exhaustion,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 28 (2015): 
1535–1557; and “Reconciling Personal and Intellectual Property,” Notre 
Dame Law Review 90 (2015): 1213–1263. It also draws from “What We Buy 
When We Buy Now,” by Aaron Perzanowski and Chris Jay Hoofnagle, forth-
coming in the University of Pennsylvania Law Review (2016). We thank those 
journals, their editors, and our many colleagues who helped refine our 
thinking at those early stages. We’d also like to extend our appreciation to 
the long list of law schools where those articles and portions of this book 
were workshopped.
We  are  grateful  to  Peter  Steffensen  for  outstanding  research  assis-
tance and to Yawen Li for last-minute editing. For their thoughtful com-
ments on this manuscript, we’d like to thank Brandon Butler, Ryan Calo, 
Rochelle Dreyfuss, Dave Fagundes, Josh Fairfield, Tomás Gómez-Arostegui, 
James Grimmelmann, Parker Higgins, Chris Hoofnagle, Peter Jaszi, Ariel 
Katz, Mark Lemley, Lydia Loren, Mike Madison, Christina Mulligan, Sean 
O’Connor, John Rothchild, Sarah Schindler, Matthew Schruers, Sherwin 
Siy, Molly Shaffer Van Houweling, and Fred von Lohmann.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273323/9780262335959_cab.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20201  Introduction
Chances are, you are reading this book in one of two ways. Either you 
are holding a bound set of printed pages—a traditional analog book—or 
you are holding an electronic device displaying a digital file—an ebook. 
Whether the page is physical or virtual, the words are the same. But the 
seemingly simple choice between these two ways of delivering text offers 
a window into a broader set of questions about the emerging digital econ-
omy and our place within it. In the courts, in the marketplace, and in our 
homes, we find mounting evidence that our rights to own, control, repair, 
and use the products we buy depend, in large part, on whether those goods 
are analog or digital. This looming rift between buyers of analog and digital 
goods is the byproduct of a number of relatively recent legal, technological, 
and marketplace developments. And those shifts implicate not only media 
content like books, music, and movies, but also nearly every software-
enabled device we encounter, from phones, cars, and coffeemakers to medi-
cal devices like pacemakers and insulin pumps.
An example may help illustrate the problem. In George Orwell’s dys-
topian classic 1984, the Ministry of Truth, at the behest of Big Brother, 
destroyed documents by casting them into the memory hole, a massive 
network of tubes leading to an incinerator. Amazon, the world’s largest 
bookseller, sells 1984—along with millions of other titles—both in print 
and in its Kindle ebook store. Assuming they had a chance to read the book 
first, Kindle users were no doubt struck by the irony of Amazon’s decision 
to remotely delete their purchased copies of 1984 in response to a dispute 
with a publisher.1 These customers went to bed one night thinking they 
owned a copy of Orwell’s cautionary tale and woke up the next morning 
to find their book had been confiscated. In its place, they received a refund 
and an object lesson in the risks of digital reading.
In the world of printed books, this scenario would be unthinkable. Your 
local bookseller cannot creep into your home in the middle of the night 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20202  Chapter 1
and reclaim the contents of your bookshelf. But Amazon exercises a very 
different kind of practical power over your digital library. Your Kindle runs 
software written by Amazon, and it features a persistent network connec-
tion. That means Amazon can send it instructions—to delete a book or even 
replace it with a new version—without any intervention from you.
But it’s not just the technology that sets analog and digital books apart. 
The legal terrain looks very different as well. If you bought a printed copy 
of this book, it became your personal property. Like your favorite pair of 
shoes, or your toothbrush, you own it. Ownership of this book means you 
can do lots of things with it. You can keep it forever; you can read it as 
many times as you like; you can lend it to a friend;2 you can resell it or give 
it away; you can leave it to a loved one in your will. We don’t encourage it, 
but you can even burn it if you feel like it. Because of the demands of copy-
right law, you generally cannot make copies of this book without permis-
sion. But otherwise, if you own it, it is yours to do with as you choose. This 
may seem obvious; the same basic rules of personal property have applied 
to books and other movable property for hundreds of years.
And you might expect digital books to work much the same as their 
printed counterparts. They contain the same text and are often sold by the 
very same retailers for comparable prices. Indeed, a 2012 study showed that 
nearly a third of bestselling ebooks were more expensive than their hard-
cover counterparts.3 But according to publishers and retailers, ebooks play 
by a distinct sets of rules. For print, we rely on the familiar rules of personal 
property. But do you actually own your ebooks? Most readers have prob-
ably never paused to ask this question. After all, you clicked the “Buy Now” 
button and paid the price demanded by your favorite ebook retailer. Why 
wouldn’t you own the thing you bought?
Despite the common sense appeal of that view, digital retailers insist 
that ownership depends on the terms of an end user license agreement 
(“EULA”)—that incomprehensible slew of legalese you reflexively click “I 
agree” to dismiss. Those terms—negotiated by lawyers working for retail-
ers and publishers—determine your rights, not the default entitlements of 
personal property. And buried within those thousands of words that we all 
ignore is one consistent message: you don’t own the books you bought; 
you merely license them. That is to say, you have permission to read them. 
Until one day, you don’t.
The 1984 incident is hardly the only case of readers losing access to 
their purchases. Linn Nygaard, a Norwegian Kindle customer, lost doz-
ens of ebooks she bought from Amazon. They simply vanished without 
notice when Amazon erased her Kindle, citing unspecified “abuse of [its] 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Introduction  3
policies.”4 Our best guess is that Nygaard ran afoul of those policies because 
she lived in Norway, a territory in which Amazon had not yet launched its 
Kindle Store. But we can’t say for sure, since Amazon never bothered to tell 
her. To be clear, she didn’t pay with a stolen credit card; she didn’t hack 
Amazon’s servers to get her ebooks for free; she simply made her purchases 
from the wrong country. After a worldwide spate of critical news coverage, 
Amazon relented and restored Nygaard’s purchases. But Amazon’s technical  
ability and legal authority to take away your ebooks remain unchanged.
Other retailers have caused ebook purchases to vanish without even the 
pretense of wrongdoing on the part of readers. Scholastic, the publisher of 
children’s educational books, launched its Storia ebook platform in 2012, 
promising that purchases could be shared with up to ten students. But just 
two years later, Scholastic announced a change of plans. It would be offer-
ing ebooks exclusively through a streaming model. And its new subscription 
service required an active Internet connection. No Wi-Fi—the reality in too 
many of the underfunded schools across the United States—means no read-
ing.5 Subscription services are not inherently bad. They can offer those of 
us interested in temporary access real value, but Scholastic’s approach ret-
roactively converted what students and educators thought were purchases 
into rentals—from permanent possession to conditional permission. As the 
publisher explained, “The switch to streaming means that eBooks you’ve 
previously purchased may soon no longer be accessible.”6
The chapters that follow will illustrate that this problem goes well 
beyond ebooks. Digital distribution of music has already largely displaced 
CD sales. And digital movie distribution is projected to overtake DVD and 
Blu-ray within the next few years. Software and video game sales are trend-
ing toward digital models as well. In each of these sectors, the same story 
about ownership plays out. Gamers who buy titles on discs can lend them 
to friends and resell them. Those who download their games through Xbox 
Live or the PlayStation Network can do neither, even though they pay the 
same price. The rights that we have come to expect when we buy music, 
movies, and other content are at best uncertain and at worst absent in the 
digital marketplace.
So how did our rights in media goods become so unstable and inse-
cure? Part of the answer is technology. Cheap remote storage, high-speed 
mobile network connections, and nearly ubiquitous computing devices like 
tablets and smartphones have facilitated new ways of distributing media. 
Digital downloads, cloud storage, and streaming services offer convenience, 
instant accessibility, and lower prices to consumers. But they also physically 
separate us from the books we read, the music we play, and the movies we 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20204  Chapter 1
watch. That content doesn’t live on our shelves anymore. It’s in a server 
farm in some distant and unknown city.
At  the  same  time,  aggressive  intellectual  property  laws,  restrictive  
contractual provisions, and technological locks have weakened end user 
control over the digital goods we acquire. We will tackle each of these devel-
opments in detail later, but the terms of use for the Kindle Store offer a brief 
glimpse into one chief cause of the instability consumers confront in the 
digital marketplace. As Amazon explains in the EULA you’ve likely never 
read, “Kindle Content is licensed, not sold, to you.”7 In other words, you 
don’t own the ebooks that you buy. What’s more, “if you fail to comply 
with any term of this Agreement, ... Amazon may immediately revoke your 
access to ... Kindle Content without refund.”8 So if you break Amazon’s rules 
by, for example, posting a “threatening, defamatory, ... or objectionable” 
product review, your books can be confiscated.9 Your rights are defined by 
a nonnegotiable agreement you’ve never read, one that—as we will show—
runs counter to what most of us think we can do with the products we buy.
Beyond these contractual restrictions, many products today incorporate 
technology that restricts how you can use them. Digital rights management 
(DRM) builds these restrictions into the very design of the products we 
buy. If you’ve ever found yourself unable to watch a movie because you’ve 
authorized too many devices, you’ve been the victim of DRM. But DRM isn’t 
limited to digital media. Today, we see it in all manner of products, where it 
plays much the same role, officiously telling you what you can and can’t do 
with the stuff you buy. When Keurig released version 2.0 of its home coffee 
machine in 2014, for example, it incorporated DRM to prop up sales of its 
coffee. Customers who tried to brew cheaper, off-brand ground coffee were 
greeted by a message on the device’s display that politely refused to make 
their cup of coffee, instructing them to buy Keurig-brand coffee instead.
The traitorous coffee maker is not an isolated example. The same trends 
that threaten to undermine ownership of intangible digital media have 
made their way into the world of tangible objects. Smartphones, televi-
sions, cars, household appliances, and wearable technology like the Apple 
Watch and Fitbit—to name just a few—feature embedded software and net-
work connectivity that control how we use the things we buy. And like Kin-
dle ebooks, the agreements that accompany these products typically insist 
that buyers are merely licensed to use them and expressly prohibit lending, 
resale, modification, and even repair.
You might find this vision of the future troubling. But the anemic under-
standing of consumer rights that manufacturers and retailers are pushing 
is only one side of the story. Ownership is a contested question, and the 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Introduction  5
digital marketplace is a contested space. As we will argue, there are good 
reasons to resist these efforts to redefine our relationship to the media and 
devices that shape so much of our interaction with the world. And while 
some courts and policymakers have been led down the path of ever-dimin-
ishing consumer rights, others have signaled an unwillingness to jettison 
those rights without carefully considering the consequences.10 Perhaps 
more importantly, readers, listeners, and tinkerers—everyday people—are 
expressing their own reluctance to accept ownership as an artifact of some 
bygone predigital era. The questions we address in this book are complex, 
and there are no easy answers. Our goal is to explain the current state of 
our relationship with the products we buy, how we arrived at this pivotal 
moment in ownership’s history, and to begin what we hope is an open and 
ongoing conversation about where we might go from here.
Of course, any discussion of our digital future has to acknowledge the 
benefits of new technologies and the business models they enable. Many 
of us—including the authors of this book—embrace the digital market-
place. Just consider how the Kindle revolutionized the experience of read-
ing. Today’s devices can store thousands of books in a package smaller and 
lighter than the average paperback. They allow readers to search, bookmark, 
and annotate, to share favorite passages with a community of friends, and 
to instantly define unfamiliar words. And new books are a mere click away 
thanks to wireless connectivity and integrated shopping platforms. Even 
those of us who prefer the reassuring heft of a hardcover, the smell of ink 
on paper, and afternoons wandering the aisles of the Strand, Powell’s, or 
John K. King can at least recognize the appeal of digital books.
Beyond books, many of us happily store our collections of digital arti-
facts in the cloud. Or we opt for no permanent collections at all, instead 
dipping into the streams of all-you-can-eat subscription content available 
from Netflix, Spotify, and the like. As the popularity of these streaming ser-
vices makes clear, lots of us are content to sacrifice ownership and perma-
nence if it means a wider selection, more portability, greater convenience, 
and lower prices. Advocates of licensing models say they enable a degree of 
flexibility that sales simply can’t. If customers can license the precise rights 
that meet their needs—to read a book, but not lend it, or to watch a movie 
on your smartphone, but not on your TV—they can pay accordingly, and 
everyone wins. We will return to price discrimination—the notion of charg-
ing different customers different prices depending on their specific prefer-
ences and willingness to pay. For now, it’s enough to say that we agree that 
certain forms of price discrimination increase consumer choice in valuable 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20206  Chapter 1
ways. But we think the benefits of price discrimination are often overstated, 
and that it can do more harm than good if unrestrained.
Today, we operate in a market that—for the most part—affords a choice 
between ownership and more conditional, impermanent access to digital 
and physical goods. Those choices are neither right nor wrong. But they 
have consequences, both for individuals and society more broadly. There 
are things we gain and things we lose. And if we know what those trade-
offs are, we can make more informed, more meaningful choices—not only 
about the products we buy, but also about the laws and policies that govern 
the marketplace.
So what is at stake when we make these choices? The most immedi-
ate consequence of nonownership is the long list of substantive rights we 
lose. The prohibitions found in most EULAs and enforced by most DRM 
contrast starkly with the default rules of private property. You can’t resell 
a product you don’t own. You can’t lend it, give it away, or donate it. You 
can’t read, watch, or listen on unapproved devices. You can’t modify or 
repair the devices you use. There might be good reasons to give up those 
rights. But the evidence we will present strongly suggests that most con-
sumers are poorly informed about the disparities between ownership and  
licensing.
Nor is the impact of the shift from ownership to licensing limited to 
individuals; our educational and cultural institutions are dealing with the 
fallout as well. When a library buys a printed book, for example, it can 
lend it to as many patrons as it chooses, without asking the publisher for 
permission or paying any additional fees. Library books can remain in cir-
culation for decades, serving the needs of hundreds of readers. But when 
libraries acquire ebooks, licensing terms and software code often impose  
hard ceilings on lending. HarperCollins ebooks, for example, can be lent 
out twenty-six times, which translates to a single year of borrowing, after 
which they essentially self-destruct.11 Patrons cannot borrow that title again 
until the library ponies up an additional fee to the publisher. So despite the 
claims by publishers like Random House—who claim that libraries “own” 
their ebooks—libraries don’t own their digital collections any more than 
you own the movies on your Netflix queue.12
Digital consumers sacrifice stability and permanence too. As the 1984 
episode shows, purchases can be deleted or disabled without warning or 
explanation for any number of reasons. Perhaps you unknowingly violated 
some provisions of a site’s terms of service. Perhaps the retailer adopted a 
new business model that left existing customers in the cold. Google, Major 
League Baseball, MSN Music, Sony, Virgin Digital, Walmart, and Yahoo all 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Introduction  7
pulled variants of this move when they decided to shut down the servers 
that customers needed to access the media they purchased.13 Some custom-
ers were given the chance to convert to other services, but many were told 
to burn their purchases to CDs or lose them forever. In other cases, retailers 
have simply gone out of business altogether. Although you might lament 
your local bookstore closing up shop, you’d at least keep your books. But 
when HDGiants, a purveyor of high-quality audio and video files went 
bankrupt, its servers went dark and its paying customers were left with 
nothing.14
Privacy presents another concern.15 For analog media, we have strong 
privacy protections that limit access to information about what books you 
check out from the local library and what movies you rent from your local 
Redbox. Putting the law aside, practical barriers ensured that governments, 
publishers, and retailers could not easily track who bought, owned, resold, 
or enjoyed analog copies of banned and confiscated works like Tropic of 
Cancer,16 As Nasty As They Wanna Be,17 or The Tin Drum.18 Digital trans-
actions make this kind of tracking far easier. First, digital purchases are 
almost always tied to a unique user account, linking your purchase history 
to your identity. Second, the architecture of online media allows unprec-
edented surveillance of consumer behavior. Adobe, for example, recently 
came under fire when researchers discovered that its popular ebook plat-
form, Digital Editions, reported back not only the titles of every book in 
a reader’s library, but also when they were read and even what pages were 
viewed. Even more troubling, this information was sent over the Internet 
unencrypted, meaning that any mildly sophisticated hacker could learn all 
there is to know about your reading habits.19 And then of course, there is 
the risk of government surveillance by the National Security Agency (NSA) 
and others.20
The transition from owning to licensing causes another, more wide-
spread problem. Because their terms can vary so widely, licenses lead to 
uncertainty about what rights we actually acquire. When it comes to own-
ership, centuries of practice—reinforced by clear legal rules—mean that 
when a reader walks into a store and exchanges cash for a book, they know 
with a fair degree of certainty what they are getting.21 That clarity disap-
pears when rights are defined by the variable and often incomprehensible 
text of a license agreement. Licenses vary—from retailer to retailer, from 
publisher to publisher, from product to product. Close study of the license 
accompanying an Amazon ebook tells you very little about one you might 
buy from Apple. And it tells you almost nothing about the license for your 
coffeemaker. Licenses are driven by the concerns of manufacturers, retailers, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20208  Chapter 1
and publishers—and the negotiations among them. As a result, licenses are 
often idiosyncratic and subject to change, sometimes even after your pur-
chase. The rights you acquire are therefore less clear and less predictable 
than the rights associated with ownership.
Beyond its impact on individuals, this erosion of clarity poses a risk of 
broader social harms. One advantage of clear, reliable property rights is that 
they make it easier for people to navigate the marketplace. Replacing clear 
property rules with complicated and uncertain contractual ones makes life 
harder for all of us and impairs the functioning of the economy as a whole.
In the language of economists, property rights increase efficiency by 
lowering transaction costs. Transaction costs are all of the costs aside from 
the sticker price that we incur when we buy a product or engage in some 
transaction.22 Let’s say you want to buy a newly released bestseller. The 
retail price for the book is $25. But that price doesn’t take into account all 
of the relevant costs of acquiring the book. You have to drive to the book-
store; you have to spend time looking for the book on the shelf; in some 
cultures, you may have to haggle over the price. These are all transaction 
costs. Even information about the book comes at a cost. We have to investi-
gate products to determine their quality and characteristics before deciding 
to buy them. How many reviews, for example, did you read before deciding 
to buy this book?
Clear property rights help keep these costs low.23 Without stable and reli-
able rules about what rights we acquire when we buy a product, informa-
tion costs go up. On the one hand, when you see the price tag on a book, 
you understand that if you pay the $25, you own it. And most of us have 
a solid understanding of what ownership entails. On the other hand, in a 
world where some books were owned, some could be read only once, others 
had to be returned after a month, and still others could be read in the bath-
tub but not on the beach, you’d need to carefully investigate each purchase. 
You’d have to ask the sales associate lots of questions or scour the terms that 
accompany each book to figure out precisely what rights you acquire, for 
what period of time, and what restrictions apply.
This information cost problem leads to what economists call an exter-
nality—a cost created by a transaction that isn’t borne by the parties strik-
ing the deal. Pollution is a classic example.24 A factory makes widgets and 
sells them to the public. In the process, the factory emits pollution that 
lowers air quality. The price of the resulting widgets is a function of a num-
ber of factors—the cost of labor, materials, research and development, and 
advertising, among others. But the cost of pollution isn’t one of them. 
Widget buyers don’t pay for it, and in the absence of some environmental 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Introduction  9
regulation, the factory doesn’t either. So pollution is a cost created by the 
sale of the widget that neither the buyer nor the seller has to take into 
account.
Information costs can work the same way. Let’s say your neighbor loves 
to read at the beach, but prefers a quiet glass of bourbon in the bathtub. 
So they are enthusiastic about the prospect of saving a dollar on their next 
book by paying for the beach-but-no-bathtub license. You, on the other 
hand, prefer to own your books. When your neighbor and others like them 
opt for the licensed book—assuming they are fully informed about their 
choice—they may be getting precisely what they want. As between buyer 
and seller, this deal looks like a success. But there is a cost they are both 
ignoring. The next time you go to the bookstore, you’ll have to keep a 
careful eye out for licensed books, lest you end up drawing a bath only to 
find out you are prohibited from reading. So information costs for you and 
other would-be book owners increase. The fact that some books come with 
idiosyncratic rules imposes a cost on all book shoppers, regardless of their 
preferences.
This isn’t the only externality created by the shift away from ownership. 
There are other costs that go unnoticed in our calculations. One benefit of 
ownership is preservation. Valuable cultural works disappear for all sorts of 
reasons. Government censorship can remove works from the market; books 
and records go out of print when they are deemed commercially unviable; 
films—from The Interview to Disney’s Song of the South—are hidden from 
view for reasons that range from political controversies to pure marketing 
ploys.25 Works can also be lost to accidents, natural disasters, and plain old 
inattention. Ownership helps guard against those losses. When we own 
our copies, we have greater incentives to make efforts to preserve them, 
and it’s harder for publishers and government actors to erase them. And 
when works are distributed widely on secondary markets through resale 
and lending, the risk of loss is reduced. Even though we all benefit from the 
preservation of our shared cultural heritage, outside of the small circle of 
archivists and cultural historians, few of us give it much thought. So when 
we choose to license rather than own, we are—in admittedly small incre-
ments—chipping away at preservation efforts.
Ownership can also spur innovation. When the used goods we buy can be 
resold, those secondary markets create an incentive for new and improved 
products. We see new features on our cars and phones, remastered music, 
and behind-the-scenes features for movies, in part because ownership and 
transferability increase competitive pressure. This trend is perhaps most vis-
ible in the video game industry where publishers frequently release “Game 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202010  Chapter 1
of the Year” or other special editions loaded with extra content as a way to 
compete with cheaper used copies. Ownership also enables user innovation 
from those who modify and improve the products they buy.26 This innova-
tion is valuable. To the extent licensing reduces incentives and opportuni-
ties for innovation, it imposes costs on society that are not reflected in 
the lower price of licensed goods. Precisely because these costs are not felt 
acutely by individuals, we might doubt whether consumer choice alone—
even if informed—can fully solve the problems licensing creates around 
information costs, preservation, and innovation.
Competition can also get a boost from individual ownership because 
it helps lower the costs of switching from one format, device, or platform 
to another. Lower switching costs open the market up to new entrants 
with potentially superior products. Imagine you are a loyal Microsoft Xbox 
enthusiast with thousands of dollars invested in hardware and software. 
But you’re considering switching sides and buying a Sony PlayStation. If 
you own your Xbox, you can sell it along with your collection of games on 
Craigslist or eBay. But if Microsoft could stop you from reselling your device 
and games—as it currently does for digital games purchased through its 
Xbox Live service—you’d be less inclined to switch, and the market would 
be less competitive as a result.
But the most fundamental value at stake in the choice between own-
ership and licensing is autonomy—the sense of self-direction, that our 
behaviors reflect our own preferences and choices rather than the dictates 
of some external authority. If we own our purchases, we are free to make 
whatever lawful use of them we choose. If you own your books, you can 
give them away. If you own your records, you can lend one to a friend. If 
you own your iPhone, you can use the mobile carrier and install the apps 
of your choice. If you own your PlayStation, you can replace its operating 
system and use it as a low-cost computer. If you own your Ferrari, you can 
customize it as you see fit. And if you own your Keurig coffeemaker, you 
can brew whatever brand of coffee you prefer. What ties these disparate 
behaviors together is that they don’t depend on permission. You don’t have 
to ask Amazon or Apple or Sony. You are free to act on your own accord, 
even over their objections.
That’s one reason we find efforts to recreate resale, lending, and other 
rights  through  licensing  unsatisfying.  Amazon  created  a  program,  for 
example, that allows readers to “lend” an ebook to a friend. But that pro-
gram has strings attached. An ebook can only be lent a total of one time 
and only for fourteen days. Most crucially, lending depends on permission 
from the book’s publisher. As a result, only a small fraction of ebook titles 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Introduction  11
allows lending. Your hardcovers, on the other hand, can be lent to as many 
friends, relatives, or strangers as you choose whether the publisher likes it 
or not. So while Amazon has recreated some aspects of the lending culture 
we have grown accustomed to for print books, digital lending remains an 
imperfect simulacrum, in large part because it hinges on choices other than 
our own.
Of course even with ownership, we don’t enjoy total freedom. There 
are limits on what we can do with the things we own. But those limits are 
generally defined by law. And under our system, law is created through a 
process—imperfect in many respects—that is ultimately responsive to our 
input. But a future defined by licensing is one where control over how 
we interact with the world around us and with each other is increasingly 
concentrated in the hands of a small coterie of powerful private actors. In 
that future, the limits on our autonomy will flow from a EULA rather than 
collective self-government. It doesn’t have to be this way. Technology can 
constrain our freedom, but it can also empower us.
In 1984, the U.S. Supreme Court weighed the fate of the VCR. Movie stu-
dios sued Sony, alleging that TV viewers used its Betamax player to unlaw-
fully record broadcast programs. Ultimately, the Court rejected this effort 
to dictate how new technologies were designed and used by their owners. 
Key testimony in the case came from an unlikely source, Fred Rogers—
host of the PBS mainstay Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood. In characteristically 
simple and powerful language, he explained the value of the VCR in terms 
of personal autonomy: “I have always felt that with the advent of all of this 
new technology that allows people to tape the Neighborhood off-the-air ... 
they then become much more active in the programming of their family’s 
television life. Very frankly, I am opposed to people being programmed by 
others. My whole approach in broadcasting has always been ‘You are an 
important person just the way you are. You can make healthy decisions.’ 
... Anything that allows a person to be more active in the control of his or 
her life, in a healthy way, is important.”27 Ownership facilitates the sort 
of active participation that Mister Rogers had in mind. And the licensing 
model puts it at risk.
So far, we’ve focused on how ownership affects the average person. But 
there is another set of interests at stake in this debate. Much of the effort to 
displace ownership has been undertaken in the name of strengthening the 
intellectual property (IP) rights of creators. Intellectual property is generally 
understood as a way for the law to provide economic incentives for the cre-
ation of new inventions and works of expression. By protecting inventors 
and authors from copying, IP law boosts their chances of financial success. 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202012  Chapter 1
And if the theory behind IP protection is correct, we see more creativity as 
a result.
IP rights holders—from publishers to carmakers—are attracted to the 
increased control licensing promises them. They can eliminate secondary 
markets like used book stores; they can reduce competition for complemen-
tary products like coffee or ink cartridges; and they can corner the market 
for repair and other related services. All of which, they argue, increases their 
incentives to invest in new and better products. Moreover, rights holders 
argue that digital goods are fundamentally different from analog ones. 
They can be copied perfectly and distributed at no cost. Unlike a paperback 
that falls apart after a handful of readings, an ebook can be passed around 
to infinite readers. We agree that analog and digital goods are not perfect 
substitutes, though we think the differences between them are often over-
stated. Still, we acknowledge that the rules of digital ownership can’t sim-
ply copy and paste from the analog world. But we shouldn’t simply scrap 
ownership either.
If greater IP protection comes at the cost of personal property rights, a 
licensing-only strategy may well backfire. Today, most commercially valu-
able copyrighted works are available for free somewhere online, with or 
without the copyright holder’s permission. The challenge facing copyright 
law—and with the introduction of 3D printing, soon patent law too—is 
figuring out how to convince the public to pay for things it can get for 
free. One way the law does that is through the stick of infringement liabil-
ity. And that stick is a big one. The Copyright Act allows for damages of 
up to $150,000 for unlawfully downloading a single song.28 But copyright 
holders, despite their best efforts, cannot locate and sue each and every 
downloader on the Pirate Bay.29 And the probability of a lawsuit is too low 
to deter many of them.
If we want to persuade people to pay for these products rather than 
download them illegally, the carrot can be just as important as the stick. 
People pay for things that offer them good value for their money. And own-
ership is a major component of that value. Property rights mean that buy-
ers have assurances about their ability to use and enjoy the products they 
buy. A book, movie, or video game that the law recognizes as your personal 
property is more valuable than one in which you have no recognized rights. 
And as a result, personal property rights provide a strong reason to buy law-
ful copies. But when copies lack the rights and freedoms we expect, they are 
less desirable and harder to distinguish from free, infringing ones.
The risk is that creators, publishers, and digital retailers are unwittingly 
reducing incentives to buy their own products through aggressive efforts to 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Introduction  13
control how readers, listeners, and viewers use them. If after learning about 
the restrictions they impose, people are not convinced that digital products 
present a good value proposition, we can expect a number of responses. 
Some will revert back to analog copies, if they can. Others will decide to 
spend their money on subscription services like Spotify and Netflix, which 
are arguably less profitable for copyright holders than sales-based busi-
ness models. Some will choose to download content illegally. And some 
will decide to spend their disposable income elsewhere, on a vacation or 
personal trainer, for example. Tampering with ownership is likely to have 
major consequences, and perhaps not the ones creators expect.
That’s our argument for why these issues—and this book—matter. Here is 
how the remaining chapters will proceed. First, we outline some basic prin-
ciples of personal and intellectual property law—in particular, the notion of 
exhaustion of rights—to lay the conceptual groundwork for the rest of the 
book. Next, we trace two key developments in the erosion of ownership—
the technologies of digital distribution and the rise of the license agree-
ment. Then, we explore the mismatch between the fine print of EULAs 
and the claims about “buying” and “owning” that are so prevalent in the 
digital marketplace. We will demonstrate that those claims mislead con-
sumers about the fundamental nature of digital transactions. From there, 
we turn our attention from individuals to the implications of the licensing 
model for an important group of institutional actors, public libraries. Next, 
we look at how the licensing model, which was largely confined to digital 
media for decades, has been exported to the world of physical goods. That 
transition starts with DRM technology and the laws that protect it. But with 
the emergence of the Internet of Things, the question of our relationship 
with the devices around us—and sometimes in us—is more pressing than 
ever. Then we explore another legal avenue for exerting control over how 
we use the objects we buy—the patent system—and how the ongoing fight 
over so-called post-sale restrictions threatens ownership. Finally, we will 
outline an agenda to reconcile stable, reliable personal property rights with 
our inevitably digital future.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273324/9780262335959_cac.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20202  Property and the Exhaustion Principle
In order to make sense of our changing relationship with digital goods, we 
need to start with a basic understanding of our system of property rights. 
This chapter should make a few things clear. For one, defining consumer 
rights through licenses rather than the default rules of ownership is a sig-
nificant departure from the way we typically treat personal property. For 
another, despite common misconceptions, property rights are rarely abso-
lute. Instead, they often have to accommodate the interests of others. The 
law has developed ways of resolving those competing claims. Who wins 
and who loses in those struggles for control over valuable resources tells us 
something about our priorities, about what sorts of uses and what sorts of 
users we think should be privileged under the law. When it comes to goods 
subject to intellectual property protection, the principle of exhaustion is 
the primary tool for resolving disputes between IP holders and personal 
property owners. The shift away from exhaustion and toward licensing is 
an effort to take power away from individuals in favor of copyright holders 
and their retail partners. Because this power grab reduces efficiency, creates 
harmful externalities, and interferes with individual autonomy, we should 
find it troubling.
A Property Law Primer
To begin, we should distinguish between four basic types of property: real, 
personal, intellectual, and intangible. Most of us associate the term “prop-
erty” with land—your home or the proverbial family farm. In the law, we 
call this real property, as in real estate. Real property stands apart from other 
kinds of property in a number of ways. First, each piece of real property, 
defined by the physical space it occupies, is unique. Theoretically, each par-
cel of land can be clearly defined and distinguished from all others. Second, 
because real property is tied to physical space, it stays put. Setting aside 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202016  Chapter 2
things like tectonic shifts, landslides, and rivers changing course, your real 
property will remain exactly where you left it. Third, real property is com-
paratively expensive. As a result, most of us engage in only a handful of real 
property transactions in our lives. Compare the number of homes you’ve 
bought to the number of socks, books, or cell phones you’ve purchased.
Another key distinguishing characteristic of real property is the rela-
tive flexibility the law affords owners of land to define and rearrange their 
rights. Interests in real property can take a number of forms. The most 
familiar is what lawyers call the fee simple. The owner of a fee simple inter-
est has the right to use the land, to possess it, to exclude others, to sell it, to 
give it away, and to collect profits from it. But there are other ways to own 
real property. A life estate, for example, is a right to possess and use land, 
but only for the duration of a person’s life. Tenancy in common allows two 
or more owners to possess land at the same time, each having equal rights 
to occupy and use the property. Timeshares, in contrast, make it possible 
for several owners to use the property, but each for only a set amount of 
time each year. And condominiums provide for individual ownership of 
each unit in a building, but joint ownership of common areas like lobbies 
and hallways.1
Not only can real property owners choose from these and other ready-
made forms of ownership, they can further customize their property rights 
using legal tools called real covenants and equitable servitudes.2 With these 
tools, property owners can craft limitations or obligations on future use of 
the property; they can attach strings that dictate what can be done with 
the property. These strings are said to “run with the land,” binding all sub-
sequent owners of the property. Through these legal devices, owners can 
impose a wide range of restrictions on future generations. They can limit a 
piece of land to a particular purpose—a single family home, for example. 
Or they can forbid certain uses—no lighthouses or organic supermarkets. 
They can prohibit pets. They can insist on green lawns and gardeners to 
tend them. They can require that you choose from an approved palette of 
paint colors. They can ban holiday decorations. In short, through property 
law, owners can fashion their own bespoke sets of rights, imposing their 
preferences and whims on everyone who encounters a particular parcel of 
real property.3
When it comes to personal property, the rules are not nearly as custom-
izable.4 Property interests in chattels—legal-speak for your personal posses-
sions—are far more prosaic. You can own a tuxedo; you can rent a tuxedo; 
and you can borrow a tuxedo. But the law of property doesn’t recognize 
timeshares in tuxedos.5 Nor does the law recognize servitudes on chattels; 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  17
personal property doesn’t come with strings attached. Although some Eng-
lish courts in the mid-1800s toyed with the idea of applying servitudes to 
movable property, they quickly corrected course. And U.S. courts followed 
suit.6 As a result, your tuxedo can’t be burdened by an obligation to wear a 
particular brand of shoes or a prohibition on wearing it two weekends in a 
row. Of course, you could agree to those limitations in a contract, but only 
the parties to a contract are bound by its terms. Those obligations would 
not “run with the tuxedo” to bind future owners.
Maintaining clear and simple rules for personal property serves a couple 
of related purposes. First, it helps keep information costs in check. We may 
be willing to carefully investigate each real estate transaction for idiosyn-
cratic property obligations. After all, we don’t buy homes all that often, 
and a lot of money is at stake. But when it comes to donuts, staplers, and 
books, such effort hardly seems worth it. The cost of determining the pre-
cise contours of the property rights in these sorts of purchases could easily 
exceed the value of the good itself.7 Second, clear property rights make sure 
that common items of everyday commerce can be freely bought and sold. 
If tuxedo manufacturers could customize the rights that buyers obtain, 
they might be tempted to protect themselves from competition by prohib-
iting rental or controlling resale prices. As one court put it, efforts to attach 
strings to personal property are “obnoxious to public policy, which is best 
subserved by great freedom of traffic in such things as pass from hand to 
hand.”8
Our personal property rules place a high value on alienability—the right 
of an owner of an item to resell it, give it away, or otherwise transfer it. But 
it doesn’t have to be that way. We can imagine other property systems that 
would lead to very different outcomes. Consider goblin property. In J. K. 
Rowling’s Harry Potter series, goblins are skilled metalsmiths. And they are 
deeply attached to the items they craft, regarding themselves as the true 
owners of those items, even after their sale. As Rowling explains: “Goblin 
notions of ownership, payment, and repayment are not the same as human 
ones. ... To a goblin, the rightful and true master of any object is the maker, 
not the purchaser. All goblin-made objects are, in goblin eyes, rightfully 
theirs. ... They would consider it rented by [a purchaser]. ... They consider 
our habit of keeping goblin-made objects, passing them from wizard to 
wizard without further payment, little more than theft.”9
But we are not goblins, at least not yet. When you sell your used Prius, 
you don’t owe Toyota a percentage of the sale price. When you die, Sam-
sung doesn’t get to reclaim your TV. Once you’ve purchased an item, it 
belongs to you.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202018  Chapter 2
So far we’ve considered property interests that relate to physical assets. 
With intellectual property, our focus shifts from the physical to the incor-
poreal. IP encompasses a cluster of legislative and judicial rules that grant 
property-like rights in the intangible creations of human ingenuity. Pat-
ent law rewards inventors with exclusive rights in their novel innovations; 
copyright law provides rights to creators of original expressive works; and 
trademark law protects distinctive symbols from confusingly similar uses. 
These and other related legal regimes fall under the broad umbrella of intel-
lectual property.
Although patents will play an important role later in our story, our pri-
mary focus is copyright law.10 Copyright is concerned with works of cre-
ative expression. Books, music, film, visual art, and software all fall within 
its broad subject matter. In order for a work to qualify for copyright pro-
tection, it must be original—it must reflect a modicum of creativity, and 
it can’t be copied from an existing work.11 To be protected by copyright, 
a work must also be recorded in some physical form.12 This fixation require-
ment is satisfied when a writer jots down a story in a notebook, or when a 
photographer saves an image to a memory card.
If a work qualifies, the copyright holder is granted a number of valu-
able exclusive rights. They include copying the work, selling or otherwise 
transferring copies of the work, publicly performing or displaying the work, 
and making new works based on it.13 Only the copyright holder is legally 
entitled to engage in these behaviors without permission. To take a more 
concrete example, let’s say you buy a copy of a film on Blu-ray. Unless 
you have permission from the copyright holder, you can’t make copies of 
that film; you can’t play it for a roomful of strangers; and you can’t make 
an unauthorized sequel. This ability to control how the work is used by 
others accounts for the property-like nature of copyright interests. Since 
copyrighted works are often sold in physical form, IP rights enable a degree 
of ongoing control by copyright holders over the tangible products we buy. 
But as we will describe later in this chapter, that control is constrained in 
crucial ways by the principle of exhaustion.
Although  IP  shares  some  characteristics  with  more  familiar  forms 
of property, it differs from them in a number of respects. In fact, many 
question whether the term “intellectual property,” despite its wide usage, 
overstates the connection between IP and other more familiar forms of 
property. Unlike most forms of tangible property, patents and copyrights 
expire. Indeed, the U.S. Constitution requires that they last for only “lim-
ited times.” Initially, the term was fourteen years. Today, patents expire 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  19
after twenty years, and copyrights expire an astounding seventy years after 
the death of the author.14
More fundamentally, the mental creations of interest to IP law are what 
we call public goods; they exhibit two characteristics that set them apart 
from traditional property. First, ideas and expression are nonrivalrous. Use 
of an intellectual resource by one person doesn’t interfere with its use by 
another. If I am driving my car, you can’t. And no matter how hard you try, 
you can’t fit two people into a single tuxedo. But millions of people can 
watch the same television show, sing the same song, or read the same novel 
without depleting the underlying intellectual resource. As Thomas Jeffer-
son explained it, “He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction 
himself without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives 
light without darkening me.”15 Second, information is nonexcludable; it is 
difficult to maintain control of intellectual resources once they have been 
disclosed. You can put a fence around your land to keep out intruders. You 
can lock your jewels in a safe. But controlling the use and spread of infor-
mation is like trying to construct a fence around your own personal supply 
of air. For these two reasons, intellectual resources are distinguishable from 
other kinds of property.
Good ideas—like a new way of treating a deadly disease or the perfect 
breakup song—have the potential to improve lives. We want them to 
spread. So we should celebrate the fact that information goods, unlike ara-
ble land or iPhones, don’t run out or wear down. But the public-goods char-
acteristics of information resources create a potential problem. Although 
a groundbreaking treatment or a heartbreaking song can be freely shared 
and enjoyed, making something new requires investments of time, effort, 
and money. If creators cannot recover those investments, plus a reasonable 
profit for their trouble, some will be dissuaded. In a world where creating 
new works is expensive and copying them is cheap and easy for the public, 
poets will become accountants, and inventors will become plumbers. IP law 
is meant to remedy this public goods problem—the feared undersupply of 
creative investment—by creating legal barriers to competition by prohibit-
ing copying. IP rights are an effort to overcome the inherent characteris-
tics of intellectual resources and force them to behave more like tangible 
property.
Importantly, not all intangible resources fall under the IP umbrella. 
Interests  in  debts,  securities,  and  government  franchises—think  liquor 
licenses or taxi medallions—all concern intangible assets rather than tan-
gible objects, but they aren’t regulated by IP law. Likewise, we can think 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202020  Chapter 2
of assets like digital currencies and virtual objects—a powerful weapon in 
your favorite video game, for example—in terms of property. The rules sur-
rounding these relatively new intangible assets remain largely undefined.16 
Digital objects don’t easily fit into either the IP or the personal property 
frameworks. Consider a digital movie you purchase from Apple. You browse 
on iTunes, find a movie that looks promising—we recommend Shane Car-
ruth’s Upstream Color—and buy it for $12.99. You can stream that movie to 
your TV from Apple’s servers, you can download it to your laptop, or you 
can come back to it another day. But what set of rules defines your rights 
in that digital asset? Is it the rules of personal property or the rules of intel-
lectual property and, by extension, the iTunes license agreement? The ques-
tion at the heart of this book is whether digital goods—both media content 
and devices with embedded software—play by the familiar rules of personal 
property or the more flexible but often opaque rules of IP licenses. In short, 
do we own our digital goods?
Understanding Ownership
What does it mean to own property? That’s a surprisingly hard question 
to answer. Legal scholars, economists, and philosophers have debated the 
fundamental nature of property for centuries. And we can’t hope to button 
up that long-running dialogue here. Our more modest goal is to convince 
you to reconsider some of your own preconceptions about ownership.
Most people think of property ownership as bestowing an absolute right 
to an individual owner of a tangible thing. If you know a single adage about 
the law of property, it is probably William Blackstone’s oft-quoted reference 
to property as “that sole and despotic dominion which one man claims 
and exercises over the external things of the world, in total exclusion of the 
right of any other individual in the universe.”17 But our discussion already 
suggests what Blackstone knew very well: that this absolutist view of prop-
erty is an oversimplification.18
Over the last century or so, a more nuanced understanding has gained 
prominence among property experts. Under this view, property ownership 
is comprised of a bundle of distinct and separable interests. Consider the 
owner of a piece of land. We can break the concept of ownership down  
into a number of discrete rights that the owner might enjoy: the right to 
possess the land, to have physical control over it; the right to use the land, 
for picnics or kite flying for example; the right to manage the land, to decide 
who else can have picnics and fly kites; the right to income from the land, 
to charge rent for picnics and kite flying; and the right to alienate the land, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  21
to sell it or give it away. Each of these rights, among others, contributes 
to the owner’s property interests. But no single right is essential to owner-
ship. The owner could lease their land, but their lack of possession doesn’t 
mean they no longer own it. They could sell mineral rights in the land to 
an energy company, but the company’s use and profit are not inconsistent 
with individual ownership.
This understanding of property as a bundle of related but separable 
rights helps us account for the complexity and flexibility of property inter-
ests, especially interests in land. It is a less useful metaphor when it comes 
to personal property, where the law insists on less complex arrangements 
of rights in order to limit information costs, ensure the free movement 
of goods, and protect consumer welfare. When it comes to your tuxedo, 
the law doesn’t permit this sort of slicing and dicing. But copyrights, in 
contrast, lend themselves to the bundle-of-rights model by congressio-
nal design. The rights of a copyright holder are an explicitly enumerated 
bundle—to reproduce, distribute, publicly display and perform, and make 
adaptations of the work. And each of those rights is divisible by time, geog-
raphy, medium, or any other limitation dreamed up by a rights holder. A 
playwright, for example, can transfer the right to publicly perform their lat-
est play but, if they so choose, only on alternating Tuesdays in Wisconsin. 
In practice, this can easily lead to dozens of owners of copyright interests in 
a single work. In theory, the number is infinite.
These two conceptions of property—one emphasizing simplicity, the 
other embracing flexibility—are in tension. On the whole, we think the 
bundle-of-rights view is a more accurate description of how property works. 
But we also recognize the importance of placing limitations on the flex-
ibility that the bundle enables. Particularly when it comes to consumer 
goods—characterized by their low cost and high volume compared to real 
property—we think the information costs and other negative externalities 
that flow from customized bundles of rights make the case for a limited 
menu of standard transactions.
Let’s say you decide to take us up on our recommendation of Upstream 
Color. For the sake of simplicity, let’s also stipulate that you prefer hard cop-
ies. You have four basic options. You can buy the film on Blu-ray. You can 
rent it from Redbox or a local video rental store, if you can find one. You 
can get it from a subscription service like Netflix’s vestigial DVD-by-mail 
service. Or you can borrow it from a friend or the local library. That short 
list of familiar transactions would satisfy the needs of most people.
We could come up with other fanciful alternatives. They might even 
end up looking something like the Apple or Amazon EULAs. Taken to its 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202022  Chapter 2
extreme, the bundle-of-rights view would allow for the creation of any 
bespoke assemblage of rights and restrictions we can imagine. And while 
there might be some people who prefer these innovative transactions, we 
think that degree of flexibility imposes costs on individuals and society 
without a corresponding increase in consumer satisfaction. Flexibility is 
valuable, but only up to this point of diminishing returns.
The second widely held belief we want to challenge concerns the subject 
matter of property rights. Most of us think about property as conferring 
rights over things, typically tangible things. But we’ve already seen how 
the law extends some property concepts to intangibles. So if property rights 
don’t define an owner’s relationship to an object, what do they define? 
For many legal scholars, the answer is that property rights actually define 
relationships between people. To say I own a parcel of land, or a tuxedo, or 
a song is to say that I have the power to control, to varying degrees, your 
behavior in connection with the thing I own. I don’t control the thing, but 
the ways in which others interact with it.
From this perspective, property law is just one of many tools that allow 
us to structure our relationships with others and influence their behav-
ior. Contracts are another. But again, contractual rights are only enforce-
able against the parties to an agreement. Property rights in contrast don’t 
require negotiation, mutual agreement, or assent. Your property rights 
apply to everyone, whether they like it or not. Property and contract can 
also differ in the sorts of remedies they provide. For example, infringement 
of a copyright can lead to tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars 
in damages, regardless of any measurable harm suffered by the copyright 
holder. But a claim based purely on a contract would be limited to actual 
provable losses caused by the breach.
Third, we should say a bit about the source of property rights. Some see 
property as a natural right—one that exists independently of any legal rule 
and rooted in some deeper philosophical foundation. John Locke famously 
argued that property is a natural right that arises out of labor. According 
to Locke, we acquire property rights by exerting effort to gather resources, 
cultivate land, or develop new ideas.19 Hegel offered another view on the 
foundations of property. He argued that property is necessary for individual 
self-actualization. Unless we can exert control over objects in the world, we 
cannot express our will, achieve our goals, or thrive as individuals.20
But regardless of its foundation, property is deeply contingent on the 
law as a practical matter. Property rights exist by virtue of the willingness 
of the government to recognize and ultimately enforce them. Imagine you 
encounter trespassers on your land. What do you do? Perhaps you call the 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  23
police. Under some circumstances, you might file a lawsuit. If the legal sys-
tem refuses to deal with the trespassers, your property rights have very little 
value. Even a property owner’s self-help remedies depend on legal recogni-
tion. Physically removing someone from your property is lawful only to the 
extent the legal system favors your interests over those of the trespassers.
IP rights are even more obviously contingent on legal recognition. 
Copyright and patent rights in the United States simply wouldn’t exist 
without legislation. There is no recognized natural right to such protection. 
Instead, the law protects authors and inventors in order to promote the cre-
ation of valuable intellectual resources for society at large to use and enjoy. 
And Congress and the courts tweak those property interests—adding new 
rights, expanding or limiting existing ones—when they are persuaded that 
changes would yield a better outcome.
The existence and specific contours of property rights are dictated by 
our legal system. So by calling something property and calling someone 
its owner, the law is using a sort of shorthand. Those labels identify the 
winner of a contest for control over the behavior of others with respect to 
some valuable resource. At this point, our claim about the future of own-
ership should start to take on a somewhat clearer meaning. When we say 
that personal property rights are being eroded or eliminated in the digital 
marketplace, we mean that rights to use, to control, to keep, and to transfer  
purchases—physical and digital—are being plucked from the bundle of 
rights purchasers have historically enjoyed and given instead to IP rights 
holders. That in turn means that those rights holders are given greater con-
trol over how each of us consume media, use our devices, interact with our 
friends and family, spend our money, and live our lives. Cast in these terms, 
it is clear that there is a looming conflict between the respective rights of 
consumers and IP rights holders. The next question is how do we resolve it?
Property Conflicts
In the public imagination, property rights definitively resolve conflicts in 
favor of property owners. But that’s not how property actually works. What 
happens when your interests are at odds with those of your neighbor? Or 
more pointedly, what happens when the personal property interests of pur-
chasers are at odds with the intellectual property rights of copyright hold-
ers? Property rights—of all varieties—are limited in their scope. They have 
baked-in constraints that prevent owners from disregarding the interests 
of others. In real property, eminent domain and nuisance ordinances are 
useful reminders that the power of property owners is finite. Title to your 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202024  Chapter 2
property will not excuse excessive noise or pollution that harms your neigh-
bors, for example. Similarly, personal property owners have to comply with 
all sorts of generally applicable laws that restrain use of their property. You 
can’t park your car on the sidewalk or swing your favorite ax in a crowded 
park, even though you own them.
IP rights feature their own inherent limits. Copyright, for example, 
extends only to the particular expression used by an author, not to the 
ideas that underlie their work. So the copyright in Star Wars protects the 
film, script, plot, and even specific characters from copying, but it does 
not give George Lucas, or now Disney, exclusive rights to the hero’s jour-
ney.21 And the fair use doctrine sometimes permits copying of the author’s 
expression if it serves the public interest and poses limited risk of economic 
harm to the copyright holder. For example, our copying of a short quote 
from Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows to illustrate a point about property 
law a few pages back is a fair use that doesn’t require permission from the 
copyright holder.
Conflicts between the property interests of copyright holders and con-
sumers are central to our story. For creators, intellectual property law is 
primarily concerned with intangible creations—who owns them, how to 
exploit them, and whether one creation treads too closely to another. But 
for most of us, copyright law is a set of rules that tells us what we can and 
can’t do with our stuff. Can you copy your Blu-ray movies to your laptop? 
Can you share a favorite new album with a friend? Can you sell your used 
books? How many people can you invite into your home to watch the 
Super Bowl? And if you watch it at the local bar, how big can the TV be?22 
In this sense, copyright law constrains how we use our property on a daily 
basis.
So there is a tug of war going on between purchasers and IP holders. If 
the law strengthens IP rights, it narrows personal property rights. And if the 
law gives us more latitude to do what we want with the things we buy, IP 
holders sacrifice some control over us. This tension is an inevitable feature 
of a system that accounts for the interests of both creators and consumers. 
From a policy perspective, intellectual and personal property rights func-
tion as stand-ins for a broad range of concerns—creative incentives, infor-
mation costs and other externalities, deception, and autonomy. Since the 
law creates and defines the contours of those rights, the question of how 
best to balance them is inevitable. For well over a century, copyright law 
has provided a transparent and predictable answer to that question through 
the principle of exhaustion. That principle is the legal backdrop against 
which the rest of the developments we describe take place.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  25
The Exhaustion Principle
Exhaustion is the notion that an IP rights holder relinquishes some con-
trol over a product once it sells or gives that product to a new owner. We 
say those IP rights have been exhausted because the rights holder can no 
longer control many of the uses the new owner may make of that product. 
The power to prevent distributing, displaying, and sometimes reproduc-
ing a work gives way to the personal property interests of the owners. This 
principle is expressed in a number of copyright rules, the most important of 
which is the first sale doctrine. The Copyright Act prohibits unauthorized 
distribution—the selling, renting, leasing, or giving away—of protected 
works. Without some exception or limitation, we would have no right to 
donate our used books or sell our used video games or even give a newly 
purchased CD to a friend on their birthday.23 The first sale doctrine steps in 
to prevent that absurd result. It allows copy owners to sell, give away, lend, 
or rent their copies even when the copyright holder objects.
Here’s one recent example of the first sale doctrine at work. In 1982, 
Atari released E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, a video game based on the hit movie, 
for its 2600 home console. The game bombed and today is widely regarded 
as the worst video game ever made. In 1983, Atari shipped as many as 
twenty semitrucks loaded with unsold copies of the game to Alamogordo, 
New Mexico, where they were promptly buried. Atari reportedly chose that 
particular landfill because no scavenging was allowed. It wanted to erase 
all evidence of this embarrassing creative misstep. Decades later, the city 
decided the games were worth more above ground than below it. The city 
dug them up and auctioned off nine hundred surviving E.T. cartridges for 
more than $100,000.24
But first sale isn’t copyright’s only exhaustion rule. The Copyright Act 
also prohibits unauthorized public displays of protected works. Again, with-
out some exception, that means that a museum that paid millions of dol-
lars for a painting would need the copyright holder’s permission before 
hanging it on the wall. Luckily, the Act makes clear that the owner of a 
painting or other work is free to display it.25 Another provision gives owners 
of copies of software the right to make copies necessary to run, back up, or 
modify it.26 And long before exhaustion was written into the Copyright Act, 
courts recognized the rights of owners of copies of books and other works to 
resell them, to copy portions of them, and to create new works from them. 
What all of these exhaustion rules have in common is that they privilege 
the property interests of copy owners over those of copyright holders.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202026  Chapter 2
Exhaustion  is  copyright  law’s  main  tool  for  mediating  the  tension 
between intellectual and personal property rights. For more than a century, 
this cluster of exhaustion-based rules struck a balance that gave purchas-
ers and other owners considerable, but not unlimited, rights to use and 
enjoy their copies. But at the same time, those rules have helped protect 
the financial interests of copyright holders in two ways. First, they limit the 
rights that flow from exhaustion to owners of lawful copies of a work. So if 
the copy you bought is an infringing one, exhaustion would not entitle you 
to resell it. Second, even an owner of a copy can’t do whatever they want 
with it. For example, you can’t buy a copy of the latest bestselling young 
adult novel and make copies for all of your friends. Exhaustion doesn’t go 
that far. Nor should it.
Exhaustion is so deeply engrained in our experience of the copyright 
economy and such a fundamental part of our property rules that most of us 
barely notice it at work. But that doesn’t mean it isn’t important. Exhaus-
tion is the reason we have used record stores and bookstores. It’s the reason 
we have public libraries and eBay. It’s the reason we can lend a novel to a 
friend and leave our record collections to loved ones in our wills. It’s the 
reason museums can display their paintings and you can back up your soft-
ware. But the rules that permit these uses are not a given. They were estab-
lished by the courts and Congress, and their survival depends on continued 
legal recognition.
The first cases in the United States to recognize the exhaustion prin-
ciple date back to the nineteenth century. For example, Mark Twain’s plan 
to market The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn exclusively through a high-
priced subscription service was thwarted when book distributors sold copies 
to bookstores. When Twain sued the distributors, the court reasoned that 
since they owned the books they bought from Twain, the distributors were 
free to sell them to whoever they chose.27 Subsequent courts went even 
further. They decided that fire-damaged pages of books sold as wastepa-
per could be bound and resold over the objections of copyright holders;28 
that booksellers could repair and resell used copies of children’s school-
books, even if that meant reproducing missing or damaged parts;29 and that 
the purchaser of loose pages of Rudyard Kipling poems could bind them 
together with other works to create a new collection.30 Although courts 
were not unanimous in embracing this burgeoning exhaustion principle, 
the majority agreed that ownership of a copy entitled the owner to make a 
variety of uses that otherwise would have been illegal.
Eventually, copyright exhaustion made its way to the Supreme Court 
in a case that pitted a publisher against the retailer Macy’s.31 In 1904, the 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  27
Bobbs-Merrill Company published the novel The Castaway. Like many 
publishers at the time—and today—Bobbs-Merrill was deeply interested in 
controlling retail prices of its books. In an effort to inflate those prices, 
Bobbs-Merrill printed the following notice, an early ancestor of today’s 
EULAs, in each copy of The Castaway: “The price of this book is one dollar 
net. No dealer is licensed to sell it at a less price, and a sale at a less price will 
be treated as an infringement of the copyright.”
Macy’s sold copies of the book for a mere eighty-nine cents, and Bobbs-
Merrill promptly sued for copyright infringement. Bobbs-Merrill argued 
that since it had the right to choose whether to sell the book to the public 
or not, it could sell it with conditions attached that would bind all subse-
quent buyers. But the Supreme Court recognized this theory as the literary 
equivalent of servitude on a tuxedo. And it wasn’t buying it. According to 
the justices, once Bobbs-Merrill sold copies at its chosen wholesale price, 
its right to control the further distribution of those copies came to an end. 
Copyright law does not recognize that sort of ongoing control over the 
personal property of another.
Almost immediately, Congress embraced the first sale rule. It passed 
the Copyright Act of 1909 just a year later, which provided that “nothing 
in this Act shall be deemed to forbid, prevent, or restrict the transfer of 
any copy of a copyrighted work the possession of which has been lawfully 
obtained.”32 And when Congress overhauled the Copyright Act in 1976, it 
retained the first sale rule in a slightly modified form that remains in effect 
today.33 Because Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus was concerned with resale, the 
rule recognized by the Court, and subsequently by Congress, was silent on 
the kinds of copying and alteration endorsed in earlier decisions. Nonethe-
less, the exhaustion principle was firmly established.
For well over a century now, exhaustion has been the law of the land 
in the United States. And it has proven good public policy. Individuals 
and society more broadly benefit from rules that allow owners to exercise 
property rights in their purchases of copyrighted materials. By opening up 
secondary markets, the exhaustion principle promotes access to cultural 
works. More people can read books, watch films, and play games when 
used copies, rentals, and lending drive down the cost of access. Exhaustion 
is also central to securing the benefits of privacy, preservation, innovation, 
and competition that flow from consumer ownership of products that con-
tain copyrighted works.
And exhaustion—as an example of a clear property rule—helps keep 
information costs in check. The rules of exhaustion are simple, intui-
tive, and familiar. They largely track the rules that apply to other forms 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202028  Chapter 2
of tangible property. As a result, we don’t have to engage in painstaking 
research to determine our rights in each book, movie, or game we buy. We 
already know the rules. That makes life easier and markets more efficient. 
From the perspective of the average person, exhaustion is an easy sell.
Resisting Exhaustion
But copyright holders have resisted exhaustion at nearly every turn. Many 
seem to regard it as some sort of loophole that allows owners to make uses 
that should require permission or additional payment. Although these 
misgivings about exhaustion have been around for decades, rights holders 
have started to take particularly aggressive steps to circumvent exhaustion 
and weaken consumer property interests in recent years.
The efforts of book publishers to restrain the free alienability of private 
property were responsible for the explicit recognition of the exhaustion 
doctrine. The restrictions Bobbs-Merrill tried to impose on owners of cop-
ies of The Castaway were themselves a rejection of the idea that buyers 
of products can control whether and at what price they can be resold. 
Bobbs-Merrill, of course, lost that battle. But one hundred years later, pub-
lishers are still filing copyright suits in an effort to control resale prices for 
books.
In 2008, John Wiley & Sons, a multibillion-dollar publisher of college 
textbooks, sued a USC graduate student for reselling textbooks on eBay. 
Supap Kirtsaeng emigrated to the United States from his native Thailand 
to study math. For those of you who haven’t set foot in a college book-
store recently, a single required textbook can cost as much as $300. But 
as Kirtsaeng understood, publishers sell those same books overseas at far 
more sensible rates, sometimes as much as 90 percent lower. Knowing an 
opportunity when he saw one, Kirtsaeng began importing books bought in 
foreign markets and selling them online to eager students at U.S. universi-
ties. This looks like just the kind of free alienability that the exhaustion 
principle is meant to enable.
But Wiley saw things differently. It argued that because these books were 
printed outside of the United States, the first sale doctrine didn’t apply, 
and therefore Kirtsaeng’s resales were illegal. In 2013, the Supreme Court 
rejected that contention.34 The Court held if the books were sold by the 
publisher, exhaustion applied regardless of where they were manufactured. 
In part, the Court was worried that to rule otherwise could mean that any 
product manufactured overseas that included a copyrighted work couldn’t 
be sold, rented, or given away without permission.35 Those works would 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  29
include not only the novel you bought on vacation, but also your smart-
phone and your car—devices that integrate copyrighted software essential 
to their operation.
John Wiley & Sons and its supporters warn that preventing international 
price discrimination—the practice of charging high prices in the United 
States and lower prices in developing countries—will ultimately harm the 
most vulnerable readers. Publishers like Wiley say that if they can’t segment 
markets, they will be forced to either raise prices in countries like Thailand 
or stop selling products there altogether. But there are good reasons to be 
skeptical about these threats. First, publishers can prevent imports with-
out eliminating first sale. They could make books in developing econo-
mies available through rental or subscription models, for example. Second, 
the impact of market segmentation on price is a thorny question with no 
clear answer. Pricing decisions involve a number of variables that make 
predictions and generalizations difficult.36 So while the net global effect 
of exhaustion is likely to reduce cost, its impact in any given geographic 
market is hard to predict. For every country like Thailand that benefits from 
low book prices, there’s one like South Africa, where even before Kirtsaeng 
an overwhelming number of citizens reported that books were too expen-
sive to buy.37 Or consider India, where academic publishers tend to supply 
outdated editions, and the latest versions cost just as much as they do in 
Western countries.38
There’s another strategy that publishers like Wiley should consider—
admittedly, one they won’t like. They could make less money. The aver-
age U.S. college student spends about $900 a year on textbooks.39 A recent 
Bureau of Labor Statistics report reveals that textbook prices have gone up 
over 1,000 percent in the past three decades. That’s three times more than 
the increases for medical services, new home prices, and the consumer price 
index.40 Not surprisingly, textbook publishers have been highly profitable. 
McGraw-Hill’s profit margin in 2012 was 25 percent; Wiley’s was 15 per-
cent.41 The year before, the margins for Wiley’s scientific, medical, technical 
and scholarly division were a staggering 42 percent.42 In comparison, “Big 
Oil” sees profits around 5 percent, and Walmart’s hover near 3 percent.43
Given the gouging of U.S. students, the college textbook market was 
ripe for an enterprising importer like Kirtsaeng.44 If publishers lowered 
their prices in the United States, demand for imports would decrease sig-
nificantly. That might lower publisher profits. But we are confident they 
could make do. Copyright law is designed to ensure sufficient incentives for  
the production of new works, but it should not be a license to print  
money. As the Supreme Court has explained, “Creative work is to be  
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202030  Chapter 2
encouraged and rewarded, but private motivation must ultimately serve 
the cause of promoting broad public availability of literature, music, and 
the other arts.”45
Book publishers aren’t the only ones to push back against exhaustion. In 
the early 1990s, record labels worried that used CDs would harm their bot-
tom line. CDs, after all, were different from vinyl records or cassettes since 
digital copies don’t deteriorate with age or use. Or so the worry went.46 So 
the major labels were openly hostile to used CD sales and plotted ultimately 
unsuccessful strategies to undermine the practice. They tried to crack down 
on stores that sold used CDs by refusing returns on opened merchandise 
and withholding millions of dollars of customary underwriting for print 
and radio ads.47 They even threatened to boycott stores that sold used CDs, 
turning away orders for the new album from then-megastar Garth Brooks.48
Hollywood demonstrated its own antipathy to exhaustion. In the late 
1970s, when the home video market was first emerging, videocassettes of 
Hollywood films were designated as “sold for home use only” in an effort to 
dissuade both public performance and rental. In fact, contracts with retail-
ers explicitly prohibited rental of the tapes they purchased. Video rental 
pioneer George Atkinson faced mixed signals from the movie industry as 
he tried to build his business. Finally, after receiving a legal threat for rent-
ing tapes he purchased lawfully, Atkinson consulted a lawyer who informed 
him that thanks to the first sale rule, he was free to rent the tapes he owned. 
Although the studios required retailers to promise not to rent tapes and 
refused to sell directly to rental shops, the free alienability of personal prop-
erty ensured a steady inventory for Atkinson and his contemporaries,49 
leading major studios like Warner Brothers, Disney, and MGM to lobby for 
the doctrine’s repeal.50
More recently, a video producer of a different sort has adopted a firmly 
anti-exhaustion posture. Beachbody, maker of the popular P90X home 
workout videos, insists that its customers do not own the DVDs they 
purchase from the company’s website, but merely license these physical 
purchases.51 Beachbody has aggressively targeted individuals who resold 
legitimate copies of its DVDs on eBay, threatening litigation and demand-
ing exorbitant compensation. It is easy to understand why Beachbody 
would want to prevent customers from reselling their workout videos after 
their New Year’s resolve runs out. As reasonable as three easy payments of 
$39.95 may be, used DVDs could decrease sales and put pressure on the 
company to lower prices. What’s harder to see is how this strategy can be 
squared with the principle of exhaustion, personal property rights, or the 
best interest of consumers.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  31
The computer software industry has been waging its own war on exhaus-
tion practically since its inception. In the next chapter, we will discuss 
the licensing practices of software companies in greater detail. For now, 
it’s enough to note that the industry pioneered the widespread use of 
license agreements as a strategy for undermining end user ownership and 
exhaustion. Other innovations in the software industry, from digital rights 
management  to  the  software-as-a-service  business  model,  have  helped 
developers put even greater distance between software transactions and the 
traditional rules of private property. Legislatively, the industry successfully 
lobbied Congress to pass the Computer Software Rental Amendments Act, 
which prevents the rental of most software programs.52
Today, the video game industry is the fiercest opponent of exhaustion. 
Its relationship with exhaustion has been contentious since at least the 
1980s. Unlike other kinds of software, Congress did not carve out an excep-
tion to exhaustion that prevented rentals of console games. Despite the 
clear legality of video game rentals, companies like Nintendo saw rentals 
as a threat to game sales and characterized the rental shops as copyright 
infringers. Nintendo even sued Blockbuster. But because of the first sale 
doctrine, the game giant was forced to settle for claims that Blockbuster 
unlawfully photocopied the instruction manuals packaged with its games.53 
Although game rentals continue through subscription services like Game-
fly, the industry has turned its focus to what it deems a bigger economic 
threat: used game sales.
At $2 billion per year, the used game market represents a significant por-
tion of gaming industry revenue. Video game retailer GameStop has been 
the leader in this space, but used gaming has attracted the attention of 
Amazon and Walmart among others. Leading game developers have called 
the used market a “bigger threat than piracy.”54 Others have prophesied the 
industry’s undoing if gamers continue to resell their $60 video games after 
finishing them. But resale has killed gaming the same way it killed the mar-
ket for new music, movies, cars, and sofas. That is to say, it hasn’t. In fact, 
GameStop reports that 70 percent of trade-in value—the money gamers get 
for selling their used titles—goes to the purchase of new games. That’s well 
over $1 billion per year.55
Nonetheless, in response to the used game threat—real, imagined, or 
invented—the gaming industry has been hard at work on strategies to 
reduce or eliminate used sales. Most controversially, console makers have 
developed technologies to prevent the use of pre-owned games. Sony filed 
a patent application on technology that would tie individual game discs to 
particular users or consoles, though it hasn’t yet deployed it.56 And when 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202032  Chapter 2
Microsoft initially announced its Xbox One console, it unveiled plans to 
restrict secondhand games. But after persistent and overwhelmingly nega-
tive feedback from customers, Microsoft was forced to relent.57 As we will 
discuss in the next chapter, however, the gaming industry’s most effective 
gambit against exhaustion has been the shift to digital game distribution. 
As one developer put it, “digital distribution stabs the used games market 
in the heart.”58
If the used market directs so much revenue back into new game sales, 
why are publishers trying to snuff it out? One possibility is that they over-
estimate the losses due to used games. Not every used game translates into 
a lost sale. Without the used market, some gamers would simply buy fewer 
titles or none at all. This is the same faulty logic that led record labels to 
overstate the impact of file sharing a decade ago.59 Another answer is that 
copyright holders are not always particularly skilled at recognizing the 
potential value of markets they don’t control. After Hollywood lost its legal 
battle against the VCR, home video became a bigger source of revenue than 
the box office. And the music industry, after years of resisting, was dragged 
kicking and screaming into the era of digital distribution only after Napster 
threatened CD sales. Since then, Apple alone has sold over thirty-five bil-
lion songs.60 A third explanation has less to do with miscalculation and 
more to do with principle. Again, the movie studios’ attitude toward the 
VCR is instructive. When pressed in Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Sony Cor-
poration of America to identify how the VCR hurt their bottom line, the 
studios admitted it didn’t cause “a great deal of harm.” Instead, their chief 
concern was “a point of important philosophy that transcends even com-
mercial judgment.” Their worry was that the VCR crossed “invisible bound-
aries” and that copyright holders “lost control.”61
We think this focus on absolute control is shortsighted. There are good 
reasons to think exhaustion helps game makers, just as home video helped 
movie studios. Exhaustion broadens markets and expands audiences. Used 
games drive demand for consoles and build the community of gamers. 
Today’s used game buyers—once they finish school and get a job—might 
very well start purchasing new games. The used game market also trains 
gamers to pay someone—even if it isn’t the publisher—for their games 
rather than getting them for free. And it exposes them to new titles and 
publishers, potentially creating valuable lifelong fans in an era of long-run-
ning game sequels. These are all reasons to doubt that the used market is 
harmful to publishers on the whole.
Regardless, many copyright holders still see exhaustion and, by exten-
sion, personal property rights as an unfortunate legal loophole to be closed 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Property and the Exhaustion Principle  33
at  the  first  opportunity.  And  really,  what  business  wouldn’t  eliminate 
competition if it could? Ford dealers would happily ban used car lots and 
Craigslist ads. Levi’s would do away with vintage shops, garage sales, and 
sewing machines. And restaurants would declare leftovers contraband. But 
of course, we’d never let them. Nor should we let copyright holders elimi-
nate resale and lending. Exhaustion and the personal property rights it rec-
ognizes are an inherent part of copyright law’s balance between the rights 
of creators and the rights of the public.
Of course, that is not to say that the particular balance exhaustion has 
struck in the past is a perfect fit for the digital economy. The exact contours 
of those rules, what rights they reserve for consumers and what rights they 
grant copyright holders, are not set in stone. That balance can and should 
adapt over time in response to changing conditions, like the emergence of 
digital distribution that we describe in chapter 3. But there are good rea-
sons our legal system has recognized the personal property interests of con-
sumers who buy tangible goods. And there are good reasons to retain the 
basic framework of personal property—one that allows for flexibility but 
places limits on customization—when it comes to digital goods. The stan-
dard menu of transactions—buy, rent, borrow, and give—and the default 
rules of ownership serve the needs of readers, viewers, and users pretty well. 
But a system that allows licenses to redefine those standard transactions in 
whatever way best serves the interests of rights holders imposes real costs. 
So we favor exhaustion not because property is a label with talismanic prop-
erties, but because it is smart policy. The basic principle of exhaustion—the 
notion that owners have rights that are not contingent on copyright holder 
permission—can and should survive the transition to a digital copyright 
economy. Rights holders have always fought against this principle, but the 
digital marketplace gives them their best chance to kill it.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273325/9780262335959_cad.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20203  Copies, Clouds, and Streams
In little more than a decade, the way we acquire copyrighted content has 
been transformed three times. Until the early 2000s, we mostly interacted 
with books, music, and movies as physical objects we could hold in our 
hands. Sure, we watched movies in theaters and listened to music on the 
radio, but copyright holders were primarily in the business of selling tan-
gible copies, and legal digital downloads were still mostly hypothetical. 
It wasn’t until Apple’s iTunes Music Store launched in 2003 that a viable 
authorized digital distribution system emerged. This shift from tangible 
copies to digital ones posed major challenges for copyright law that it 
hasn’t yet fully resolved.
But the plodding evolution of the law didn’t stifle new technologies and 
business models. As copyright law struggled to accommodate digital down-
loads, developers and the consuming public migrated to the cloud. Rather 
than downloading purchases to our local hard drives, we accessed music, 
books, and movies stored remotely, aided by ubiquitous high-speed net-
work connections. Today, a third major shift is underway as subscription 
streaming services are poised to overtake hard copies, downloads, and the 
cloud. Services like Netflix and Spotify give subscribers access to massive 
libraries of material for low monthly fees, prompting droves of viewers and 
listeners to give up on the idea of buying content altogether.
For consumers, these developments offer obvious benefits. Price, con-
venience, and selection have improved in the digital era. The widespread 
embrace of the subscription streaming model, for example, signals a grow-
ing demand for low-cost, temporary access to digital media. And since sub-
scriptions offer both flexibility and clarity, they are a welcome addition to 
the marketplace. But other new ways of acquiring media introduce uncer-
tainty that muddies the waters for people trying to navigate the digital 
market.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202036  Chapter 3
In part, that’s because the exhaustion principle and by extension con-
sumer property rights are built around the idea of the tangible copy. But as 
these new distribution technologies have evolved, the distance between the 
marketplace as it exists and the marketplace as it is imagined by our copy-
right laws widens. Each of these shifts in distribution technology has taken 
us another step away from the copy-centric vision at the heart of copyright 
law. The failure of the legal system to respond to this disconnect is a major 
factor in the erosion of consumer property rights, a development that could 
harm both the public and creators in the long run.
The Hard Copy Era
Since its earliest days, copyright law has evolved, albeit slowly, in response 
to changes in the ways we copy and share creative works. And for much of 
copyright history, those changes involved hard copies. This focus on tan-
gible copies influenced the development of the law in a number of ways. 
Perhaps most important, it enshrined a sharp distinction between the 
work—the intangible creation of an author—and the copy—the tangible 
artifact in which the work is recorded. That copy/work distinction is a fun-
damental assumption of our copyright system. In a world populated with 
copies, that assumption made sense. But in a market that radically deem-
phasizes the copy, the utility of the copy/work framework is far less clear.
From its embryonic stages, copyright law focused on tangible copies. 
With Gutenberg’s introduction of the printing press in 1450,1 control over 
copying became an imperative for both publishers and governments.2 Regu-
lations like the Venetian and English printing privileges, which gave exclu-
sive rights to make books to trusted printers, sprung up in the wake of the 
printing press.3 Later, the proto-copyrights issued by the Stationers Com-
pany—a group of London printers who enjoyed a royal monopoly—also 
focused on making and selling tangible copies.4 And the first U.S. Copyright 
Act in 1790—like its English predecessor, the Statute of Anne—provided 
exclusive rights to print, publish, and sell books as physical artifacts.
In the twentieth century, copyright law expanded to include not only 
books, maps, and charts but also dramatic works like plays, musical compo-
sitions, visual art, photographs, motion pictures, and later recorded music, 
architecture, and computer software. At the same time, in addition to 
making and selling copies, the statutory rights of authors grew to embrace 
publicly performing and displaying a work, and creating derivative works 
like sequels and translations.5 This expansion reflected the technological 
advances of the day. Live performances of musical and dramatic works 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  37
had long been economically crucial to some creators. But motion pictures, 
radio, and television enabled valuable new uses of works that didn’t depend 
on the distribution of physical copies. Copyright holders predictably called 
for new legal protections to help them profit from those uses.
But throughout this period, the sale of copies remained the core focus of 
most creative industries, and of copyright law. The fortunes of publishers 
were tied to the sale of hardcover and paperback books. The music industry 
enjoyed revenue from radio, but made the lion’s share of its profits by sell-
ing copies—first sheet music, and later records, tapes, and CDs. And up until 
the last few years, the software and video game industries were primarily 
in the business of distributing tangible copies to the public. Even the film 
industry shifted toward selling home videos, despite its frantic objections 
to the VCR. Television, because of business models premised on advertising 
and cable subscriptions, was less concerned with selling tangible copies. But 
toward the end of the hard copy era, even TV studios profited from DVD 
and Blu-ray sets. In the early years of the twenty-first century, the copyright 
industries largely revolved around the economic value of the copy.
This focus on copies is reflected in the fixation requirement. Remember, 
to be protected at all, a work needs to be fixed in some stable, tangible form. 
Copyright doesn’t protect a poem stored in your memory, but it does once 
you scribble it on a napkin. Conceptually, the law distinguishes between 
two forms a work can take—first, the intangible expression in the mind of 
its creator; and second, a tangible object containing that expression. But 
the fact that works exist in these two related but distinct forms compli-
cates questions of ownership. As early as 1741, English courts recognized 
that the copyright in a work was distinct from ownership of any particular 
copy of it.6 So the owner of a number of letters written by Alexander Pope, 
for example, wasn’t entitled to publish their contents. Ownership of the 
physical artifact did not give the would-be publisher the right to copy the 
underlying work. The U.S. Supreme Court embraced the same principle in 
1860 in Stephens v. Cady.7 There the Court held that the owner of a cop-
perplate could not reproduce the map engraved on it. Again, ownership of 
the work and ownership of the copy were separate questions. Occasionally, 
courts forgot this lesson and decided that by delivering a physical copy like 
a book manuscript, an author necessarily transferred their copyright inter-
est.8 In an effort to underscore the distinction between the work and the 
copy, Congress provided in the Copyright Act of 1976 that “ownership of a 
copyright ... is distinct from ownership of any material object in which the 
work is embodied.”9
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202038  Chapter 3
This copy/work distinction has helped resolve disputes over transfers of 
copyright ownership. But even more important, it has shaped copyright 
law’s exhaustion rules in profound ways. The distinction provided the con-
ceptual framework and vocabulary copyright law uses today to think about 
the relationship between the rights of consumers and creators. Relying on 
the copy/work distinction, exhaustion rules have drawn an easily under-
stood line separating those respective rights. Creators own their intangible 
works; but purchasers own the copies they buy. Of course, putting exhaus-
tion in these terms oversimplifies things a bit. “Ownership” is not a self-
defining term. Exactly what rights a copy owner enjoys depends on what 
rights copyright holders retain in the works. So if Congress insisted that 
copyright holders get to control public displays of their works even after 
a sale, owning a copy of a painting would mean something quite different 
from what it does today. Nonetheless, by articulating the exhaustion prin-
ciple in terms of copies and works, copyright law takes advantage of our 
built-in understanding of personal property. Our experiences with tuxedos, 
cars, and microwave ovens translate reasonably well to the rules surround-
ing physical books, records, and paintings. By linking consumer rights to 
tangible objects, copyright law has helped the public embrace exhaustion 
and accept its limits.
Because our exhaustion rules developed during the era of the hard copy, 
the way copyright law talks about and conceptualizes consumer property 
rights is deeply tied to tangible copies. The equilibrium that exhaustion 
established has worked so well over time because the way works were dis-
tributed and sold remained largely unchanged. But an exhaustion prin-
ciple rooted in the copy/work distinction only makes sense if we are still 
dealing in things we recognize as copies. Since Gutenberg, copies have 
been a fact of life. But their place in our digital future is increasingly 
uncertain.
The Trouble with Downloads
Format changes are nothing new. We used to listen to music on vinyl 
records, then eight-track and cassette tapes, and most recently CDs. In 
many ways, the rise of digital downloads looks like just another in a long 
line of new and improved formats. CD players joined the turntables col-
lecting dust in our collective cultural garages as we marveled over our shiny 
new iPods. Like earlier format shifts, this one touted many benefits for 
music fans—increases in portability, convenience, and selection, reductions 
in price, carbon footprint, and clutter. But digital had downsides too. The 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  39
browsing experience couldn’t compete with a good record store. Digital 
thumbnail artwork was no replacement for gatefold sleeves or even CD 
booklets. One factor most of us probably failed to take into account in this 
trade-off was the impact the move to digital could have on our ownership 
of the music we buy.
Despite that fact, or perhaps because of it, digital downloads quickly 
gained market share. Apple launched the iTunes Music Store in 2003. At the 
time, its catalog was a mere 200,000 songs. Within a decade, iTunes boasted 
a library of forty-three million tracks collectively downloaded thirty-five 
billion times, making Apple the largest music retailer in the world.10 As CD 
sales dropped and digital sales rocketed upward, paid music downloads sur-
passed physical media sales. This trend extended to other media, with digi-
tal downloads poised to replace hard copies as the primary way we acquire 
copyrighted material. Paid software and video game downloads rivaled or 
surpassed brick and mortar sales. And once Amazon released the Kindle, 
annual ebook sales increased from 10 million units in 2008 to 510 million 
in 2014.11 More recently, ebook sales have plateaued, partly in reaction to 
price increases imposed by publishers.12 But they remain a major compo-
nent of the book market.
This shift to digital copies signaled an important shift in the distribution 
chain for creative works. For physical copies, an author or musician creates 
a work, often in concert with a large institutional copyright holder. They 
hand that work off to a manufacturer to produce lots of copies. Records are 
pressed, books are printed, and video cassettes are manufactured. Those 
copies get loaded into trucks, shipped around the world, and stocked on 
retail store shelves. When you buy one of those products, you come home 
with a new physical artifact containing the work of your choice. Under 
the digital model, things look quite different. For one, the traditional roles 
of publishers, labels, and studios are less crucial. Artists can release their 
own music, authors can self-publish, and independent film makers can 
find an audience more easily and more reliably than ever before. That’s 
because the digital distribution chain has so successfully reduced barriers 
to entry. Rather than sending a master copy off to some factory for costly 
mass reproduction, copyright holders can submit digital files directly to 
digital retailers. There are no manufacturing costs, no shipping costs, and 
constraints on shelf space are effectively eliminated. Digital retailers store 
those files on their servers and make them available to a worldwide audi-
ence. When a customer presses the ubiquitous Buy Now button, the retailer 
initiates a transfer of data over the Internet that is then stored on the cus-
tomer’s device.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202040  Chapter 3
If that device has a hard drive, the file is stored magnetically on a disc. 
If it has a solid-state or flash drive, the file is stored electronically in a series 
of transistors. In either case, the result is the same. A physical object is 
altered, resulting in a new copy of the work. In this sense, digital distribu-
tion isn’t all that different from the printing press. Both produce a tangible 
artifact—a hard disc, flash drive, or printed page—containing the work. 
And in some ways, copyright law treats stored digital copies the same way 
it treats more immediately recognizable physical copies. They count for 
fixation purposes. A novel typed on your laptop is just as fixed as one typed 
on an antique IBM Selectric typewriter. And they count for infringement 
purposes. Making unauthorized digital copies of that novel can be just as 
infringing as an unlicensed print run.
But digital copies differ from earlier physical copies in significant ways. 
Consider how digital files change the way we transfer copies between peo-
ple. Imagine you just finished a novel that you are sure your best friend 
would love. If it’s a hardcover or paperback, you simply hand it to them 
the next time you see each other. If they live across the country, maybe 
you mail it instead. What if instead, you bought an ebook? Assuming your 
ebook isn’t one of the few titles that qualify for Amazon’s licensed digital 
“lending” program, how do you let your friend borrow your copy? That 
depends on what you mean by “your copy.” If the copy is the physical 
embodiment stored in your Kindle’s memory, you could lend them your 
device. Of course, that means handing over your entire digital library and 
an expensive piece of hardware. It would be like if lending a friend one 
hardcover meant giving up the entire contents of your bookshelf. And if 
your device also contains your personal email, documents, and photos, 
lending out your copy is even more problematic.
The other, more reasonable option is to keep your device and just send 
your friend the file. You could email it, save it to a cheap flash drive, share it 
via Dropbox, or use one of the dozens of other ways we move data between 
people. The problem is that each of those methods of sharing your ebook 
requires making one or more new copies of the file. And that’s precisely 
what copyright law would seem to prohibit. The first sale doctrine gives 
owners the right to transfer their copies, to pass one object from person 
to person, but it remains unclear how courts will view the creation of new 
copies to facilitate transfers.
The same is true if you want to resell your digital purchases. The ortho-
dox understanding of copyright law says that making a new copy, even 
as part of the process of transferring a file to a new owner, is copyright 
infringement. ReDigi, a company that launched the first online resale 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  41
marketplace for digital music late in 2011, found that out the hard way. 
Assume—hypothetically of course—that you bought a copy of “The Sign” 
by Swedish pop group Ace of Base from the iTunes Music Store in a fit of 
1990s nostalgia. And let’s say you later regretted that impulse purchase. 
ReDigi allows you to resell that track to another equally nostalgic buyer and 
recover some of the 99 cents you paid for it in much the same way you can 
still sell used CDs and records.
ReDigi, well aware of the legal risks, designed its system to ensure that 
only one copy of the file existed at any particular time. So you decide to 
unload your copy of “The Sign.” That copy lives on your laptop’s hard disc, 
encoded in the language of magnetic charges. To sell your copy, the file has 
to be uploaded to ReDigi’s server, where it waits for its lucky new owner. If 
ReDigi’s software simply uploaded the file, two copies would exist—one on 
your hard drive and another on the ReDigi server. ReDigi wanted to recreate 
as closely as possible the mechanics of a traditional used sale, one where a 
single copy moves from one owner to another. To achieve that, as each of 
the thousands of packets of data that make up the file were sent over the 
Internet, ReDigi deleted that data from your hard drive. So your local copy 
disintegrated piece by piece as it was being reconstructed on the ReDigi 
server. That way, two complete copies never existed at any one time. ReDigi 
argued its process simply migrated a copy from point A to point B, just like 
mailing your hardcover book or taking an unwanted CD to the used record 
store. As in a traditional sale, the seller starts out with one copy and ends up 
with none. And the buyer starts out with no copies and ends up with one.
Unlike a traditional used record store, ReDigi took great effort to make 
sure the seller wasn’t keeping an extra copy for themself. But neither copy-
right holders nor the courts saw it that way. Capital Records sued ReDigi for 
reproducing copies of its tracks.13 The question for the court was whether 
ReDigi’s software succeeded in moving the file from one location to another, 
or if it simply made a new unauthorized copy. The court sided with Capital. 
Because the process resulted in the work being encoded on a new material 
object—ReDigi’s server—a new copy was made. And that was true even if 
ReDigi destroyed the original as part of the upload process. The lesson from 
ReDigi is that even if you delete your copy after transferring a file, you’ve 
likely violated copyright law by reproducing the work.14 If that’s true, the 
application of our legal rules to digital copies is inconsistent with the expec-
tations about lending and reselling developed in the hard copy era.
This isn’t the first time copyright law has encountered this sort of mis-
match. Congress recognized the same problem when it expanded copy-
right to protect computer software. Then, end users faced similar problems. 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202042  Chapter 3
They couldn’t run their software, create backups, resell, or transfer their 
purchases without potentially running afoul of the law. As Congress rec-
ognized, that outcome would be at odds with the idea that users owned 
the software they bought. So it enacted a new provision, section 117 of the 
Copyright Act, to address the situation.15 That section guarantees users the 
rights to reproduce copies of software they own for preservation purposes, 
to adapt them to run in new software or hardware environments, and to 
transfer copies of the software they purchase so long as they delete the 
copies in their possession. So users could, for example, resell their software 
even if it meant making additional copies in the process.
Section 117 was an explicit attempt to extend the longstanding com-
mitment to exhaustion to digital copies. But as we explain in chapter 4, 
its practical effectiveness has been undermined by license agreements that 
redefine software sales. Equally important, Congress has never extended 
the kinds of rights recognized in section 117 to other forms of media, even 
as digital downloads displaced hard copies. But even if it had, the digital 
download looks more and more like a transitional technology.
The Cloud of Uncertainty
Even if you don’t understand exactly how the “cloud” works, you’re prob-
ably familiar with the term. Cloud computing allows users to remotely 
access resources like data, programs, processing power, and storage from 
a variety of devices. Rather than keeping all of your software and data on 
your local desktop or laptop, you can use phones, tablets, or other network-
connected devices to access files or run programs stored on remote serv-
ers. When it comes to the distribution of copyrighted content, the cloud 
allows companies to sell you music, movies, and books without requiring 
you to download them. Your files are stored in your Apple iCloud account 
or Amazon Cloud Locker. When you want to hear a song or watch a video, 
they can be streamed to your device anywhere you have a data connection.
Like new forms of distribution that came before, the cloud was driven 
by the technology of the day. Digital downloads made sense when people 
wanted dedicated media playback devices with large storage capacities. 
They would download music and movies to their home computers, which 
functioned as central hubs for their devices, and sync those files to their 
media players. You could buy a 160GB iPod and cram your entire digital 
library onto it.
But iPods soon gave way to smartphones, tablets, and other multi-
purpose,  mobile  computing  devices.  These  devices  jettisoned  cheap, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  43
high-storage capacity hard drives in favor of more expensive, lower-capac-
ity flash memory to conserve space, weight, and battery life. So there was 
no longer enough room to lug around your entire media collection on a 
device’s internal memory. Even if there had been, people were tiring of the 
hassle of syncing devices through their home computers. The cloud took 
advantage of increasingly ubiquitous, reasonably affordable, high-speed 
mobile data networks to solve the storage and syncing problem. All of your 
digital stuff could be available all the time through the wonders of the 
cloud, without the need to download a single copy.
The cloud is not without its drawbacks, however, most of which are 
byproducts of the lack of physical possession implicit in cloud-based distri-
bution. In the hard copy and digital download eras, you literally possessed 
your copies. They were stored on shelves, in attics, and on hard discs. But if 
you possess copies in the cloud, you do so only virtually. They aren’t actu-
ally on your device; that’s the whole point. For one, the cloud creates some 
real concerns about privacy. Since a digital record is created every time you 
access a file, your reading, listening, and viewing habits are being closely 
tracked.
The lack of physical possession also means your ability to access your 
purchases depends on the cloud service provider keeping up their end 
of the bargain. The provider might suffer an outage, or the title you pur-
chased—like 1984—might be pulled from the service. Apple’s iTunes terms 
specifically address this possibility: “Apple and its licensors reserve the 
right to change, suspend, remove, or disable access to any iTunes Prod-
ucts, content, or other materials comprising a part of the iTunes Service at 
any time without notice. In no event will Apple be liable for making these  
changes.”16
So if you buy a movie or album and store it on Apple’s cloud server, your 
purchase can disappear if Apple or the copyright holder decides for any 
reason to remove it. Instead, retailers might simply stop supporting their 
cloud offerings if they are no longer profitable, or they might go under alto-
gether. A future without Apple and Amazon is hard to imagine, but so was 
one without Lehman Brothers, Enron, and Woolworth’s. And the fortunes 
of even the most highly valued technology companies are volatile. Just ask 
Yahoo, Myspace, or Apple circa 1997.
So what does the cloud mean for consumer property rights? Without 
physical possession, consumers can’t be entirely confident in their abil-
ity to access their purchases in the future. Their rights to lend, resell, or 
otherwise transfer those purchases are even more uncertain. Exhaustion, 
as we’ve seen, traditionally has been premised on ownership of a copy. But 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202044  Chapter 3
the cloud, it turns out, doesn’t result in a single identifiable copy. Instead, 
it creates a tangled web of potential copies. It’s not clear who owns them or 
whether they even count as copies for copyright purposes.
At the risk of oversimplification, we can think about two distinct sets 
of copies in a cloud system. Some copies are stored on the cloud server, 
and some copies are stored—potentially—on the user’s device. Let’s start 
with the server copies. They are stored long-term and are certainly fixed 
for copyright purposes. But who owns them? Before turning to how a court 
might answer that question, let’s consider three analogies to more familiar 
examples.
First, we could think of the cloud server copy like a film reel at your local 
movie theater. The reel is owned and possessed by the theater.17 You pay to 
see the movie, but never possess, much less own, the reel. With the cloud, 
you pay to listen to a song or watch a program, but the cloud provider 
owns the copy—literally, the hard drive in its server. Any rights you have 
would be rooted in contract, not property. Second, maybe the cloud copy 
is more like a library book. The server, like the library, is full of copies of 
works. When you want to access your purchase, the work is plucked from 
the shelves and transmitted to your device in much the same way you can 
select a library book and take it home. But again, you don’t own the copy 
on the cloud server any more than you own a book from the library. Third, 
perhaps the cloud copy is more like a family heirloom in a safe deposit box. 
You pay for a movie, and it waits for you on the cloud server until you are 
ready to access it. Just like grandpa’s stamp collection at the local bank, you 
own it even if you don’t currently possess it.
Copyright law can easily make sense of these first two analogies because 
they fit into the copy/work dichotomy. For the film reel, control over a tan-
gible copy regulates access to the intangible work shown on the screen. For 
the library book, a tangible copy changes hands, but not permanently. But 
from the perspective of the purchaser of cloud content, both of these analo-
gies are unsatisfying. Surely, you might think, “buying” Upstream Color for 
$12.99 gets you something more durable for your money. But identifying 
what that something is—in terms copyright law can comprehend—is a 
challenge. Its vocabulary is limited to tangible copies and intangible works. 
Unlike your personal property interest in Grandpa’s stamps, you don’t lit-
erally own part of Apple’s server. Your property right relates to something 
less concrete. But at the same time, it isn’t the intellectual property interest 
in the movie. A $12.99 purchase doesn’t make you the copyright holder in 
Upstream Color. Conceptually, it makes much more sense to talk about an 
intangible property right in the file—the collection of bits that encodes the 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  45
movie—detached from any particular physical copy. In much the same way 
you can own and transfer stock—an intangible interest in a corporation—
you can own and transfer rights in your cloud purchase.
From a technical perspective, those are rights the cloud provider could 
easily accommodate. Let’s say you wanted to lend the movie you bought 
to a friend. Amazon, for example, could easily transfer rights to the file by 
associating it with your friend’s user account rather than yours. When your 
friend logs in to their account, the file would be there for them to access. 
But under your account, the file would be disabled. This is how Amazon’s 
existing Kindle ebook “lending” program works.
Of course, the precise scope of consumer intangible property rights 
would be determined by the rules of exhaustion, just as our personal prop-
erty rights are today. And the division of rights between creators and con-
sumers might look different for intangible property, but the key is that your 
rights would be determined by default property rules, not the minutiae of a 
EULA. By calling it property, the law would shift the balance of power from 
sellers to buyers and responsibility for defining our rights from lawyers at 
Amazon and Apple to courts and legislators.
To be clear, U.S. law hasn’t yet recognized intangible property interests in 
digital media. So the question of how courts today would think about cloud 
copies remains. Courts have adopted two very different ways of evaluat-
ing new technologies that challenge embedded assumptions of copyright 
law. One approach—familiar from ReDigi—closely examines the design and 
operation of a technology. There the court focused on maintaining a care-
ful ledger of copies, rather than evaluating those technologies from the 
perspective of the end user.
In a recent case called ABC v. Aereo, the Supreme Court took the opposite 
tack. Aereo offered its subscribers access to broadcast television program-
ming over the Internet by constructing an elaborate system of thousands 
of dime-sized antennae, each assigned to an individual subscriber. When a 
subscriber chose a program, their antenna would tune to the appropriate 
station, and the show would be recorded by a server to hard drive space 
dedicated to that subscriber. Aereo’s system was designed with the law in 
mind. By making sure each antenna and each recording corresponded to a 
single subscriber, it hoped to design around copyright’s public performance 
right. In holding Aereo liable for infringement, the Court emphasized the 
“viewing experience of Aereo’s subscribers” and discounted the importance 
of “behind-the-scenes” details about the operation of the technology.18
Both of these approaches have merit, and we don’t mean to suggest that 
either is inappropriate. Developers shouldn’t be penalized for designing 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202046  Chapter 3
systems that comply with the letter of copyright law. But when it comes 
to cloud copies, there are two reasons we think it makes more sense to 
focus on end user experience rather than technical design choices. First, we 
have been trained to ignore what happens under the hood. The engineers 
behind cloud services have done a remarkable job of shielding us from their 
complexity. Those services are intuitive. True to Apple’s philosophy, they 
just work. The downside of such high usability is that it obfuscates details 
about precisely how these services operate.
Second, an approach that emphasizes technical details misunderstands 
what is valuable about the cloud. Back when individual copies were valu-
able, long-lasting artifacts, keeping a running ledger of copies made sense. 
But this preoccupation with counting copies is outdated. Copies today are 
cheap, disposable things. We are awash in a sea of copies that flit into and 
out of existence all the time. They are created, used, and discarded con-
stantly. What matters to consumers are reliable rights to access and use a 
work. And those rights, as property theory makes clear, don’t have to be 
tied to any particular tangible object. But until copyright law rethinks the 
central role of the copy, ownership of cloud purchases will remain a chal-
lenging question with no obvious answer.
What about the copies on your own device? There the tough question 
isn’t so much about ownership, but whether we have a copy at all. Here 
we need to distinguish between downloading and streaming content. If a 
cloud customer saves a file to their device—one that they can access dur-
ing a long flight without Internet access, for example—that looks like a 
standard download. There’s a stable, lasting copy stored to the memory of 
their phone or tablet. Streaming, in contrast, allows the customer to listen 
to music or watch a video without permanently saving a file to their device. 
It isn’t intended to result in a lasting copy.
Nonetheless, some courts have held that data stored even temporarily 
in the random access memory (RAM) of a device can count as a copy for 
copyright purposes. If so, using a digital file—reading a book or playing a 
song—means creating new copies. When you open a file on your laptop 
or your mobile phone, your device is accessing data in long-term storage, 
on a hard disc or flash drive, and recreating it in its RAM, the short-term 
storage used to display and manipulate data. But the rules for precisely how 
long such data can be in RAM before a fixed copy is created are far from 
clear. So despite the emphasis copyright law places on keeping track of cop-
ies, it has a surprisingly difficult time figuring out whether a copy even  
exists.
Although this problem has become more pronounced in recent years, 
it turns out that it is hardly a new challenge. Copyright law, in fact, has 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  47
been struggling to answer that question for more than a century. When 
the player piano hit the market in the late nineteenth century, compos-
ers and music publishers were in the business of selling sheet music that 
people took home to play on their pianos. But by combining a pneumatic 
mechanism and perforated paper rolls, player pianos enabled people to lis-
ten to music at home without a musician on the premises. Music publish-
ers argued that piano rolls were infringing copies of their compositions. 
But after years of litigation, the Supreme Court in White-Smith v. Apollo 
unanimously rejected that argument.19 According to the Court, piano rolls 
weren’t copies at all since no one, including the makers of piano rolls, could 
look at a series of tiny perforations and discern the music it contained. 
Copies, the Court explained, are limited to those forms in which a work 
can be seen, read, or understood by the human eye. Today we have a much 
broader notion of the copy, but White-Smith shows how new technology 
can frustrate efforts to apply laws written for an earlier era. That’s just as 
true today as it was a century ago. In fact, the cloud has given rise to its own 
existential crisis over copies.
Cablevision is a large cable television provider. In 2006 it launched a 
cloud-based Remote Storage Digital Video Recorder (RS-DVR) for its sub-
scribers. Most DVRs come equipped with a large hard drive to store recorded 
programs. Cablevision’s product stored recordings made by subscribers on 
remote servers in a central data center instead. In that data center, Cablevi-
sion used a device called the Broadband Multimedia Router (BMR) to send 
the constant stream of video for each cable channel to the servers that 
stored recorded programs. As it did so, the BMR briefly loaded the video 
into temporary memory buffers for a period of a second or so.
Cartoon Network sued Cablevision for copyright infringement, alleging 
that these buffers created infringing copies of its television programs.20 The 
case turned on whether or not the programs were stored long enough to 
count as copies. How long must a work be stored before it counts as fixed? 
One influential early case, MAI v. Peak, held that Peak created copies when 
it turned on MAI’s computers and loaded MAI programs into memory. 
According to the MAI court, if information stored in the memory of a com-
puter could be perceived or reproduced, it was fixed regardless of how long 
it was stored.21 If that were true, Cablevision made copies in its buffers. But 
the Cablevision court disagreed. It held that the data must last for more than 
a “transitory duration” before it counts as a copy. The court was convinced 
that 1.2 seconds wasn’t long enough to create a copy, but beyond that, it 
didn’t offer much guidance. So when you use a cloud service to stream 
a movie or song to your device, copyright law has no clear answer as to 
whether you even possess a copy.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202048  Chapter 3
The Cartoon Network case, much like ReDigi, demonstrates how copyright 
law struggles to consistently and clearly identify copies in the digital envi-
ronment. That fact puts consumer property rights at risk so long as exhaus-
tion rules are tied to ownership of a copy. Without copies, under current 
law, there’s simply nothing to own. The next major shift in distribution, 
however, suggests that ownership isn’t important to everyone.
Crossing the Stream
All of this talk about ownership assumes that we will still be buying music, 
movies, and books in the near future. If current trends hold, however, à 
la carte purchases could soon be the exception rather than the rule. Every 
day, more people are choosing digital subscription services over individual 
purchases. Although we call them subscriptions, these services don’t have 
much in common with analog magazine or newspaper subscriptions. If you 
decide not to renew your National Geographic subscription after a year or 
a decade, you still own the stack of issues they’ve sent you. If you cancel 
your Spotify subscription, you don’t keep anything. Instead, the digital sub-
scription model allows you to pay a flat monthly rate—or patiently endure 
advertisements—in exchange for access to large libraries of streaming con-
tent. And for many of us, that’s an attractive proposition.
Netflix and Hulu led the way, launching online video services in 2007. 
Since then, Netflix has become one of the most popular content providers 
on the Internet. The service boasts roughly sixty-nine million subscribers 
and accounts for as much of a third of all Internet traffic.22 In 2014, its 
revenue exceeded $5.5 billion. On the music side of things, Spotify claims 
seventy-five million active users, about twenty million of whom are paying 
subscribers.23 It recently broke the billion-dollar revenue barrier for the first 
time.24 Not surprisingly, this subscription model is being applied to other 
forms of content as well. In 2014, Amazon launched Kindle Unlimited, 
which gives subscribers access to a growing ebook library. Meanwhile, ser-
vices like PlayStation Now, EA Access, and Gametap offer subscriptions for 
online video game libraries.
Rapid gains in market share by these services point toward a future in 
which subscriptions, not purchases, will be the primary way we access 
copyrighted works. By 2016, revenue from digital distribution of mov-
ies—including subscriptions and purchases—will eclipse physical sales.25 
The bulk of that money will come from subscriptions. Even today, sub-
scriptions  account  for  nearly  three  times  as  much  revenue  as  digital  
downloads.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  49
A similar story is playing out in the music industry. In 2014, as CD sales 
continued to plummet and paid downloads dropped by roughly 10 per-
cent, streaming music services like Spotify grew by a staggering 54 percent 
as users streamed 164 billion songs.26 By 2018, streaming services are pro-
jected to account for nearly 40 percent of music industry revenue. Already 
in Europe, Spotify’s revenues are overtaking Apple’s music download fig-
ures. Given these trends, Apple spent $3.2 billion to acquire Beats Elec-
tronics, driven at least as much by its interest in the successful Beats Music 
subscription service as it was by the company’s better-known headphones. 
Apple launched its own subscription streaming service in 2015.27
The public seems to be sold as well, and for good reason. Subscription 
services make a compelling case in terms of price, selection, and flexibil-
ity. All-you-can-eat subscriptions for Netflix, Spotify, and Kindle Unlimited 
cost less than $10 per month. For that price, you might be able to buy a 
single ebook, digital album, or movie. Instead, subscription services offer 
unlimited access to massive collections of works. Spotify boasts thirty mil-
lion tracks; the Netflix streaming library tops out at over sixty thousand 
movie and television titles; and the Kindle Unlimited collection includes 
over a million books.28 These services don’t include every new blockbuster 
or bestseller, and music fans enjoy access to a much more complete library 
than movie buffs or bibliophiles. Nonetheless, users seem generally satis-
fied with both the quantity and quality of options.
Netflix has used its massive success as a springboard to becoming a lead-
ing content producer, with exclusive programming like House of Cards, 
Master of None, and the resurrected Wet Hot American Summer. Others like 
Amazon and Hulu are pursuing a similar strategy with varying degrees of 
success. Another key selling point for subscription services is their compat-
ibility with nearly the full range of media devices. You can stream Netf-
lix to your laptop, tablet, smartphone, television, or game console. The 
same is true for Spotify and most other competitors in this space. That 
allows users the degree of portability the cloud helped teach them to  
expect.
You might look at the basic business model of the subscription stream-
ing service and wonder how different it is from familiar twentieth-cen-
tury approaches to distribution. Consumers pay, either by ponying up a 
monthly fee or by sitting through advertisements, in exchange for the abil-
ity to enjoy a curated collection of programming. That sounds like a reason-
ably accurate description of broadcast or cable TV, or even terrestrial radio. 
So what sets services like Netflix and Spotify apart? And what explains their 
massive explosion in popularity in recent years?
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202050  Chapter 3
In part, the answer is control. Radio and television have always been fun-
damentally passive media. You sit back and hope the DJ plays your favorite 
song. Television required viewers to wait until their program of choice aired 
each week. But streaming services allow users to browse their libraries and 
watch whatever movie or hear whatever song they want. Right now. And 
if you want to watch thirteen hours of House of Cards without leaving your 
couch, Netflix is more than happy to oblige you. That degree of choice and 
immediacy distinguishes subscription services from cable and broadcast. It 
also makes those services a much closer substitute for purchases, and at a 
lower price point.
Interest in these services is easy enough to explain, but service providers 
and content producers have reasons to favor the subscription model aside 
from simply satisfying consumer demand. Strategically, it offers a number 
of benefits. Compared to sales-based models that wax and wane depend-
ing on a host of factors, subscriptions generate relatively predictable and 
reliable revenue streams. They also yield mountains of valuable data about 
subscribers, their viewing habits, and preferences that can be used to tailor 
the service and produce new programming, as Netflix did when it ordered 
a full season of House of Cards without the once-obligatory pilot episode. 
For some subscription video providers like HBO, ESPN, and Nickelodeon, 
launching a standalone digital subscription service allows them to reduce 
their reliance on the cable company to play the role of middleman. It also 
provides them an avenue for reaching the increasing number of cord cut-
ters without cable subscriptions. Streaming services also allow movie and 
television studios to bundle large libraries of old and relatively low-value 
content with some new, high-value programming. By doing so, they can 
squeeze additional revenue out of movies and shows that would otherwise 
be collecting dust in a vault.29
Subscription services are also an effective strategy for reducing the effects 
of widespread copyright infringement on the Internet. By setting the price 
point so low, Netflix and Spotify can attract subscribers who might other-
wise get their movies and music from the Pirate Bay. More fundamentally, 
by shifting from selling an easily copied product to selling a hard-to-copy 
service, Netflix and its cohort trade on the value of convenience, curation, 
and recommendation. By doing so, they insulate themselves from the harsh 
reality of the Internet—that copies are free for the taking.
Finally, by moving away from the sale of copies, producers get the added 
benefit of reducing resale. In the era of physical media, used copies com-
peted with new ones, reducing sales and driving down prices. Since Net-
flix doesn’t distribute copies, physical or digital, secondary markets have 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  51
no chance to develop. There’s no small amount irony in this fact. Netflix 
originally rose to prominence as a DVD-by-mail company. In that line of 
business, the first sale doctrine and resale markets were crucial to its success. 
Although Netflix bought the majority of its DVDs in bulk directly from 
movie studios at discounted rates, those negotiations took place against a 
backdrop of widespread availability of DVDs on the open market and the 
legal right to lend them. And in at least one instance, after the Weinstein 
Company signed an exclusive distribution agreement with Blockbuster, 
Netflix resorted to buying DVDs at retail to meet subscriber demand.30
The impact of subscription services on individual creators is much trick-
ier to untangle. First, there’s the question of revenue. Do subscription ser-
vices put money in the pockets of creators? It’s too early to tell whether 
or not Amazon’s experiment with Kindle Unlimited will be a boon for 
authors. Some report significant boosts in readership and revenue, while 
others allege that their sales are shrinking since the service’s launch. For 
movie makers, the answer is more certain. Netflix was once seen as an extra 
unforeseen revenue source by Hollywood, but today streaming revenue is 
part of the calculus that makes or breaks a potential project. Films and 
TV shows get produced based in part on their likely value in the subscrip-
tion market. There has certainly been plenty of squabbling over how much 
Netflix should pay for streaming rights, and sometimes titles get pulled, 
occasionally by the thousand. But there’s been no massive outcry against 
subscription services from studios, producers, or directors.
The same can’t be said for music. From well-established performers like 
Thom Yorke, David Byrne, and Beck to lesser-known artists like Jason Isbell 
and Phil Elverum, musicians have voiced concerns about the paltry sums 
they say performers and songwriters receive from streaming services. Spo-
tify pays just fractions of a penny each time a song is streamed, an amount 
many find not only insufficient, but insulting. In part, the size of these 
streaming royalty checks reflects a simple economic reality: people are not 
willing to pay as much for a product that is less valuable. Recording artists 
make significantly more money from CD sales because they give owners 
something of enduring value. If you own a CD you can play it as many 
times as you want; you can lend it to a friend; you can resell it. Despite what 
Garth Brooks may have thought, when we eliminate ownership in favor of 
temporary access, we get Spotify—not some artist-friendly utopia.
Spotify counters its critics by noting that all those microroyalties add 
up. The service has paid out over $2 billion—70 percent of its revenue—to 
copyright holders for the rights to its streaming catalog.31 That’s not to say 
Spotify couldn’t pay more, at least in theory. If the market would bear it, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202052  Chapter 3
they could increase subscription fees or their advertising rates. Or perhaps 
they should hand over an even higher percentage of their revenue. But 
those efforts wouldn’t solve the problem. Ultimately, Spotify has only so 
much control over how much money makes its way into the pockets of 
artists. Those payments are filtered through record labels, music publish-
ers, and collecting societies, each of which takes its own cut. It turns out 
that most of the $2 billion paid by Spotify has replenished the coffers of 
record labels, while very little has gone to artists. But that fact is a function 
of the contracts between recording artists and their labels, not the real or 
perceived stinginess of streaming services.
Of course, no one is forcing copyright holders to license their music to 
Spotify. If they don’t like the deal being offered, they can refuse it. And 
many artists have, including AC/DC, The Beatles, Garth Brooks, Led Zeppe-
lin, and Radiohead. But no opt-out was met with the Internet-wide hue and 
cry heard when Taylor Swift broke up with Spotify in 2014. After her record 
1989 sold nearly 1.3 million copies in its first week, the strongest debut in 
over a decade, Swift decided to pull her catalog from Spotify. Many people 
slammed her decision as a rich pop star’s attempt to boost her already sin-
gularly strong record sales by cutting off free access to her songs. Swift, it 
was argued, was simply pursuing her own short-term economic interests—
interests that, given her position in the music industry, were poorly aligned 
with all but the tiniest circle of ultra-popular recording artists.
No doubt, the economics of record sales motivated Taylor Swift. But 
there’s good reason to think her decision was about something more than 
maximizing sales of her current record, one that needed little help in that 
regard. More than most musicians with her level of success, Swift seems 
interested in building—and publicizing—a close connection with her lis-
teners. She dances with them in her music videos, buys them lunch, com-
ments on their Instagram photos, sends them Christmas gifts, and shows 
up for their bridal showers. Taylor Swift doesn’t want to rack up plays, she 
wants to cultivate fans.
Casual listeners might play her current hit for free on Spotify, and they 
might even sing along. But loyal fans will not only buy Taylor Swift records, 
they will shell out for concert tickets, t-shirts, and all manner of This Sick 
Beat® merchandise.32 They will establish connections that span a career, 
or even a lifetime. That’s the level of commitment Taylor Swift wants from 
her fans. Months before the release of 1989 and her self-imposed Spotify 
exile, Swift penned an editorial in the Wall Street Journal. She wrote in part: 
“People are still buying albums, but now they’re buying just a few of them. 
... The way I see it, fans view music the way they view their relationships. 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  53
Some music is just for fun, a passing fling. ... However, some artists will be 
like finding ‘the one.’ We will cherish every album they put out until they 
retire and we will play their music for our children and grandchildren. As 
an artist, this is the dream bond we hope to establish with our fans.”33
Here’s where ownership comes back into the picture. Listeners who 
choose to spend ten dollars on a particular record by a particular artist, 
rather than on a subscription to an undifferentiated mass of content, are 
more likely to feel invested in those artists. So meaningful personal prop-
erty rights could benefit not only consumers, but creators as well. If we own 
a Taylor Swift record—as opposed to merely listening to it on the radio or 
streaming it online—it means more to us. Because the things we own can 
help define who we are, buying 1989 identifies you, both to others and to 
yourself, as a Taylor Swift fan in a way that a Spotify playlist might not. 
That, in turn, helps transform casual listeners into the sort of fans who can 
sustain an artist’s career.
The value we place on ownership also finds support from the field of 
behavioral economics. Over the past twenty-five years, dozens of experi-
ments have established what researchers call the endowment effect—the 
widespread tendency of people to assign greater value to things they own. 
In one well-known example, researchers gave some participants coffee 
mugs. When presented the opportunity to sell or trade their mugs to other 
participants, mug owners demanded nearly twice as much compensation 
as nonowners were willing to pay.34 Subjectively, they valued the mugs they 
owned well above the market rate.
What explains these vastly different assessments of the value of an oth-
erwise ordinary mug? Some have suggested that the endowment effect is 
the result of loss aversion—the idea that people are more motivated by the 
fear or regret associated with loss of an item than the enjoyment of gaining 
it. But more recent research shows that we place greater value on the things 
we own because we own them.35 The association between an item and its 
owner means that we value things we own far more than things we simply 
use. And as that sense of ownership grows stronger, so does the value we 
place on the item. Recent research has also shown that the endowment 
effect is no less pronounced for digital goods than it is for physical ones.36 
So if a Taylor Swift fan owns her 1989 mp3s, we should expect her to value 
them in much the same way owners of 1989 CDs or vinyl do.
The psychological value of ownership might also suggest one reason for 
the flagging sales of digital downloads. We are used to getting reliable prop-
erty rights in exchange for the money we spend on music. In the past, if we 
wanted fleeting access, we’d listen to the radio for free. But when we spent 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202054  Chapter 3
money on music, we got something lasting and transferable. As we detail in 
chapter 5, many consumers misunderstand precisely what rights their digi-
tal download dollars are buying them. But as more people understand the 
limited value that downloads offer, we shouldn’t be surprised to see steeper 
decreases in digital sales revenue. If digital sales were sales in the true sense 
of the word—if they were transactions that gave users property rights—we 
might see very different consumer behavior.
In fact, some of us are still willing to pay a premium for property rights. 
The only format that can rival the growth rate of streaming subscriptions 
in recent years is vinyl. In 2014, vinyl record sales increased more than 50 
percent over the prior year.37 In absolute terms, the number was a relatively 
modest 9.2 million units, but it was the largest vinyl tally in decades. That 
upward trend continued in 2015.38 Even though vinyl is generally the most 
expensive way to get new music, there are plenty of reasons to prefer it. 
Aside from the appeal of higher fidelity and better packaging, when you 
buy a record you are bargaining for the full range of property interests asso-
ciated with a purchase, rights that are not contingent on license terms, 
digital permissions, or even an Internet connection.
The rise in these two very different approaches to consuming music—
subscription services and vinyl records—highlights the importance of con-
sumer choice. Not everyone wants to rent their music, and not everyone 
wants to own it either. These choices aren’t right or wrong. They are pref-
erences that vary between individuals and over time for a host of reasons. 
Luckily for most works today, we have options. But both consumer behav-
ior and industry strategy are limiting the choices available to those of us 
who prefer property to conditional access. Bookstores and record stores 
across the country, both big and small, have shuttered. For many of us, that 
means the immediacy of an in-person retail purchase has been replaced by 
online ordering, shipping costs, and days of waiting. That makes it hard for 
analog copies to compete with instant access to digital content, especially 
when the two formats are offered on the same Amazon product page.
Equally troubling, some content is available exclusively in one format or 
from one service. For years, a handful of big-name recording artists refused 
to sell music through iTunes. Others made music you could only buy from 
Apple. Amazon boasts over half a million titles exclusively available on its 
Kindle Store. Many works that were once available in a variety of physical 
formats are moving to digital-only distribution. Fox recently announced, 
for example, that it would no longer sell new seasons of The Simpsons on 
DVD or Blu-ray in favor of streaming delivery.39 When works are available 
only as digital downloads, it limits consumer choice. For libraries, it can 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Copies, Clouds, and Streams  55
interfere with their core function. Apple and Amazon licenses prohibit 
lending, and they won’t—or more accurately, can’t—negotiate individual 
terms for libraries and educational institutions committed to preservation 
and patron access. Since those works aren’t available in a property-friendly 
format, they are effectively excluded from library collections.40
Other works are available only through subscription. You can’t buy the 
digital version of the Compact Oxford English Dictionary; you can only access 
it through a monthly subscription that requires an Internet connection.41 
Adobe’s latest creative applications like Photoshop and Illustrator are now 
available exclusively through the company’s Creative Cloud, a monthly 
subscription service.42 Unless it reverses course, Adobe will never sell a new 
copy of Photoshop, effectively suffocating the used market. The shift to 
digital distribution is so pronounced that Microsoft made headlines when 
it made the decision to release Windows 10 in a decidedly retro format: on 
a disc, in a box, sold at brick-and-mortar retail locations.43
The copy, at least for the time being, is out of fashion. But as a legal 
concept, the copy remains as important as ever. Even as copies escape our 
possession and disappear from our experience, copyright law continues to 
insist that without them, we only have the rights copyright holders are 
kind enough to grant us. As we discuss in chapter 4, those rights are often 
impermanent, nontransferable, and conditioned on ongoing permission. 
In short, they are not property rights.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273326/9780262335959_caj.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20204  Ownership and the Fine Print
Imagine you walk into your local haberdashery in search of some new hats. 
You try on a few bowlers, some deerstalkers, a pork pie hat, even a fez or 
two. After settling on a favorite, you take note of the price tag—$100—and 
make your way to the counter to pay. On your way to the cashier, you 
notice some language printed inside the brim. It reads:
THIS HAT IS LICENSED, NOT SOLD. BY PAYING THE ASKING PRICE, YOU 
ARE ENTITLED TO WEAR THIS HAT AS OFTEN AS YOU LIKE. YOU MAY 
RETAIN POSSESSION OF THE HAT INDEFINITELY, BUT YOU ARE NOT 
PERMITTED TO RESELL, LEND, OR OTHERWISE TRANSFER IT WITHOUT 
THE EXPRESS PERMISSION OF THE MANUFACTURER.
What should we make of this language? There are at least three ways 
we might think about the legal impact of this sort of notice. First, it might 
mean, as the hat maker probably intends, that you don’t own the hat after 
forking over your $100. The notice could transform a deal that looks like a 
sale—a transfer of ownership from one party to another—into something 
less—mere permission to possess and use the hat. Second, the notice might 
form the basis of a contract. By buying the hat, you would become its 
owner, but you would also be promising not to transfer it. You would have 
the power to resell it as a matter of property law, but you might have to pay 
damages under the contract if your transfer causes provable harm to the 
manufacturer. Third, the notice might be utterly ineffectual as a legal docu-
ment. It could still confuse or intimidate some hat owners, dissuading them 
from loaning or reselling their chapeaus. But as a legal matter, it wouldn’t 
impose any obligations or restrict your behavior.
Regardless of which of these interpretations is right, most of us would 
find this sort of language surprising. Puzzled, we might ask the sales clerk for 
an explanation. Or maybe we would simply refuse to buy a hat so burdened 
by unreasonable demands. What many of us fail to notice, however, is that 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202058  Chapter 4
we encounter this sort of language on a nearly daily basis. It is attached to 
both digital and tangible goods that we assume, rightly or wrongly, we are 
buying. The boxed software you purchase, the apps and games you down-
load, the digital books, music, and movies you buy, your smartphone, and 
even your car all come bundled with similar restrictions. But this language 
is typically buried within the thousands of words of terms and conditions, 
liability waivers, warranty information, and prohibitions on the develop-
ment of nuclear weapons—no, really1—that make up End User License 
Agreements, where it blends into the informational white noise most of us 
are skilled at ignoring.
In the simplest terms, a license is a grant of permission to engage in some 
behavior that would otherwise be prohibited. You need a license to drive 
a car, a radio station needs a license to broadcast over the public airwaves, 
and James Bond needs a license to kill, all for the same reason. Without 
permission, those activities are against the law. Sometimes that permission 
comes from the government, and other times from private parties. If you 
enter your neighbor’s property without a license, you are a trespasser; with 
a license, you are an invited guest.
But modern license agreements have evolved into something else alto-
gether. They create private regulatory schemes that impose all manner of 
obligations and restrictions, often without meaningful notice, much less 
assent. And in the process, licenses effectively rewrite the balance between 
creators and the public that our IP laws are meant to maintain. They are 
an effort to redefine sales, which transfer ownership to the buyer, as some-
thing more like conditional grants of access.
A troubling number of courts have embraced these efforts. They have 
decided that products remain the property of IP rights holders even after 
an apparent sale, so long as the license recites the proper incantations. You 
may have paid for the CD-ROM containing your favorite software program, 
but according to this reasoning, that plastic disc belongs to the software 
maker, not you. And your use of it is constrained not by the public law of 
copyright, but the private law of the license. This way of thinking has its 
strongest foothold in the world of computer software, but it is unlikely to 
remain confined to that corner of the economy. The licensing mentality 
has already spread to digital media and, just as problematically, to tangible 
goods.
By allowing license terms to redefine transactions and strip consumers of 
ownership, courts are taking power away from the public lawmaking pro-
cess and vesting it in the hands of private IP rights holders. Licenses func-
tion as a form of privately made law that allows rights holders to modify, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  59
supplement, and contravene IP law at the expense of the customers who 
pay for their products.
The Fine Print
So what do licenses actually say? Most of us have no idea, and for good 
reason. License agreements are long, inscrutable, and full of bad news. They 
are the Lars von Trier films of legal documents. The form and substance of 
license agreements discourage consumers from reading them, which per-
versely reinforces their worst attributes.
Let’s start with their length. The current iTunes Terms and Conditions 
are over 19,000 words, translating into fifty-six pages of fine print, longer 
than Macbeth.2 Not to be outdone, PayPal’s terms weigh in at 36,000 words, 
besting Hamlet by a wide margin. The demands of these prolix legal docu-
ments are jaw-dropping. Take Adobe’s Flash, a software platform installed 
on millions of computers each day. Assume the average user can read the 
3,500-word Flash license in ten minutes—a generous assumption given the 
dense legalese in which it is written. If everyone who installed Flash in a 
single day read the license, it would require collectively over 1,500 years of 
human attention. That’s true every single day, for just one software prod-
uct.3 Imagine what would happen if you tried to read every license you 
encountered.4
Regardless of their length, license agreements are hard to comprehend. 
They are documents drafted by lawyers, and their primary function is to 
define legal rights and limit liability, not to communicate clearly and effec-
tively. As a result they are overflowing with defined terms, technical jar-
gon, unnatural turns of phrase, and complex sentence structure. Unlike 
the accessible and simple marketing language used to sell products, the 
legal language that defines those transactions—or claims to at least—often 
requires a postgraduate education to understand.5
The length and complexity of license agreements mean that they impose 
significant costs on the public. Reading and understanding a license requires 
lots of time and mental energy. For most people, simply wading through 
the terms won’t be enough to actually understand the license. You might 
need to do some independent research or consult a lawyer—a suggestion 
some licenses make, presumably with a straight face. But often the cost of 
reading the license outweighs the value of the product. Who in their right 
mind would read a 19,000-word license before making a 99-cent purchase 
from iTunes?
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202060  Chapter 4
Not surprisingly, the vast majority of us simply throw up our hands and 
ignore licenses altogether. One recent study shows that as few as one out 
of a thousand software shoppers even glanced at the text of license agree-
ments. And most who did spent only a few seconds perusing the terms.6 
Even Chief Justice John Roberts, hardly known for his casual disregard for 
legal obligations, can’t be bothered to read EULAs.7 It hardly seems fair to 
expect more from the average person.
License terms are not negotiable. So there’s little to gain from a careful 
reading. Suppose you carefully examine the Flash license and find some 
objectionable term. Perhaps it limits you to a single installation of the pro-
gram or disclaims liability for damage to your computer. What exactly are 
you going to do about it? Adobe is not going to negotiate a new license with 
you. They won’t even entertain the idea. So your choice is simple. Either 
use the product—and live with the license—or don’t. Take it or leave it.
Intentionally  or  not,  rights  holders  and  retailers  have  managed  to 
nearly universally dissuade their customers from reading the terms that 
purportedly govern their purchases. And if the public rationally avoids 
investigating licenses, there is little marketplace incentive to offer more 
consumer-friendly terms. Better terms would simply go unnoticed. When 
software maker PC Pitstop included language in its license offering a cash 
prize to the first user to notice the clause, it took nearly four months before 
someone collected the $1,000.8
When high-quality products are indistinguishable from poor ones, we 
get what economists call a market for lemons.9 Even though car buyers 
would pay more for a vehicle with no mechanical issues, they often can’t 
tell a reliable used car from a clunker destined to break down in a steaming 
heap in a week or two. And since they can’t sort the good deals from the bad 
ones, they are only willing to pay a price corresponding to a low-quality car. 
But if buyers aren’t willing to fork over extra money for a high-quality car, 
used car dealers have every reason to stock their lots with the cheapest cars 
available. So despite the fact that buyers would pay a premium for high-
quality cars, the market fails to supply them.10
For the same reasons, most EULAs are lemons. Licensors have lots of 
information about what their licenses say. They drafted them after all. But 
the average person has very little information. This information asymme-
try breeds disengagement and distrust. And if companies don’t gain any 
advantage in the marketplace from more consumer-friendly licenses, that 
only serves to further entrench unfavorable terms. Once license terms are 
adopted, they have a way of spreading. In part, their viral nature is about 
saving time. Few licenses are drafted from scratch. Lawyers copy and paste 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  61
liberally. When Google initially released its Chrome browser, the license 
read in part: “You give Google a perpetual, irrevocable, worldwide, royalty-
free, and non-exclusive license to reproduce, adapt, modify, translate, pub-
lish, publicly perform, publicly display and distribute any Content which 
you submit, post or display on or through, [Google’s products, software, 
services and web sites].”11
That would mean Google could publish every email you send, every 
photo you share, and every password you enter using Chrome. Of course, 
that’s not what Google meant. It quickly updated the license to clarify that 
users retain copyright in the content they generate. Google’s explanation 
for this mishap? “We try to use the same set of legal terms ... for many of 
our products. Sometimes ... this means that the legal terms for a specific 
product may include terms that don’t apply well to the use of that prod-
uct.”12 In other words, Google was a bit sloppy in copying from its existing 
licenses.
Somewhat less innocently, the uniformity in license terms is partly 
about safety in numbers.13 Once a term becomes standardized, its inclusion 
becomes a strategy for reducing competitive risk. A company that adopts 
industry standard terms guarantees that it is no worse off than its competi-
tors.14 Combined with the lemon problem, this sort of soft collusion helps 
ensure that we don’t see robust competition on the basis of consumer-
friendly license terms.
Instead, we see a growing list of standard terms, almost none of which 
add to a product’s value from the perspective of users. Some restrict what 
you can do with the products you purchase. These include limits on mak-
ing backup copies, prohibitions on bad reviews, provisions permanently 
tying a product to a particular device, and bans on reverse engineering—
the process of discovering how a product works through observing it in 
action.15 Other terms eliminate legal rights and remedies. These include 
limitations on liability, bars to class action suits, and mandatory arbitration 
clauses.16 And if the licensor neglected to include some one-sided term it 
later deems useful, many licenses give the drafter the option to change the 
terms of the EULA at any time.17
But for our purposes, the most important license provisions are ones 
that try to redefine ownership and limit the transfer of the products we 
purchase. Across the board, nearly every license agreement for digital con-
tent—software, games, music, movies, and books—declares that the product 
is licensed, not sold. As Apple informs its customers, “the software products 
made available through the App Store ... are licensed, not sold, to you.”18 
Microsoft says the same thing: “We do not sell our software or your copy of 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202062  Chapter 4
it—we only license it.”19 Amazon’s Kindle store follows suit as well: “Kindle 
Content is licensed, not sold, to you by the Content Provider.”20 Sony’s 
PlayStation license states: “All Software is licensed, not sold, which means 
you acquire rights to use the Software ... but you do not acquire ownership 
of the Software.”21 The same sort of terms are increasingly attached to hard-
ware devices with embedded software. Most of these licenses preclude you 
from reselling, lending, renting, or otherwise transferring their purchases.
There are two ways to interpret these kinds of terms. They might stand 
for the uncontroversial—and frankly obvious—proposition that when you 
buy a product like Microsoft Office software or an iPhone, you are not 
acquiring all of the copyright, patent, and trademark rights in that prod-
uct. To which we say, duh. But these licenses typically mean something 
beyond that. They mean that you don’t own the thing you buy. You don’t 
own and can’t transfer the plastic disc, the digital file, or the physical copy 
of the code embedded in your phone. So when retailers and record labels 
tell you that the song you purchased is licensed, not sold, they mean two 
things—you don’t own the copyright in the song and you don’t own the 
file you downloaded.
Despite this effort to define downloads of digital media as licenses rather 
than sales, rights holders take a very different position when it comes time 
to pay artists. Most recording contracts distinguish between sales—histori-
cally, of CDs and other physical media—and licenses—to use a song in a 
commercial, for example. A recording artist would be owed a small royalty 
for each sale, say 15 percent, and a much higher rate for each license, more 
like 50 percent. To minimize the payments owed to artists, record labels 
have insisted in lawsuits filed by Eminem and others that iTunes and Ama-
zon transactions are in fact sales, not licenses.22 Of course, that’s not what 
their EULAs tell us. To understand how they benefit from that strategic 
characterization, we need to take a step back and consider how the licens-
ing model first developed.
The Origins of the EULA
The EULA got its start in the software industry. In the early days of comput-
ing, hardware and software were typically bundled together. Software was 
a means of boosting hardware sales; markets for standalone software prod-
ucts had yet to develop. IBM was among the first companies to unbundle 
its hardware and software. But unlike its mainframes, its software code was 
easy to copy. IBM viewed existing intellectual property protections—pat-
ents, copyrights, and trade secrets—as either ineffective or too uncertain. 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  63
So it “coupled the copyright with a license and counted on the license to 
provide the real protection” against copying.23
At the time, IBM had legitimate concerns. Intellectual property law was 
decades away from unambiguous copyright or patent protection for soft-
ware.24 Even after the Copyright Act was amended in 1980 to explicitly rec-
ognize software as protected subject matter, developers worried about the 
dangers of rental. Since every PC is a copying machine, if Microsoft Word 
could be rented as easily and cheaply as a VHS copy of Airplane!, illicit copy-
ing could do real harm. At the urging of the software industry, Congress 
addressed that worry with the Computer Software Rental Amendment Act, 
which prohibited the rental of most software programs.25
But licensing is about more than guarding against legal uncertainty 
and the threat of infringement. Strategically, a business model premised 
on “licensing” products gave the software industry far greater control 
over downstream uses than other IP-intensive industries. Book publish-
ers, record labels, and movie studios tried for decades to find a reliable 
and efficient means of stamping out unwanted competition by control-
ling secondary markets. By insisting that end users did not own the copies 
they bought, the software industry achieved that elusive goal and much  
more.
If you don’t own a copy, you aren’t entitled to resell or otherwise transfer 
it. That is just as true for software as it is for hardcover books. But because 
of the nature of software, ownership is even more crucial. Using software 
creates copies. If you install code on your hard drive, you’ve made a copy. If 
you run the program, you’ve created a copy in your computer’s memory—
at least according to some courts.26 Unlike an analog book, a copy of a 
software program is virtually worthless without the right to make copies.27 
Congress understood that fact when it extended copyright protection to 
software in 1980. So it enacted a new broader set of exhaustion protections 
for software buyers.
Section 117 of the Copyright Act gives owners of copies of computer pro-
grams a number of important rights. First, it allows them to create “essential 
step” copies—copies necessary to run the program.28 Second, it lets owners 
modify a program—to fix bugs, or add new features for example.29 Third, 
it permits the creation of archival copies to guard against degradation and 
accidental deletion.30 Section 117 also gives an owner expanded rights to 
transfer both the original copy they purchase and any unmodified essen-
tial step and archival copies.31 The statute imposes two intuitive caveats on 
transfers. All rights to those copies must be transferred together as a single 
bundle. That is, the owner can’t sell their original copy on eBay and their 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202064  Chapter 4
archival copies to a neighbor. And once the owner transfers those rights, 
any copies still in their possession have to be destroyed.
So long as the user is recognized as the owner, section 117 does its job. 
But by denying the existence of a sale, license agreements undermine these 
congressionally crafted consumer protections. If all you get when you fork 
over your cash is a license, you are at the mercy of the software maker. Your 
rights to transfer the copy, to make backups, even to install and use the 
software are determined by the text of the license, not by federal law or 
common sense.
Licenses displace the laws Congress created to secure consumer property 
rights. And by doing so, licenses make themselves an indispensable part of 
every software transaction.32 If we accept the idea that the license prevents 
the transfer of ownership to the user, the license becomes the sole source 
of the rights to install and use the program. Without the license, the user 
can’t do anything at all with their copy, aside from glare at it in frustra-
tion. Of course, if it weren’t for the license’s insistence that no sale has 
occurred, users wouldn’t need permission to make those customary uses of 
the program in the first place. Those rights are already provided for in the 
Copyright Act.
In the software industry, these licenses have become commonplace, 
but these efforts to privately redefine consumer rights have spread to 
digital books, movies, and music—not to mention consumer electronics, 
home appliances, and farm equipment. As with software, the use, storage, 
or transfer of digital media products often requires the creation of addi-
tional copies. And just like software, these digital goods are encumbered by 
licenses that attempt to strip away property rights. But digital media aren’t 
covered by the expanded statutory exhaustion rights that apply to software. 
So even if consumers can prove they own the digital files they acquire, they 
still need a license to make the copies necessary to use them. If ownership 
doesn’t entitle you to actually use your property, ownership doesn’t mean 
much.
If we accept the licensing model, we bow to private regulations that 
redefine consumer rights and impose conditions and restrictions on our use 
of the things we buy. Those constraints on our freedom aren’t the product 
of self-governance. They are dictated by private actors driven by their own 
self-interest. The license agreement, in short, has us over the proverbial 
barrel.
But we shouldn’t be so quick to accept the idea that license agree-
ments define our rights. There are two ways of explaining the legal force of 
EULAs, both of which are flawed. First, we can treat them as contracts. But 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  65
shoehorning contemporary consumer licenses into contract law requires 
us to toss out the basic rules and justifications for creating and enforcing 
contracts. More important, the contract model fundamentally misunder-
stands what’s going on when rights holders claim they are licensing their 
products. The second approach recognizes that licenses aren’t really about 
promises; instead, they are creatures of property law. But when we view 
licenses through the lens of property, it turns out rights holders often don’t 
have the power that they assert over us. The notion that a license can strip 
buyers of their property rights is false.
The EULA as Contract
Most of us can remember signing a contract—closing on a home, signing a 
business loan, leasing a car, or perhaps entering into an employment con-
tract. But very few of us would conjure up an image of installing software, 
downloading an ebook, or buying a new kitchen appliance as an example of 
a binding legal agreement. We tend to associate contracts with something 
more notable. Our common conception of contract formation involves 
substantial stakes and some formal process that clues us into the serious-
ness of the situation. There is probably a long document with lots of places 
to sign and initial. There might be someone walking you through the major 
provisions. Perhaps there are even lawyers in the room. But EULAs are of 
no moment. They are ubiquitous, an unnoticed part of the most mundane 
of modern tasks.33 So we treat them like casual annoyances rather than 
binding obligations. Nonetheless, when courts are confronted with license 
agreements, they typically think about them as contracts.
Contract law reflects the deep moral intuition that we should be held 
accountable for the promises we make. By putting us on the hook for the 
harm we cause when we fail to live up to our word, the law encourages 
promise making and promise keeping. And when we can trust others to 
make reliable commitments, society works better. We can coordinate our 
actions, plan for the future, avoid costly protections against unscrupulous 
behavior, and preserve valuable relationships.
But it only makes sense to hold people to their word when they know 
that they are entering into a binding agreement and understand the terms. 
Traditionally, contract law had built-in mechanisms to make sure contracts 
reflected the mutual intent of the parties. But those checks on contract 
formation are broken. Today, many courts are willing to enforce terms that 
consumers do not understand, did not read, have never seen, and to which 
they simply didn’t agree, so long as there is some constructive notice of 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202066  Chapter 4
their existence. It is this mutant form of contract law that embraces the 
EULA.
Under the classic model, forming a contract requires mutual assent to 
the terms by the parties—typically established through an offer by one 
party and its acceptance by the other—and what the law calls “consider-
ation.” To form the basis of a contract, an offer has to be definite and needs 
to reflect all of the terms central to the deal. Imagine your neighbor rings 
your doorbell and proposes to “sell you some stuff.” Appealing though it 
may be, that suggestion doesn’t function as an offer. You can’t sensibly 
agree to such an amorphous deal. At the very least, you’d need to know 
what stuff and at what price.
Then your neighbor clarifies, “I’ll sell you my creepy antique manne-
quin collection for $500.” Fan though you are of moldy, dead-eyed, depart-
ment store dummies, the price strikes you as steep. You reply, “You’ve got 
a deal for $350.” Even though you expressed your willingness to buy the 
collection, this is not an acceptance of your neighbor’s offer. Acceptance 
requires agreement on all material terms like price and quantity.
Assuming you agree on all the important points of the deal, acceptance 
of a contract can take many forms. You and your neighbor could type up 
the terms and sign them. But most contracts can be formed orally, no writ-
ing required. Contracts can also be accepted through your actions. Your 
neighbor could say something like, “Think it over. If you agree, leave the 
money in my mailbox.” By dropping off the payment, you’d be accepting 
the terms of the deal.
Offer and acceptance are important because they provide strong evi-
dence of mutual assent. A contract should reflect a “meeting of the minds” 
between the two parties. They should have a common understanding of 
what they are each required to do.
Finally, a contract requires consideration—something of value provided 
to induce the other party’s participation. So in our antique mannequin 
example, your neighbor’s consideration is the promise to transfer their 
collection to you. And your consideration is payment of the agreed-upon 
price. Imagine instead that your neighbor, in a generous mood, stops by 
and says, “I promise to give you my mannequin collection tomorrow.” And 
you reply, “Sounds great.” Since you’ve provided no consideration—you 
haven’t obligated yourself to do anything—there’s no contract. Your neigh-
bor is free to change their mind tomorrow. It’s your consideration that 
obliges the other party to hold up their end of the bargain.
When it comes to EULAs, many courts have essentially abandoned the 
traditional rules of contract formation. They enforce terms we find inside 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  67
a package only after making a purchase. These terms don’t require us to 
explicitly agree to anything. Simply using the product or even opening the 
packaging is enough to bind us. Then there’s the now ubiquitous “I Agree” 
button. Of course, clicking that button is no guarantee of meaningful assent 
since almost no one reads the terms before reflexively “agreeing” to them. 
But courts enforce them anyway. Some courts have even gone so far as to 
bind parties to terms linked from a website, regardless of whether they ever 
saw them. Assent, such as it is, is manifested by merely visiting the site.
When parties don’t see the terms of an agreement until after they make a 
purchase, when they never see the terms at all, or when they take no inten-
tional steps to manifest assent, contract formation rules are stretched to 
their breaking point. As a result, a number of early courts refused to enforce 
EULAs.34 But over time, courts grew to accept them. As Mark Lemley has 
explained, “A majority of courts now reject any requirement that a party 
take any action at all demonstrating agreement to or even awareness of 
terms in order to be bound by those terms.”35
Judge Frank Easterbrook’s opinion in ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg is largely 
to blame for this distortion of contract law. ProCD sold a CD-ROM database 
of telephone listings to most customers for $150; it sold copies to retailers 
and other commercial users at a significantly higher price. In order to main-
tain this price discrimination strategy, ProCD included a license with the 
low-cost version that, among other things, prohibited commercial use of 
the database. The product packaging noted that it contained a license, but 
users had no opportunity to review its terms until after they purchased the 
software. Matthew Zeidenberg bought a copy of the database and posted it 
online, charging users a fee to access it. ProCD sued. Since copyright law 
does not protect purely factual compilations like lists of names and phone 
numbers, ProCD’s claim was based on a breach of contract. The question 
for the court was whether the noncommercial use restriction was part of 
the agreement between ProCD and Zeidenberg.
For most consumer goods, the contract is formed at the time of initial 
purchase. Let’s say you walk into your local hardware store to buy a shovel. 
You see one that looks suitable for your needs. It bears a $20 price tag. Even 
though it’s not as formal as a loan document, contract law calls that an 
offer. You take the shovel to the checkout counter and tender the asking 
price. That’s acceptance. A contract has been formed. But let’s say that once 
you get home, the hardware store calls you and says, “You know that shovel 
you bought? Well, there are some additional strings attached. You can use it 
for ditch digging, but you can’t use it for gardening. Gardening requires you 
to pay an extra $30 upgrade fee.” After depleting your reserve of expletives 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202068  Chapter 4
and hanging up the phone, chances are you would feel no obligation to 
avoid planting some shrubbery with your new shovel. And no court in its 
right mind would disagree with you. It would recognize that phone call as 
an ineffective attempt to modify an existing contract.
Now imagine a slightly different scenario. While waiting in the checkout 
line, you notice a sticker on the handle of your shovel. It reads: “This shovel 
is subject to a license agreement. You will be notified of the full terms by 
phone after your purchase.” Does this change things? Most of us would 
probably say no. Vague references to unknown terms cannot form the basis 
of a contract. But according to Judge Easterbrook, the fact that Zeidenberg 
was put on notice that the license terms were forthcoming, even if he had 
no idea what they were at the time of purchase, was enough to make them 
part of a binding legal agreement.
Easterbrook offered a number of justifications to soften the blow of 
his departure from the basic rules of contract formation. But rather than 
putting our minds at ease about enforcing these kinds of terms, each of 
Easterbrook’s assurances underscores the legitimate worries of consumers. 
First, he suggests that if the license agreement is a contractual offer, you 
can always reject it. If you don’t like the terms, you can simply return the 
software to the store. Anyone who has ever tried to get a refund from a 
retailer for opened software products can point out the obvious flaw in this 
reasoning.
Beyond these optimistic predictions about return policies, failure to take 
action is a problematic trigger for contract formation. If one day a neighbor 
walked up to you and said, “I propose to buy your house for $1. Failure to 
mow my lawn by tomorrow constitutes acceptance of my offer,” we would 
be shocked if a court called that an enforceable agreement. But that’s just 
what the court does in ProCD. Your failure to return the software constitutes 
acceptance. In treating inaction as assent, Easterbrook ignores the costs this 
sort of arrangement imposes on users. Under his view, software transactions 
require you to drive to a retail store, find the software you want, pay for it, 
take it home, and inspect the terms. If you don’t like the terms, you have 
to drive back to the store, wait in line for a refund, explain why the box is 
open, and hope that the manager at the local big-box office supply store is 
willing to make an exception to its refund policy.
This reality is at odds with one of Easterbrook’s chief defenses of enforc-
ing EULAs—market efficiency. By standardizing agreements, the argument 
goes, we streamline the process of mass production and distribution. To go 
back to a requirement of individualized contracts, he says, would “return 
transactions to the horse-and-buggy era.” Standardized mass contracts, in 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  69
contrast, hold out the promise of drastically reducing transaction costs for 
sellers.
Easterbrook is right that standardized contracts lower costs for software 
makers. They draft one license, likely cobbled together from existing terms, 
and use it in thousands or even millions of transactions. No messy nego-
tiations, no discussions, no explanations. Undoubtedly, that reduces costs 
within the software industry. And while it is generally true that reducing 
transaction costs is a good thing, here those costs are not eliminated. They 
are just shifted from sellers to buyers. In a world governed by EULAs, life 
is easier for software companies and much harder for all of us. We are the 
ones expected to read and understand page after page of license text. And 
those costs add up. The failure to account for them shows that Easterbrook 
is keenly concerned with transaction costs when they harm software mak-
ers, but remarkably insensitive to those costs when they are imposed on 
individuals.
Next, Easterbrook gestures toward competition as a check on abusive 
license terms. If people are unhappy with a term that restricts how they 
can use a product, he speculates, surely competitors will offer more attrac-
tive terms to win them over. But the information asymmetry between users 
and license drafters makes it unlikely that the market will reflect consumer 
preferences. For the average user, the costs of researching license terms far 
outweigh the value of the goods at issue. The same is not true for the seller, 
who has the power to make certain that its license reflects its own best inter-
ests and has very strong incentives to do so. That dynamic all but ensures 
that competition will not result in more favorable terms. In fact, there is 
good reason to expect competition will lead to worse terms as companies 
look for ways to keep prices—the most obvious point of comparison—low.36
But even if competitive forces don’t weed out unfair terms, Easterbrook 
reassures us, contract law will. The doctrine of unconscionability will pre-
vent enforcement of EULAs if they are truly egregious. A contract is deemed 
unconscionable, and thus unenforceable, when one party enjoys superior 
bargaining power and the substance of the agreement is so one-sided that 
no reasonable person would agree to it. That’s a tough standard to satisfy. 
This rule looks at both the process by which the contract was formed and 
its substantive terms to decide whether the apparent agreement of the par-
ties should be set aside. In terms of process, take-it-or-leave-it contracts like 
EULAs, sometimes called contracts of adhesion, typically suggest unequal 
bargaining power. But by lending its enthusiastic seal of approval to the 
pay-now, terms-later EULA, the ProCD opinion makes the uphill battle to 
establish unconscionability even more difficult.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202070  Chapter 4
Finally, Easterbrook reminds us that contracts don’t create rights against 
the world; they only create rights as between the parties to the agreement. 
So even if these contracts are enforced, their impact will be limited. In con-
trast to public law like property or copyright, a contract does not affect the 
rights of the public at large. As Easterbrook explains, “Someone who found 
a copy of SelectPhone on the street would not be affected by the shrinkwrap 
license.”37 In a formal sense, it is true that only parties to the contract are 
bound by it. But once we accept the distorted picture of contract forma-
tion endorsed by ProCD, we all become parties to these contracts, as even 
Easterbrook’s own example shows. The stranger on the street who finds a 
copy of ProCD’s product may not be bound the moment they pick it up. 
But once they install the program, “the software [will splash] the license on 
the screen and [will] not let him proceed without indicating acceptance.”38 
Everyone who encounters the product is restricted in their use of it. Those 
restrictions travel with the product, much like the hypothetical restrictions 
on tuxedo rental forbidden by property law.
In the two decades since ProCD, EULAs have flourished. For the vast 
majority of us, these ubiquitous license terms are unnoticed, unread, and 
unreadable. The practice of entering into these so-called agreements has 
become automatic. We unthinkingly click “I Agree” when we buy a product 
online, when we download a new app on our phones, and when we log 
onto our online banking accounts. And thanks to lax standards for con-
tract formation, we enter into binding legal obligations simply by visiting a 
website that links to a set of terms. By announcing their intention to bind 
you, the operator of any website can rope you into a contract. What used 
to require a meeting of the minds is now a unilateral exercise of power. 
Even after these one-sided agreements are formed, many allow the drafter 
to change the terms at any time without assent.
Under these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that people don’t 
bother reading EULAs. Typically, the failure to read a contract is no excuse 
for breaking it. The law imposes a duty to read, and for good reason. When 
people know they are entering into an agreement, generally the reasonable 
thing to do is read it. Closing your eyes and plugging your ears doesn’t get 
you off the hook. But the duty to read doesn’t look quite so reasonable 
when the consumer has little reason to expect a contract is in the offing. 
And even when they do have reason to know a contract has been pre-
sented—when they confront the “I Agree” button—the duty to read should 
take into account the cost of studying the terms presented. If the duty to 
read is about making sure people behave reasonably, we might ask whether 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  71
it is in fact reasonable to expect a consumer to read a Macbeth-length license 
before they make a 99-cent purchase.
So despite its widespread acceptance by courts, the notion that EULAs 
are enforceable contracts rests on a shaky foundation and leads to a slew of 
troubling consequences. But there’s another way to think about the license 
agreement, one that more accurately captures how they function.
The EULA as Permission
If EULAs aren’t contracts, what are they? The classic understanding of a 
license has nothing to do with mutual promises. A license is a pure expres-
sion of permission, one that requires no agreement to be effective. Let’s say 
you are walking along a secluded country road and notice a picturesque 
lake in the distance. You decide to rest in the shade of a lakeside oak tree. 
But as you make your way closer, you see a sign that reads “No Trespassing.” 
Despite your vigorous disagreement with being denied a peaceful afternoon 
in the shade, your assent, or lack thereof, is utterly irrelevant. You and the 
property owner don’t have to agree that you keep out. The owner’s asser-
tion is all that matters. The same would be true if the sign read “Feel free 
to enjoy the shade, but absolutely no swimming.” The moment you take a 
dip, you become a trespasser.
EULAs work in a similar way. The owner of an intellectual property right 
can define the circumstances under which others are allowed to use their 
creation. Sometimes they grant permission, other times they don’t. And 
even though that permission might be memorialized in a written docu-
ment, mutual assent isn’t required for the limits on that grant of permission 
to be enforceable.39 Let’s say you write a hit song. General Motors comes to 
you and asks to put that song in a commercial. You tell them, “You can use 
my song, but only for ten seconds. And definitely not in a Buick ad.” If they 
use a twelve-second clip of the song in a Buick Enclave commercial, they’ve 
infringed your copyright regardless of whether a contract was formed  
or not.
Nonetheless, most courts, commentators, and copyright holders con-
tinue to think of licenses as creatures of contract law. The free software 
movement is one notable exception. Developers of free software are com-
mitted to the idea that all users should be free to run software, study it, 
modify it, and redistribute it. Those core beliefs are reflected in free soft-
ware licenses like the GNU General Public License, or GPL. Examples of 
free software products include the Firefox web browser, the Apache web 
server, and MySQL relational database software. As Eben Moglen, head of 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202072  Chapter 4
the Software Freedom Law Center and one of the drafters of the current 
version of the GPL explains, “Licenses are not contracts: the work’s user is 
obliged to remain within the bounds of the license not because she volun-
tarily promised, but because she doesn’t have any right to act at all except 
as the license permits.”40
An approach that roots licenses in property law is preferable to one that 
treats them like contracts. It does away with the fiction of assent. That 
could make it easier for licensors to assert their wills, but it would also avoid 
the damage done to contract law by insisting that EULAs are enforceable 
agreements. So why don’t we see more rights holders adopting this stance? 
One answer is path dependence. ProCD illuminated a clear and not particu-
larly arduous path for enforcing license terms. Most rights holders—and 
their lawyers—are too risk-averse to rely on a sounder but largely untested 
argument.
The license-as-permission approach also helps clarify the relationship 
between the license and property ownership. A license does not—in fact, 
cannot—define  property  rights;  it  depends  on  predetermined  property 
rights. A license is a tool that allows a property owner to control how others 
use a resource. Before a license can be effective, we have to know who owns 
what. If the party asserting the license doesn’t own the property, the license 
is an empty gesture. If you post a “No Trespassing” sign in a city park, for 
example, it has no legal effect since that’s not your property in the first 
place. If you don’t own it, you can’t license it. And the license itself cannot 
transfer ownership from one party to another. So before a valid license can 
exist, we have to know who owns the resource.
The requirement that the licensor have some property or statutory 
exclusive right is one reason the court in ProCD insisted that EULAs are 
contracts. ProCD’s database of phone listings did not qualify for copyright 
protection; it was part of the public domain. As a result, ProCD had no legal 
right to exclude others from the information. It had no property to license. 
Contract law was the only way to impose restrictions on the use of what 
was essentially public property.
You can’t use a license to prohibit joggers in the city park. Likewise, 
copyright holders can’t use licenses to control behaviors that aren’t within 
the scope of their statutory rights. But that doesn’t stop them from try-
ing. They try to prohibit things like negative reviews or reverse engineer-
ing—uses that are noninfringing and thus outside of their control. Those 
kinds of licenses are more like a “No Trespassing” sign that forbids you 
from describing the roadside lake to a friend. The lake’s owner has property 
rights, but they just don’t extend that far.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  73
There are plenty of examples of valid copyright licenses. When a copy-
right holder grants permission to make a derivative work—say a novelist 
allows a movie studio to adapt a book into a film—that is squarely within 
the scope of the novelist’s statutory rights. So are grants allowing the 
public performance of a play or the reproduction of a photograph in an 
ad campaign. Copyright holders can also license the distribution of cop-
ies that they own. If an artist lends—rather than sells—a sculpture to a 
museum, they can prohibit the museum from lending it to another institu-
tion. When they grant permission over uses within their statutory rights, 
copyright holders can give, withhold, or condition permission in all sorts  
of ways.
But not all rights related to a work belong to the copyright holder. Some 
are reserved for the public at large. Others are granted to owners of copies. 
One crucial function of the Copyright Act is to divvy up rights between 
creators and consumers. Without copyright law, the public could copy, dis-
tribute, and adapt every book, record, and film produced. But copyright 
law takes those rights away from the public and gives them to creators and 
their publishers. The public still has the right to make fair uses of protected 
works.41 And eventually copyright expires, works enter the public domain, 
and the public is free to use them. But copyright law also carves out a set of 
rights for owners of copies of protected works. That’s what the exhaustion 
rules embodied in sections 109 and 117 do. The law says that people who 
own copies have rights that the public at large doesn’t. They can distribute 
their copies of books by reselling or lending them. They can publicly dis-
play their paintings. They can make backups and adaptations of their com-
puter programs. Those are rights copyright holders would strongly prefer to 
control, but the Copyright Act gives them to purchasers instead.
By insisting that their products are licensed rather than sold, copyright 
holders are trying to get those rights back. The courts and Congress have 
decided certain rights belong to us, but the license is designed to overcome 
this default allocation of property rights. On the one hand, if we think of 
licenses as contracts, this transfer of property rights from copy owners to 
copyright holders makes some conceptual sense. Parties agree to transfer 
property rights all the time. You might agree to sell your house for a hefty 
sum, but that transfer depends on the mutual agreement of the parties. If, 
on the other hand, we think of a license as a pure expression of permis-
sion, a license attempting to reclaim exhaustion rights is about as effective 
as your neighbor declaring, over your strenuous objections, that they now 
own your spare bedroom. It just doesn’t work.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202074  Chapter 4
When it enacted the exhaustion provisions in the Copyright Act, Con-
gress intended to safeguard personal property rights. If that was the goal, it 
would be a very odd choice to allow copyright holders’ unilateral edicts in 
the form of EULAs to eliminate those rights. It strikes us as highly unlikely 
that Congress went through the trouble of allocating rights to owners if 
those rights would ultimately be contingent on the kindness of copyright 
holders to refrain from reclaiming them.
Copyright holders assume that personal property rights are theirs to 
grant or withhold. And on some level, that is true. A copyright holder can 
choose not to release a work to the public at all. They can leave it in a 
vault collecting dust. Or they can choose to exhibit it publicly, but refuse 
to sell individual copies, as hip-hop group the Wu-Tang Clan did with a 
recent album that required fans to visit a museum to hear the single copy 
produced.42 Copyright holders can choose to lease or rent their works to 
the public, but not sell them. But whether or not a transaction is a sale 
that transfers ownership can’t be up to the rights holder alone. Understood 
properly, licenses that attempt to redefine consumer property rights in their 
purchases fail.
In part, that’s because property law puts limits on the kinds of transac-
tions the law will recognize. You can enter into a contract that obligates you 
to refrain from renting your tuxedo, but you can’t sell a tuxedo with a no-
rental restriction that is enforceable against the world. Allowing those kinds 
of idiosyncratic restrictions defeats one of the main benefits of personal 
property law—clear legal rules that reduce information costs. The economy 
would grind to a halt if every consumer transaction required a diligent 
investigation into the strings attached to every apparent sale. Instead, we 
need some objective basis for determining whether consumers are owners 
or not. But courts have struggled mightily to come up with a workable test 
for identifying sales.
Defining Ownership
So how can we tell whether or not a reader, listener, or user owns some-
thing? Too many courts, especially in cases dealing with software, have 
turned to license agreements, on the assumption that what they say goes. As 
long as the copyright holder recites some variation of the magic words “this 
is a license, not a sale,” you don’t own anything.43 The better approach, 
which a number of courts have adopted, turns to some source of publicly 
made law. They might look to centuries-old common law property rules, or 
the rules governing the sale of goods outlined in the Uniform Commercial 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  75
Code,44 or the internal rules of intellectual property law. These sources focus 
on objective facts about a transaction, not just the self-serving claims made 
in the license agreement.45
The Copyright Act, for example, grants copyright holders the exclusive 
right “to distribute copies ... to the public by sale or other transfer of owner-
ship, or by rental, lease, or lending.” This language suggests that copyright 
law recognizes two kinds of transfers of copies. First, we have permanent 
transfers: sales or gifts. Second, we have temporary transfers: rental, lease, 
or lending. The first are transfers of ownership; the second are not. The 
question then becomes which of those two categories is a better fit in a 
particular circumstance. Plenty of transactions are easy enough to charac-
terize as a rental, lease, or lending. You don’t own the books you borrow 
from the library. And your Netflix subscription doesn’t give you a property 
interest—personal, intellectual, or intangible—in the movies you watch. 
But when you pay a one-time fee for a copy of, or permanent access to, an 
ebook, game, or other digital media, that should be recognized as a sale that 
transfers ownership of a tangible or intangible asset.
Courts struggle to define and identify sales in large part because they 
can’t decide whether to rely on the privately drafted declarations of copy-
right holders or facts about a transaction beyond the license. There is no 
better example of this floundering than a pair of cases argued on the same 
day in front of the same three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals for the 
Ninth Circuit, a court whose territory includes both Hollywood and Silicon 
Valley. Both cases involved the resale of copies despite license terms prohib-
iting transfer. And both cases turned on the question of copy ownership. 
If the defendants owned their copies, they were free to resell them. But if 
the copies were licensed, reselling them was an act of infringement. After 
years of inconsistent decisions, many hoped these cases would clarify the 
question of consumer ownership. Although the license agreements in both 
cases imposed nearly indistinguishable restrictions, the judges reached very 
different conclusions, relying on two incompatible approaches. In one case, 
ownership was determined on the basis of objective evidence about the 
nature of the transaction. In the other, the court relied solely on the pro-
nouncements of the copyright holder.
UMG v. Augusto involved the resale of promotional CDs. Record labels 
frequently send free CDs to critics, bloggers, and other tastemakers. Inevi-
tably, those CDs end up for sale at used record stores. Troy Augusto made 
his living buying used CDs—including the relatively rare and profitable 
promo CDs—from local record stores and reselling them on eBay. Augusto 
figured that since he owned the discs, he was entitled to resell them. But 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202076  Chapter 4
Universal Music Group insisted that he didn’t own the CDs because of a 
license printed on the discs. That license claimed that the discs remained 
the label’s property, limited recipients to noncommercial use of the discs, 
and prohibited resale and transfer. Nonetheless, the Ninth Circuit held that 
ownership of the discs transferred to their recipients upon delivery and, 
eventually, to Augusto. Although it cast some doubt on whether the notice 
was enough to form a binding agreement, the court focused on Universal’s 
method of distribution. Universal made no effort to keep track of the CDs it 
claimed to own once they were shipped. After dropping them in the mail, 
it had no control over how they were used or by whom. And Universal had 
no means of collecting the CDs it claimed it owned. The discs were under 
the control of the recipients, who were free as a practical matter to use them 
as they pleased.46
The other case, Vernor v. Autodesk, centered on the resale of software discs. 
Like UMG, Autodesk argued that the notice accompanying its software 
meant that end users who paid thousands of dollars for copies did not own 
those plastic discs. Autodesk merely “licensed” them. Rather than consider-
ing the kinds of factors they relied on in Augusto however, the judges cre-
ated a three-part test that asked (1) whether the copyright holder called the 
transaction a license; (2) whether it restricted transfer of the software; and 
(3) whether it restricted use of the software. Since Autodesk’s license terms 
contained the necessary language, the court concluded that Autodesk, not 
the end user, owned the discs.
The Vernor test is flawed.47 It hinges entirely on self-serving proclama-
tions from the copyright holder. By reciting the appropriate magic words, a 
rights holder can avoid a sale regardless of the objective reality of the trans-
action. Even if you pay a one-time price for an item you get to keep forever, 
as long as the license repeats a few key phrases, no sale has occurred. The 
test also begs the question. The reason we need to decide if there’s been 
a sale is to know whether the buyer can transfer their property over the 
objection of the copyright holder. Under the court’s test, copyright holders 
can defeat the buyer’s property claim by objecting to resale and lending.  
But to an owner, those objections are irrelevant; so they don’t help us 
answer the question of ownership. Again, that’s because licenses depend on 
clear property rights; they don’t define those rights.
We think there is a better way to answer the ownership question—one 
that is more accurate, reliable, and fair. As other courts have recognized, 
the economic reality of a transaction is the best guide to deciding whether 
a sale has occurred.48 There are three considerations that offer strong indica-
tions of ownership: (1) the duration of consumer possession or access; (2) 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  77
the payment structure of the transaction; and (3) the characterization of 
the transaction communicated to the public.
Under the first factor, we follow the lead of the Court of Appeals for the 
Second Circuit, which said it would be “anomalous” to treat a user as any-
thing less than an owner when their “degree of ownership of a copy is so 
complete that he may lawfully use it and keep it forever, or if so disposed, 
throw it in the trash.” Under the second factor, someone who pays a one-
time fee is more likely to be an owner than someone whose access depends 
on ongoing payments. If you need to pay a monthly fee to access a collec-
tion of movies, for example, you are a subscriber, not an owner. Under the 
third factor, we take into account the way a transaction is presented to the 
public. If a service is clearly advertised as a subscription, for example, own-
ership is harder to argue. The hard question here is what communications 
count. Copyright holders want their license terms to be dispositive. But as 
we all know, people rarely read them. More importantly, the fine print is 
often overshadowed by the simple language used to market digital media. 
Apple, Amazon, and others implore you to “Buy Now,” “Purchase,” and 
“Own It in HD.” We think those kinds of statements are more important in 
establishing consumer expectations and should figure heavily in the deter-
mination of consumer rights.
If courts consistently thought through these considerations, they would 
reach conclusions about ownership that were fairer and more intuitive. 
More of us would own the products we buy and enjoy greater freedom to 
use and transfer them. It would also mean that rights holders would have 
a harder time configuring bespoke bundles of rights. That loss of flexibility 
could have an impact on price. Without the ability to tailor licenses, they 
argue, it will be more difficult for rights holders and retailers to tailor their 
prices. We interrogate those claims below.
Licensing and Price Discrimination
Licenses facilitate price discrimination. ProCD v. Zeidenberg illustrates this 
point well. ProCD wanted to sell its database to two different groups of 
customers at very different prices. Businesses like telemarketing companies 
were willing to pay high prices for ProCD’s database. But the average per-
son has less money to spend and less interest in a phone database. So the 
price had to be lower. If ProCD charged a high price, businesses would buy, 
but normal people wouldn’t. If it charged a low price, both would buy, 
but ProCD would be leaving money on the table since businesses would 
have paid the higher price. The solution is price discrimination. Charge 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202078  Chapter 4
businesses high prices, and charge the average user low prices. By doing so, 
ProCD can maximize its profits.
From a seller’s perspective, the ideal world would look something like 
this. Information about each potential customer’s preferences, needs, buy-
ing habits, bank account, physical condition, and emotional state would 
give the seller real-time information about exactly how much they are will-
ing to pay for a particular product. Running late? Expect higher gas prices. 
Parched after a long run? Expect to pay twice as much for that bottle of 
water. Just got paid? Phone battery about to die? Expect your Uber to cost 
twice as much. Expect those new shows you’ve been eyeing to cost a few 
dollars more. Despite the terabytes of consumer data collected in servers 
across the globe, the dream—or nightmare—of perfect price discrimination 
isn’t yet a reality. But we seem to be on our way.49 Google recently patented 
a technology that allows it to predict—leveraging the massive digital dos-
sier it has compiled over the years—how likely a customer is to buy a partic-
ular product and adjust prices accordingly.50 Not to be outdone, Facebook 
patented a technology that helps lenders discriminate based on borrowers’ 
social connections.51
But there are other, less precise ways to discriminate. Sellers can offer 
slight variations of the same product at differing prices. Bulk sales are one 
familiar example. Buyers who are price sensitive can get a year’s worth of 
ranch dressing at their local warehouse store. And those with more money 
to spend can buy a single bottle. Or think of airlines. Coach and first class 
passengers get essentially the same service—transportation from one city 
to another. But first-class passengers pay for bigger seats, better food, and 
more personal service. And airlines don’t just divide customers into coach, 
business, or first; United, for example, relies on over twenty different fare 
classes, each defined by its own sets of perks and restrictions—and each 
with its own price.
Sellers can also discriminate between different groups of consumers, 
determining prices on the basis of various demographic proxies for willing-
ness to pay. That’s what ProCD did when it divided the world into com-
mercial and noncommercial users. That’s what John Wiley tried to do when 
it divided the college textbook market into the United States and everyone 
else; what restaurants do with early bird specials; and what movie theaters 
do when they offer student discounts.
Resale can disrupt these carefully laid plans. Price discrimination depends 
on the ability to limit arbitrage—the practice of buying goods at low prices 
in one market, and selling them for more in another. If individuals can buy 
cheap copies of ProCD’s database and sell them to commercial users, ProCD 
misses out on potential revenue. That’s one reason rights holders prefer 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  79
licenses to sales. With a license, there is no exhaustion, no property rights, 
no resale, and no arbitrage. They can be sure that their preferred pricing 
scheme won’t be undermined by enterprising resellers. The question isn’t 
why sellers want to put a stop to resale markets, it’s whether we should let 
them.
Advocates of price discrimination argue that it benefits consumers, or at 
least that it can. First, price discrimination—the argument goes—can keep 
prices low by requiring wealthy buyers to subsidize more price-sensitive 
shoppers. Second, it creates incentives for product differentiation that 
increases consumer choice. We think there are good reasons to be skeptical 
of both of these theoretical upsides. We acknowledge that there are times 
when particular subsets of consumers benefit from price discrimination. 
But on the whole, it is a strategy that transfers money and control from the 
public to rights holders.
Let’s think about price first. How does price discrimination keep prices 
low? Without price discrimination—as Judge Easterbrook argued—ProCD 
could be forced to raise its prices. Instead of selling its low-cost product for 
$150, it might have to raise the price to $200 to account for lost revenue 
from higher-priced sales to commercial users. This is essentially the same 
argument John Wiley made to the Supreme Court; if it couldn’t discrimi-
nate against U.S. students through high prices, it would be forced to raise 
the prices for Thai students. These examples both show how price discrimi-
nation can help relatively poor consumers at the expense of wealthier ones. 
Assuming you support this redistribution of wealth, you might question 
whether these implicit subsidies should be entrusted to private actors or if 
instead they should be crafted through public debate and decision making.
Nor is it the case that price discrimination always favors the poor at the 
expense of the wealthy. The market for consumer credit, for example, is just 
the opposite. For the wealthy, credit is cheap and convenient. For the poor, 
it’s anything but. Credit is expensive, and subsistence credit card users are 
among the industry’s most profitable customers.52 Mortgages, home loans, 
and even groceries cost more for poor families than rich ones.53 Ultimately, 
which group benefits from price discrimination—rich or poor, domestic 
or foreign, young or old—depends on what’s best for the seller. ProPublica 
recently reported that Asian families are charged higher prices by the test 
prep company Princeton Review, for example.54 And a recent White House 
report noted that, as online intermediaries gather more information about 
us, these practices “raise the specter of ‘redlining’ in the digital economy—
the potential to discriminate against the most vulnerable classes of our soci-
ety under the guise of neutral algorithms.”55
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202080  Chapter 4
First and foremost, price discrimination is a strategy for maximizing 
the seller’s profit at the expense of buyers. Imagine a market without price 
discrimination, one in which every buyer pays the same price for a given 
product. In that market, let’s say this book costs $20. Readers who value 
it at less than $20 won’t buy it. Don’t worry, we won’t be offended. Those 
that value it at $20 or more will buy it. Let’s say you think this book is 
worth $25. When you buy it for $20, you realize a $5 surplus—the differ-
ence between your personal valuation of the book and the price you actu-
ally paid. Across the economy as a whole, that surplus is worth trillions of 
dollars to consumers.
To sellers, that surplus represents untapped revenue. The goal of price 
discrimination is to reduce the consumer surplus to zero. If you value the 
book at $25, that’s what you pay, and not a penny less. As we are divided 
up into smaller groups, prices can be more carefully tailored to match our 
willingness to pay. When that happens, the consumer surplus goes down 
and sellers come away with more of our money. As the economist Louis 
Phlips put it, “Price discrimination aims at taking the entire consumer sur-
plus away from all customers, if possible.”56 So to the extent we benefit 
from price discrimination, sellers see that fact as a bug, not a feature. Not 
surprisingly, most people are wary of price discrimination. A University of 
Pennsylvania study found consumers overwhelmingly object to price dis-
crimination, viewing it as morally wrong and legally suspect.57
That’s not to say we shouldn’t care about affordability and making prod-
ucts available to those with fewer resources. But we think the secondary mar-
kets for resale and lending that exhaustion makes possible are a better way 
to achieve that goal. Secondary markets keep prices down more efficiently, 
more reliably, and without the collateral damage of price discrimination.58
The second argument in favor of price discrimination is that it increases 
the number of options in the marketplace. Because it encourages product 
differentiation, price discrimination results in increased consumer choice. 
Think of the array of options available on a new car. Each accessory you add 
creates a slightly different product, one customized for you. And it’s not 
just big ticket items. Nike and Converse now let shoppers customize every 
square inch of their shoes.59 You can even buy M&Ms bearing the message 
or image of your choice. Custom products aside, a trip down any aisle at the 
grocery store reveals the staggering number of choices. Crest, for example, 
sells forty-one varieties of toothpaste in the United States alone.60
When we make important decisions—which house to buy or what col-
lege to attend—an ample supply of choices can be helpful. But for more 
mundane choices, an overabundance of options leaves us in a market that 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership and the Fine Print  81
is more difficult to navigate.61 The surfeit of product features, ingredients, 
sizes, and quantities—each with their own impact on price—can undermine 
our ability to draw comparisons between products and make informed deci-
sions. By increasing the cost of information, customization can make it 
harder to know whether you are paying a fair price and increases the risk of 
buyer’s remorse. Licenses are a perfect vehicle for this sort of price discrimi-
nation. They allow nearly infinite flexibility to craft whatever combination 
of rights a seller can imagine. If there’s reason to think some consumers will 
pay more for a license that lets them read their ebooks in the bathtub, it’s 
easy enough to capture that surplus. And since license terms are rarely read 
or fully understood, they reinforce the opaque nature of pricing.
We are not opposed to consumer choice. In fact, we think meaning-
ful options are crucial to the functioning of markets for digital goods. But 
there comes a point at which additional choices do more harm than good. 
For obvious and important product attributes—like whether you are buy-
ing a movie directed by Jean-Luc Godard or one starring Jean-Claude Van 
Damme—the more choices, the better. But when it comes to nearly indis-
tinguishable  variations  between  license  agreements,  additional  options 
harm the public on the whole. We aren’t suggesting a one-size-fits-all 
solution that requires everyone to own the media they consume and the 
devices they use. We do think, however, that rental and subscription mod-
els offer clear, easy to understand alternatives and considerable flexibility. 
Netflix, for example, charges one price for individual users and another for 
its family plan. And unlike licenses, rentals and subscriptions don’t result 
in ambiguity about whether a sale has occurred. As we detail in the next 
chapter, licenses create considerable uncertainty about precisely what we 
get for our money.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273327/9780262335959_cao.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20205  The “Buy Now” Lie
If you’ve read this far, you understand the potential disparity between the 
legal rights of purchasers of analog and digital goods. The owner of a hard-
cover book, for example, can lend, resell, or give away their purchase con-
sistent with age-old principles of personal property. But according to digital 
retailers and publishers, an ebook owner can’t do the same. Nonetheless, 
the market for digital goods continues to grow. What explains the apparent 
eagerness of consumers to sacrifice these economically and socially valu-
able rights?
Ordinarily, the free market sends strong signals about what consumers 
want. Those signals tell companies which products to make, how many 
to produce, and what they should cost. So we would expect the market 
demand for digital goods to accurately reflect changing preferences. If we 
are buying more digital goods, that suggests the convenience and other 
advantages of those products outweigh whatever value people assign to 
ownership.
But the signals the market sends are not always reliable. One founda-
tional assumption of market economics is that consumers make choices 
based on accurate information. But if consumers are denied valuable infor-
mation—about competing products or current prices, for example—their 
behavior in the marketplace is a less useful indicator of their preferences. 
Information is never perfect, but we have laws that are intended to guard 
against the most egregious sources of misinformation. Trademark law, for 
example, prevents the use of confusingly similar names, logos, and other 
indicators of the source of a product.1 More directly, the law prohibits false 
and deceptive advertising.2 A company can’t claim that its bottled water 
cures cancer if it doesn’t, or that its service is free if it isn’t.
Some  people—and  we  are  occasionally  among  them—prefer  digital 
goods despite a full understanding of the limited bundle of rights associ-
ated with them. But not everyone is so well informed. Only a tiny fraction 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202084  Chapter 5
actually read the fine print that spells out the details of digital transactions. 
And even if they did, most would struggle to make sense of those terms. 
Equally troublingly, those terms appear to conflict with a common-sense 
understanding of other, more prominent messages used to market digital 
goods. Words like “buy” and “own” are casually and commonly employed 
by digital retailers. And to the unwary, those words could communicate a 
set of rights that corresponds to personal property in the analog world. If 
so, digital retailers are engaged in a pervasive false advertising campaign 
that could have wide-reaching consequences for our shared understanding 
of ownership.
Mixed Signals
The digital marketplace is rife with marketing language that makes prom-
ises about ownership that are inconsistent with the text of the licenses that 
retailers insist govern these transactions. A shopper browsing digital movies 
on the Apple iTunes Store, for example, is likely to run across an ad invit-
ing them to “Own It in HD.” Unsurprisingly, Apple’s marketing materials 
do not define precisely what it means to own a movie purchased from its 
digital storefront; it leaves customers to fill in those blanks for themselves. 
People with a lifetime of experience owning tangible objects could be for-
given if they assumed that the same basic rules of personal property applied 
to iTunes purchases. But Apple’s license, despite describing those transac-
tions as “purchases” and noting that “all sales ... are final,” insists that cus-
tomers cannot “rent, lease, loan, sell, [or] distribute” the movies and music 
they acquire from iTunes.3
Or consider Amazon, which offers hundreds of millions of items for 
sale on its site, from books and CDs to treadmills and toupees. Amazon 
invites its customers to purchase each of these millions of items with the 
ubiquitous phrase “Buy Now,” or if you’ve enabled single-click shopping, 
the somewhat awkward “Buy Now with 1-Click®.” That’s true whether the 
product is a physical object or digital file. A reader shopping for an ebook 
encounters the same invitation to “Buy Now” they would see if contem-
plating a hardcover. And they would complete that transaction by clicking 
the very same button.
Despite these similarities, Amazon offers fundamentally different prod-
ucts to buyers of digital and analog goods. Those who buy hardcover books 
own their purchases; those who “buy” ebooks have a different relationship 
with their books, one that is probably unfair to characterize as ownership. 
Amazon says that relationship is defined by its terms of service. And buried 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  85
within the thousands of words of that EULA is one consistent message: you 
don’t own your ebooks; you merely license them. You have permission to 
use them in the ways Amazon permits, and that’s all. As Amazon’s terms 
explain, “[u]nless specifically indicated otherwise, you may not sell, rent, 
lease, [or] distribute ... any rights to the Kindle Content.”4 Amazon’s MP3 
store offers similar terms, albeit in a separate prolix document. Although 
Amazon customers “purchase” music, payment merely “grant[s] you a non-
exclusive, non-transferable right to use. ... Music Content ... only for your 
personal, non-commercial purposes.” And “you may not redistribute, ... 
sell, ... rent, share, lend, ... or otherwise transfer or use Purchased Music.”5
Sometimes ownership is presented as an explicit selling point of digital 
content despite obvious limitations on the rights of buyers. When pub-
lisher Image Comics announced a digital storefront for comic books, it 
touted the fact that unlike competing digital comics services, customers 
actually owned their purchases. Wired published an article with the head-
line “For the First Time, You Can Actually Own the Digital Comics You 
Buy,” reporting on the difference between the Image Comics site, which 
allows customers to download DRM-free comics to their hard drives, and 
competing services, which prohibited downloads.6 As Image’s Director of 
Business Development explained at the time, “There’s something to be said 
for the ownership factor. If readers purchase a book on ComiXology, ... that 
could be revoked. And God forbid, if ComiXology goes under or their data 
center has an earthquake all their hard drives go away—then you’ve got 
nothing.”7
Image, the third largest comic books publisher in the United States, 
should be applauded for allowing customers to store copies locally, but for 
all of the celebration of consumer ownership, its license terms aren’t much 
different from those of other digital retailers. That license provides in part: 
“You shall not share, lend, lease, rent, sell, license, sublicense, transfer, net-
work, reproduce, display, distribute, or otherwise make any Digital Comic 
available to any other person, to the extent that doing so requires making a 
copy of the Digital Comic (e.g., a copy on a hard drive, RAM, flash memory, 
a paper copy, etc.). A Digital Comic may be shared only by sharing the 
device containing the Digital Comic.”8
So in Image’s view, its customers “own” their digital comics, but are for-
bidden from doing most of the things we associate with ownership. They 
can’t lend, give away, or resell a specific comic they “own” without also 
transferring their entire comic library and an expensive piece of hardware. 
That is an understanding of ownership many people wouldn’t recognize.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202086  Chapter 5
The misuse of the language of ownership isn’t limited to efforts to per-
suade the average consumer. HeinOnline hosts a massive database of legal 
publications, including law journals, judicial opinions, statutes, and trea-
ties from around the world. Historically, it has offered these materials to 
libraries, law firms, and individuals on a subscription basis. Subscribers who 
sign into their HeinOnline accounts can access the wealth of information 
stored on its servers. In response to pressure from some subscribers, notably 
libraries, that value the comparative reliability, security, and privacy of local 
copies, HeinOnline launched its “Digital Ownership Program.” Rather than 
signing up for a remote access subscription, by “purchasing digital owner-
ship,” users can “obtain ownership rights to PDF files” delivered on a hard 
drive.9 HeinOnline does not provide a link to the terms of the Digital Own-
ership Program on its site. But after we asked for clarification, HeinOnline 
provided us with a copy. The relevant language is below:
V. PURCHASE TERMS
Customer may not: (i) sell, distribute, publicly display or in any other way exploit 
(commercially or otherwise) the Collection(s) or portions thereof, by any means, 
including, without limitation, sale, exchange, barter, transfer, assignment, or dis-
tribution, (ii) transfer, assign or sublicense any of the Customer’s rights or obli-
gations under this Agreement. ... Under the terms of this Agreement, Customer 
is authorized to make further copies of its original copy in perpetuity, as it may 
deem necessary, for purpose of preservation, refreshing, or migration, including 
migration to other formats so long as the purpose of such copying is solely for 
continued access to and/or archival retention of the Collection(s) in the manner 
permitted hereunder.
These terms make clear that HeinOnline’s definition of “ownership” is an 
exceedingly narrow one. A library that purchases one of these hard drives 
couldn’t lend it to another institution, for instance. In that sense, HeinOn-
line’s understanding of ownership is even more cramped than the one 
offered by Image Comics.
Random House tried a similar ploy when its Vice President of Library 
and Academic Sales told Library Journal, “Random House’s often repeated, 
and always consistent position is this: when libraries buy their RH, Inc. 
ebooks from authorized library wholesalers, it is our position that they own 
them.”10 We will address a range of issues facing libraries in the next chap-
ter, but it is worth pausing for a moment to consider what it means for a 
library to own a digital copy. Most publishers refuse to deal directly with 
libraries when it comes to ebooks. Instead, they contract with vendors like 
OverDrive, who provide technology platforms that allow library patrons 
to access digital books. Given that baseline, it is easy to understand why 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  87
the library community was puzzled by Random House’s claim. When Peter 
Brantley of the University of California Davis Library sought clarification, 
Random House explained that by “ownership,” it meant that libraries could 
migrate their ebook catalogs from one vendor to another. As Brantley put 
it, “That’s very nice. It’s just not ownership. It’s licensing, with benefits.”11
Contrast these claims of ownership with those made by technical pub-
lisher O’Reilly Media. When customers buy ebooks from O’Reilly they can 
“freely loan, re-sell or donate them, read them without being tracked, or 
move them to a new device without re-purchasing all of them,”12 as long as 
they don’t keep any copies of their books after lending or reselling them.13 
That’s a notion of ownership that looks familiar to most of us.
Publishers and retailers understand the visceral appeal of the language of 
ownership. And they have succeeded in using that appeal to peddle digital 
products. But it remains to be seen whether we are actually getting what 
we bargained for.
The False and Deceptive Advertising Frameworks
Two distinct but overlapping bodies of federal law regulate the accuracy of 
claims used to market consumer products.14 The Lanham Act—primarily 
the source of federal trademark protection—also prohibits the use of “any 
... false or misleading representation of fact ... in commercial advertising or 
promotion [that] misrepresents the nature, characteristics, qualities, or geo-
graphic origin” of goods or services.15 In addition, the Federal Trade Com-
mission (FTC) is empowered by Congress to prevent the use of “unfair or 
deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce.”16 Both of these sources 
of law could be used to address potential mismatches between license terms 
and advertising claims. As an FTC official explained in 2009, “A company’s 
marketing materials must be consistent with the nature of the product being 
offered. It’s not enough to disclose the information only in a fine print of a 
lengthy online user agreement. ... If your advertising giveth and your EULA 
taketh away don’t be surprised if the FTC comes calling.”17
The standards for false and deceptive advertising under the Lanham and 
FTC Acts track each other fairly closely. We will discuss them in greater 
detail shortly. But first, we should highlight one important difference 
between these two legal regimes that relates to what lawyers call standing—
the right to pursue your claim in court.
The Lanham Act creates a civil cause of action. That means a party who 
believes it was injured by false advertising can bring a suit in federal court 
against the advertiser. On its face, the statute creates broad standing. It 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202088  Chapter 5
allows “any person who believes that he or she is or is likely to be damaged 
by such act” to sue for damages.18 Despite this inclusive language, courts 
have limited standing to competitors or others with a commercial inter-
est implicated by the allegedly false statements.19 Consumers, even though 
they are most directly harmed by false claims about the products they buy, 
are barred from challenging them under the Lanham Act.20
Courts—understandably  concerned  about  opening  the  floodgates  of 
litigation to every person upset that their toothpaste was not in fact “new 
and improved”—argue that competitors are in a better position to vindicate 
consumer interests than consumers themselves.21 Competitors, these courts 
say, have greater resources and financial incentives to target false advertis-
ing. So we should expect them to vigorously pursue such claims.
Sometimes that is true, but not always. Companies make the expensive 
decision to litigate only if they think it will give them a competitive advan-
tage. Suppose your competitor launches a highly successful, but arguably 
false, advertising campaign. You worry that you are losing sales because this 
competitor is overstating the benefits of their product. You could spend 
millions of dollars in legal fees in the hope that in a year or two a court will 
put a stop to the campaign and perhaps award you monetary damages. Or 
you could just adopt the same misleading tactic as your competitor. The 
incentive to adopt dubious advertising language grows as it becomes more 
widespread.
Of course, there are reasons to suspect individuals would be reluctant to 
challenge false advertising too. Aside from the most expensive purchases, 
the harm to a single person from a false ad is just too small to justify the 
time and expense of a court case. Class action lawsuits could solve that 
problem by bundling together the claims of similarly situated consumers in 
a single case. But without consumer standing, that option remains off the 
table as a matter of federal law. Consumers could sue under false and decep-
tive advertising statutes in various states. But those claims face their own 
set of hurdles. Because those laws vary in subtle but sometimes significant 
ways, class actions may be limited to consumers within a particular state. In 
addition, some retailers like Amazon include arbitration provisions in their 
terms that may well preclude litigation altogether.22
That’s where the FTC’s deception authority steps in. Section 5 of the FTC 
Act does not create a private right of action for consumers or competitors; 
it leaves enforcement entirely to the FTC.23 Unlike competitors, the FTC is 
tasked with defending the public interest.24 So we might expect it to serve 
as a more reliable proxy for consumer interests. But given its broad mandate 
and limited resources, the FTC has to carefully prioritize its enforcement 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  89
efforts. So while it can’t—and shouldn’t—take on every questionable ad, 
the FTC can use its discretion to target deception that causes significant 
harm to buyers.
Whether it’s a false advertising claim brought by a competitor or a 
deceptive practice case brought by the FTC, the central questions remain 
the same. In order to establish that an ad is false or deceptive, you must 
prove that it is misleading—that it is likely to convey a message that is 
not true. You must also prove that the message conveyed is material—that 
consumers would have behaved differently had they not been misled. So 
for example, a product advertised to U.S. customers as “Made in Turkmeni-
stan” would be misleading if the product was actually produced in Tajiki-
stan. But unless shoppers prefer products from Turkmenistan, that claim 
would be immaterial.
Misleading claims are not limited to express statements like “Made in 
Turkmenistan.” They can be implied as well. An ad that claims a supple-
ment will “boost your immune system” may not expressly promise to 
prevent the common cold, but it implies as much. Even omissions can be 
misleading. A television commercial for mail-order furniture, for example, 
would be misleading if it failed to disclose that the sofa depicted was child-
sized. While express claims are clear on their face and require no additional 
proof of falsity, the meaning of implied claims and omissions are more 
ambiguous. In those cases, courts and the FTC consider other sorts of evi-
dence including consumer testimony and surveys to decide whether an ad 
is likely to mislead.
How many consumers have to come away with an incorrect impression 
before an ad is considered false or deceptive? There is no precise answer to 
that question. Some courts talk about a “statistically significant”25 or “not 
insubstantial”26 portion of the intended audience. Others ask whether a 
“significant minority of consumers”27 was misled. It’s difficult to pin down 
an exact percentage, but prior cases suggest that a small number like 3 per-
cent or 7.5 percent is below the legal threshold.28 But courts have held that 
slightly higher rates like 10 , 15 , or 20 percent are enough to establish a 
likelihood of deception.29
The willingness of courts to accept survey evidence that demonstrates an 
ad deceives only a relatively small minority acknowledges that advertise-
ments are often susceptible to more than one reasonable interpretation.30 
But where one of those interpretations is misleading, the advertiser is liable. 
It also reflects the fact that false advertising law is not intended to protect 
only the savvy or the skeptical. Its protections extend broadly to the public, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202090  Chapter 5
“that vast multitude which includes the ignorant, the unthinking and the 
credulous.”31
Once we know people are being misled, the question turns to whether 
or not those inaccuracies are material to their choices. Would they have 
behaved differently had they known the truth?32 Perhaps they would have 
refused to buy the product, would have paid less for it, or would have 
preferred an alternative. Materiality can be presumed for express claims, 
implied claims intended by the seller, or claims that relate to the health and 
safety, central characteristics, purpose, performance, or cost of a product.33 
Of course people don’t want products that are unsafe, don’t perform as 
expected, or don’t work for their intended purpose. For misleading claims 
that fall outside of these categories, courts and the FTC consider consumer 
testimony and surveys, among other evidence.
What “Buy Now” Means to Digital Consumers
Do the marketing efforts of digital retailers meet the definitions of false 
or  deceptive  advertising?  To  answer  that  question,  Aaron  Perzanowski 
and Chris Jay Hoofnagle conducted a first-of-its-kind study to gauge how 
consumers understand the phrase “Buy Now” as used by major digital  
retailers.34
This study surveyed nearly 1,300 likely buyers of digital books, music, 
and movies. The sample was representative of the U.S. population in terms 
of sex, age, and income.35 Respondents were asked a series of questions 
about their media purchasing habits and, depending on their responses, 
were sorted into one of three groups: ebook shoppers, digital music shop-
pers, and digital movie shoppers. In order to better replicate real-world con-
ditions, they were next presented with a number of popular media titles 
and asked to select the one that most appealed to them.
At this point respondents viewed mock webpages featuring the book, 
album, or movie they chose. An example is included in figure 5.1. Media-
Shop—the fictional online retail site respondents viewed—was created for 
the purposes of the study. Its design elements—the layout, buttons, product 
photos, and descriptions—would be familiar to any online shopper. Aside 
from its name, color scheme, and perhaps reduced visual clutter, MediaShop 
is indistinguishable from Amazon, iTunes, Target, or Walmart. Each respon-
dent was presented one of four variations of the product page. One group 
saw the digital good they chose accompanied by a “Buy Now” button; a 
second group saw the digital good with a button that read “License Now”; 
a third group saw the digital good with a “short notice,” to be described in 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  91
Figure 5.1
An example of a MediaShop product page
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202092  Chapter 5
more detail; and the rest saw a physical good—a paperback, CD, or Blu-ray 
disc—with a “Buy Now” button.
Respondents were asked to review the MediaShop page as they normally 
would before making a purchase online. Notably, each digital product page 
included a link to MediaShop’s Terms of Use.36 Of the 956 respondents who 
viewed those pages, only 14 clicked the link to investigate the fine print. 
That figure—less than 1.5 percent—is consistent with other research that 
demonstrates how infrequently online consumers review terms.37
After completing their fictional transaction, respondents were presented 
a series of questions about what rights, if any, they obtained after paying for 
the product. As you can see in figure 5.2, lots of respondents believed that 
when they clicked “Buy Now” to acquire ebooks, MP3s, and digital mov-
ies, they were acquiring rights that we associate with ownership of physi-
cal goods. Survey respondents overwhelmingly believed that when they 
clicked “Buy Now” they owned the product that they purchased. Because 
ownership is a legal conclusion—one that is contested in the digital econ-
omy—it is hard to say with any certainty whether consumers are right or 
wrong when they express their beliefs about ownership. But on the whole, 
those beliefs seem to belie the claim often made by rights holders and retail-
ers that people understand perfectly well that when they click “Buy Now” 
what they are buying is a license.38 Putting aside the conceptual awkward-
ness of “buying a license,” the survey data suggest that for a substantial 
number of consumers, the notion of buying entails a set of rights that are 
independent of any license terms.
100
86 8789 88
83 84
81 81
75 78
50
50
48
39 38
35
33 32
30
25
26
23
1717
12 12
9
0
Own Keep Device Lend Gift Will Resell Copy
ebook MP3 Digital movie
Figure 5.2
Percentage of respondents who believe the “Buy Now” button confers rights
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  93
For nearly nine out of ten respondents, “Buy Now” communicated that 
they were entitled to keep their digital purchase for as long as they wanted. 
That’s typically the case with the physical media we buy. Once you pay 
for your hardcover book or your vinyl record, it is yours until you decide 
to part with it, barring theft or disaster. But as both a practical and legal 
matter, the same isn’t true of the digital goods you buy. In chapter 1, we 
outlined some of the many ways buyers can be denied access to their digital 
purchases. Your retailer might go out of business or decide to shut down its 
servers as a cost-cutting measure. You might find your account wiped clean 
for violating the terms of service. You might wake up to find your device 
has been remotely deleted like the Amazon customers who thought they’d 
purchased 1984. You might be denied access to ebooks you purchased 
months ago, like some Barnes and Noble customers, because your credit 
card recently expired.39 Not only can your purchases be effectively repos-
sessed after you pay for them, but risk-of-loss and termination provisions 
common in license agreements insulate retailers from any legal liability for 
denying you access to your purchases.40
An almost equally large majority of respondents believed that when they 
bought digital goods, they could enjoy them on the device of their choice, 
whether it be a laptop, smartphone, tablet, or dedicated reader or player. 
Assessing the accuracy of this belief is a challenge because of the variety of 
devices, formats, and business models in the marketplace. Some retailers 
have embraced the diversity of the digital ecosystem. Amazon, for example, 
supports a wide range of devices for digital media, from its own Kindle line 
to Apple iOS and Android devices, even including the latest Nook from 
competitor Barnes and Noble.41 Amazon sees the ability to read ebooks on a 
buyer’s device of choice as a selling point. Its choice to sell music in the de 
facto standard MP3 format paints a similar picture.
But other retailers have taken a decidedly more closed approach to device 
compatibility. Apple’s iBooks can only be read on Apple devices. The same 
is true for iTunes music and movies. Through a combination of license 
terms, proprietary file formats, and DRM, Apple has inextricably tied the 
media it sells to its own hardware. In part, that’s a reflection of Apple’s 
longstanding obsession with carefully controlling end users’ experience of 
its products. But it’s also a function of the differing business philosophies 
of Apple and Amazon. Amazon works hard to keep prices low to attract an 
ever-larger customer base. It sells Kindle eReaders and tablets at break-even 
prices and may actually lose money on each sale.42 But it hopes to profit 
in the long run by driving traffic to its site. Apple—despite selling billions 
of dollars’ worth of apps, movies, and music—is in the hardware business. 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202094  Chapter 5
And its profit margin on devices like the iPhone and iPad are as high as 69 
percent, leading to quarterly profits of over $10 billion.43 By ensuring that 
its customers can’t play their media if they switch to a competing device, 
Apple keeps those profits coming.
Ultimately, whether buyers are correct in their belief about device com-
patibility depends on choices made by retailers, rather than their own legal 
rights. And in any case, that belief is often mistaken as a practical matter. In 
the MediaShop study, for example, the license limited respondents to the 
use of “Supported Devices.” Only a handful knew that since the vast major-
ity didn’t read the license terms.
Lending is a widely recognized right of property owners. Book lending 
as a cultural practice predates the United States by several hundred years. 
And people have been lending music and movies as long as they have been 
available for sale. The same is true for gift giving. So it’s hardly surprising 
that more than 40 percent of survey respondents believed they could lend 
and give away their digital purchases to friends and family. But it’s stan-
dard practice for license terms to forbid such transfers. The Amazon Instant 
Video and MP3 stores, Apple iTunes, Google Play, Sony PlayStation Net-
work, Microsoft Xbox Live, and countless smaller digital retailers explicitly 
bar consumers from lending, renting, giving away, or otherwise transferring 
their purchases.
Frustrated by the inability to make expected uses of their purchases, 
customers have pressured some retailers to liberalize their policies around 
lending and shared use. The Kindle and Nook stores both offer restricted 
lending programs. If publishers opt in, consumers can lend an ebook, one 
time only, for fourteen days. Of course, you can lend your hardcover books 
willy-nilly, whether the publisher likes it or not. Similarly, Apple’s Family 
Sharing program allows digital media purchases to be shared among up to 
six accounts, provided they all share the same credit card information.44 
And while that might make it easier to ensure that the episode of Peg + Cat 
you bought on your laptop shows up on your kid’s iPad, it’s not the same 
as ownership.
Nearly 30 percent of respondents believed they could leave their ebooks, 
MP3s, and digital movies to loved ones in their wills. We’ve grown accus-
tomed to inheriting physical media—a father’s library or a grandmother’s 
collection of LPs. And for many people, that tradition, or at least the expec-
tation of it, survived the shift to digital copies. Locally stored copies can 
be transferred through a will easily enough: “I hereby leave my Kindle to 
my daughter.” But tying a digital media collection to a single device is an 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  95
impractical and incomplete solution. What happens when that device 
breaks? Or when the movie collection and music library on a single device 
is left to two people? And what about the cloud-based purchases that aren’t 
stored locally at all?
Some early efforts to address these sorts of complications show prom-
ise. First, we’ve seen providers of web services developing tools to ease the 
transfer of accounts after the death of a user. Google’s Inactive Account 
Manager and Facebook’s Legacy Contact both allow users to designate a 
digital heir to take over their account should they meet an untimely end.45 
So far, digital media stores haven’t rolled out similar tools. But it isn’t hard 
to imagine them doing so in the future.
Second, lawmakers have taken some tentative steps to deal with the 
pressing problem of aging baby boomers with active online lives. Dela-
ware became the first state to enact the Fiduciary Access to Digital Assets 
Act, a model law developed by the Uniform Law Commission.46 That law 
gives heirs and other beneficiaries of an estate the power to control digi-
tal accounts and assets—including text, audio, video, and software—and 
to request transfers or copies of those assets.47 This act, which has been 
introduced in a number of states, provides the first legal foothold for those 
seeking to control the disposition of their digital media collections posthu-
mously. But the act contains a crucial limitation. Control over digital assets 
is limited “to the extent permitted under ... any end user license agree-
ment.”48 In other words, if a license forbids this sort of transfer, your digital 
purchases die with you. For the time being at least, people who believe 
that “Buy Now” allows them to control their digital assets after death are 
mistaken.
Finally, we turn to the question of resale. Used booksellers have operated 
in the United States for centuries. Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson 
built their personal libraries in part by buying used books. And resale mar-
kets for records, CDs, videotapes, and DVDs—though not always embraced 
by copyright holders—have been fixtures of online and offline shopping 
for decades. But at this point, you don’t need us to tell you that resale is 
nearly uniformly barred by digital retailer license agreements.
Perhaps because of the inherently commercial nature of resale, fewer 
respondents believed that “Buy Now” gives them a right to resell later. Of 
the questions surveyed, resale was the only one that did not result in a 
rate of deception well above the legal threshold. Nonetheless, the number 
who thought they acquired resale rights—12 percent for books and 17 per-
cent for music and movies—makes a more than plausible case that a “not 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202096  Chapter 5
insubstantial” minority of consumers is likely to be misled.49 Taken as a 
whole, this study suggests that when it comes to the rights we associate 
with ownership, the “Buy Now” button is a lie.
But it isn’t enough to prove that the “Buy Now” button misleads con-
sumers. The misinformation it communicates also has to be material to 
consumer purchasing decisions. If buyers wouldn’t behave differently if 
they knew the truth, then they haven’t been harmed by the deception. So 
the MediaShop study also gathered data on materiality. It did so in a few 
ways. First, it asked respondents to state their preferences when it came to 
the ability to lend, resell, and use their device of choice. Figure 5.3 illus-
trates the percentage of “Buy Now” respondents who strongly or somewhat 
preferred media purchases that allowed for those behaviors.50
There  are  two  noteworthy  findings  here.  First,  a  sizable  portion  of 
respondents—in many cases a majority—prefers to purchase goods that 
allow them to exercise rights we associate with ownership. Second, those 
preferences are remarkably stable across analog and digital goods. So con-
sumer preferences for ebooks are very similar to their preferences for physi-
cal books. The same is true for MP3s and CDs, and for digital movies and 
Blu-ray discs. These rights remain just as important to buyers in the digital 
market as they have been in the physical one.
The survey also asked whether respondents would be willing to pay 
more for digital goods that they could lend, resell, or use on their device of 
100
92
87
85
82
75 79 78
58 59
55
50 53 52
48 48
42
40 39
36 37
25
0
ebook Book MP3 CD Movie Blu-ray
Lend Resell Device
Figure 5.3
Percentage of respondents who express a strong or moderate preference for rights
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  97
choice. Most consumers were willing to pay more for at least one of those 
rights. The median price increase was $1, but the average was nearly $11 
above the current Amazon prices. For the individual rights, respondents 
were willing to pay an average of $3.82 more for the right to lend, $3.24 
for the right to resell, and $3.24 for the right to use media on their device 
of choice. Taken together, this evidence suggests that rights associated with 
personal property ownership influence the price of digital media goods. 
Roughly half of the respondents were willing to pay more for those rights. 
Since many respondents who expressed strong preferences for rights were 
unwilling to pay more for them, it is fair to conclude that some expect 
those rights to be part of the bargain under existing prices.51 That informa-
tion should interest retailers and rights holders.
Of equal interest, respondents were asked if they would be more likely 
to access digital books, music, and movies through subscription services—
rather than purchasing them outright—if they couldn’t lend, resell, or use 
their preferred device. Of the 94 percent of respondents who were familiar 
with subscription streaming services, more than half were more likely to 
stream if they could not lend their purchases. When it came to resale, 43 
percent were more likely to stream. And 63 percent of respondents reported 
being more likely to stream if they couldn’t use their purchases on their 
device of choice. For each of these rights, movie viewers were particularly 
susceptible to the draw of streaming services.
Fewer respondents—42 percent—had used or were familiar with the 
Pirate Bay and BitTorrent, two services associated with high volumes of 
infringing downloads. But among that group, 32 percent were more likely 
to download files without paying in the absence of a right to lend; 31 per-
cent in the absence of a right to resell; and 40 percent in the absence of 
a right to use their device of choice. This suggests that the limited rights 
consumers acquire when they “Buy Now” contribute to the infringement 
of copyrighted works.
This survey evidence establishes that the “Buy Now” button misleads 
a considerable number of consumers about the legal rights they acquire 
when they spend money on digital goods. It also demonstrates that these 
misconceptions about their legal rights are material; people would behave 
differently if they knew that they didn’t own their digital purchases. Apply-
ing the basic rules of false and deceptive advertising, the “Buy Now” button 
looks like an unlawful effort to exploit misinformation. The next question 
is: What can be done about it?
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202098  Chapter 5
Coming Clean
The fact that a sizable number of consumers think they get a particular set 
of rights when they click the “Buy Now” button is not in itself an argument 
for granting them those rights. Consumer expectations are fickle things. 
They change over time and depending on context. They are manipulable. 
Rights—property, constitutional, or human—need a firmer foundation. In 
this chapter, we aren’t arguing that the falsity of the “Buy Now” button 
helps us determine what rights people should have in digital purchases. 
Our goal here is more modest. It’s to point out that the usual marketplace 
signals that tell us what consumers value have failed. They’ve failed because 
people incorrectly believe that they can do things with their digital goods 
that they can’t. So the choice to embrace digital media does not prove, as 
some would conclude, that we’ve moved on as a society from the notions 
of ownership, lending, gifting, and reselling that have helped define our 
relationships with our property and each other for centuries.
No doubt, changes in the way we acquire, use, and share goods are under-
way. And they will have a profound effect on our culture. But those changes 
should take place in the open. Individuals should be fully aware so they 
can make thoughtful, deliberate choices. That only happens if they have 
accurate information. In some cases they do. Netflix and Spotify subscribers 
understand that once they stop paying their monthly fees, the movies in 
their queue and the music in their playlists go away. But we can’t say the 
same for a la carte digital purchases.
That’s where false and deceptive advertising law should come into play. 
There are two ways digital retailers could avoid deceiving their customers 
going forward. First, they could change the terms of their licenses to avoid 
misunderstandings that harm buyers. Instead of denying them economi-
cally valuable rights to lend, resell, and give away their purchases, licen-
sors could grant them. Of course, retailers would need to negotiate with 
the copyright holders whose works they sell before making such a drastic 
change to their business models. Some retailers have taken tentative steps 
in this direction. We discuss licensed resale and lending solutions in greater 
detail in chapter 10, but for now we will just note that they strike us as both 
unlikely and problematic.
The other way to avoid deception is to change the way retailers talk 
about digital media transactions. If “Buy Now” fails to convey the limited 
set of rights defined by licenses, maybe we need a new button. Apple paid 
nearly $100 million to settle allegations made by the FTC that the company 
failed to adequately disclose that free apps targeted at children could be 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  99
used to make in-app purchases. In response, Apple eliminated the “Free” 
button for those apps in favor of the less misleading “Get.”52 In theory, the 
same could be done with “Buy Now.”
The MediaShop survey tested two alternatives to see if either could 
reduce consumer misinformation. As described earlier, some respondents 
were shown product pages that used the phrase “License Now” instead of 
“Buy Now.” In theory, the word “license” would put consumers on alert 
that something was different about this transaction. But under the “License 
Now” formulation, respondents failed to consistently reduce mispercep-
tions of their rights.
A more promising approach relies on what are called short notices. The 
theory behind a short notice is that if retailers disclose the salient facts about 
a transaction in a clear, simple way, people are more likely to understand 
that information. So even though we don’t read licenses, short notices can 
not only inform us, but also help us make better decisions. From online 
privacy policies to HIPAA disclosures and credit solicitations, layered notice 
has been encouraged or required as a way to increase consumer comprehen-
sion of complex agreements or legal regimes.53
Another group of respondents in the MediaShop survey saw a digital 
product page that, instead of the “Buy Now” button, included a short 
notice that described their rights in clear, simple terms and using intui-
tive iconography. Examples are included in figure 5.4. For an ebook, for 
example, respondents saw a thumbs-up symbol informing them that they 
had the right to: download the ebook to approved devices, read the ebook 
Figure 5.4
Examples of MediaShop short notices
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020100  Chapter 5
on approved devices, and keep the ebook subject to the terms of use. A 
thumbs-down symbol was followed by text explaining that respondents 
did not have the rights to: resell the ebook, lend the ebook, give away or 
otherwise transfer the ebook, or read it on unapproved devices.
After viewing the short notice just one time, respondents were then asked 
the same questions about the rights they acquire after paying for a digital 
product. As figure 5.5 reveals, respondents demonstrated reduced rates of 
misconception under the short notice condition. Affirmative responses to 
the ownership question dropped significantly for all three media types. 
And yes answers to the lending and resale questions were cut by as much 
as half for ebooks and MP3s. When asked if they could leave their digital 
goods in their wills, ebook shoppers who saw the short notice were half as 
likely as their “Buy Now” counterparts to answer yes, a drop from 26 to 13 
percent. Although outside of the range of statistical significance, MP3s saw 
an 11 percent drop. Likewise, when respondents were asked about the right 
to give away their digital media, there was a 10 percent drop for ebooks and 
a 14 percent decrease for MP3s.
The accuracy of respondents’ beliefs was scored on a seven-point scale, 
with each correct response worth one point. Overall, the average score for 
all respondents was 3.1, with a median score of 3. Predictably, respondents 
who viewed physical media sold using the “Buy Now” button scored high-
est. Their mean score was 4.7 with a median of 5. Among respondents who 
shopped for digital goods, those who viewed the short notice performed 
100
8684 85
82 82
75 77
65
6363
50
35 3636
31
25 27 28 29
21
17
13 14
6 6 4 7
0
Own Keep Device Lend Gift Will  Resell Copy
ebook MP3 Digital movie
Figure 5.5
Percentage of respondents who believe the short notice confers rights
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The “Buy Now” Lie  101
the best, with a mean of 3.0 and a median of 3. Those who viewed the “Buy 
Now” and “License Now” buttons scored considerably lower. The mean for 
“Buy Now” respondents was 2.45, with a median of 2. For “License Now” 
respondents, the mean was 2.27, with a median of 2. Compared to these 
two buttons, the short notice significantly improved how well respondents 
understood their rights after a single exposure. 
Although the short notices were not perfectly or uniformly effective, 
they are a promising tool for preventing the kind of consumer deception 
that appears to be widespread in today’s digital marketplace. Regulators 
should take a serious look at the efficacy of short notices and consider pres-
suring or requiring digital retailers to adopt them.
But more accurate disclosures are not a panacea. As valuable as accurate 
information about the nature of digital transactions may be, in chapter 6 
we demonstrate that even highly sophisticated and informed digital media 
shoppers cannot avoid the constraints that law, licenses, and technology 
impose.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273328/9780262335959_cav.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20206  The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries
In 1731, Benjamin Franklin and a group of his colleagues founded the 
Library Company of Philadelphia, what many believe to be the first pub-
lic library in America and perhaps even the world.1 Any member of the 
public could join the Company by buying “shares” that allowed one to 
use the library space and borrow any library book as often as it was avail-
able. Money from the sale of shares went toward the purchase of additional 
books for shareholders to enjoy.
Today, such a model of sharing is well-accepted practice. There are over 
nine thousand public libraries in the United States alone in addition to 
university and private libraries. For decades and in some cases centuries, 
these institutions have purchased books in order to allow their members 
and patrons to browse and borrow them. For many, the library-lending 
model is a hallmark achievement for education and public access to knowl-
edge. Libraries function as archives of our cultural heritage, accessible 
spaces where communities gather and learn, and curators of specialized 
collections.
Legally and historically, the practice of library lending has depended 
heavily on the exhaustion principle embedded in personal property owner-
ship. When a library buys a book, it exhausts the copyright owner’s interest 
in that particular copy. The library can subsequently lend it out sequen-
tially to any number of patrons for as long as it likes, even to other libraries 
through processes such as an interlibrary loan. It can also repair the book, 
make a small number of archival copies, and resell or donate the book 
at any time—all without needing to ask permission or pay the copyright 
owner additional money. Simply put, once the library buys the book, it 
owns the book, which allows it to distribute or dispose of that copy accord-
ing to its own communal values, practices, and ethics—even if they diverge 
from those of the publishers. The same applies to videos, music, and most 
other forms of physical media that libraries acquire.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020104  Chapter 6
As  we  have  noted,  this  model  enables  numerous  benefits—privacy, 
simplicity, community, and discovery of new interests and areas of study. 
For example, librarians have for decades held to a strict ethical code that 
includes protecting patron privacy. We see this not only in the American 
Library Association code of ethics, but also enshrined in state laws, and in 
various political conflicts, where librarians have spoken out against govern-
ment requests for patron records.2 This level of commitment has served as 
a model, both ethically and legally, for other media privacy laws, such as 
the Video Privacy Protection Act and the California Reader Privacy Act. As 
Neil Richards notes in his book Intellectual Privacy, such protections are fun-
damental to both intellectual and academic freedom, among other demo-
cratic values.3
Even the notion of browsing information—something we now apply 
to websites or social media profiles—derives much of its cultural mean-
ing from the way in which libraries have presented books in open stacks, 
free  for  all  to  peruse  without  prepayment,  self-identification,  or  tech-
nological constraint.4 Owning those books provides the basis for these 
freedoms and the institutional autonomy that libraries provide to their  
patrons.
Yet there is an undeniable tension between such property rights in 
physical media and intellectual property rights in the underlying works. 
Copyright owners have often cringed at the book-lending model, imag-
ining that even under the sequential one-copy-per-patron constraints of 
analog media, libraries would cannibalize their sales if too many patrons 
could simply borrow a book, album, or movie instead of buying a copy for 
themselves.5
A fascinating example of this fearfulness appears in Ted Striphas’s book 
The Late Age of Print. Striphas recounts how in 1931, a group of book pub-
lishers hired PR pioneer Edward Bernays—the “father of spin”—to fight 
against used “dollar books” and the general practice of book lending. Ber-
nays decided to run a contest to “look for a pejorative word for the book 
borrower, the wretch who raised hell with book sales and deprived authors 
of earned royalties.” The contest generated an impressive list of verbal 
assaults on those who would dare to lend or receive a book without pay-
ing for the privilege to do so. Suggested names included “book weevil,” 
“greader,” “libracide,” “booklooter,” “bookbum,” “culture vulture,” “book-
bummer,” “bookaneer,” “biblioacquisiac,” and “book buzzard,” with the 
winning entry being “booksneak.”6 In the digital era, borrowing can be 
easier than ever. It doesn’t even require a trip to your local library, if you can 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  105
check out books from your e-reader. So the idea of frictionless digital book 
lending has some publishers absolutely terrified.7
Yet there is little doubt that digital lending and ebooks are critical to the 
future of libraries. Every year, ebook acquisitions continue to rise. For exam-
ple, from 2010 to 2011, academic libraries increased their total ebook hold-
ings from 158.7 million to 252.6 million.8 In 2012, the American Library 
Association reported that 76 percent of public libraries offered free access to 
ebooks to library patrons—up over 20 percent since 2009.9 A recent Price-
waterhouseCoopers study suggests that the percentage of ebooks sold in 
the United States and Great Britain will surpass that of print media (includ-
ing audiobooks) by 2018.10 Library spending on children’s, juvenile, and 
young adult ebooks in 2014 grew by 48 percent over 2013.11 And according 
to the CEO of OverDrive, Inc., one of the dominant U.S. ebook providers, 
“Ninety-three percent of children between the ages of two and thirteen 
are reading or being read ebooks at least once per week.”12 While analog 
books don’t appear to be disappearing anytime soon, ebooks are quickly 
becoming a centerpiece of what patrons want from their library’s digital 
collection.13
So why does this matter? Won’t libraries simply lend ebooks the same 
way they lend physical books now? Unfortunately, the answer is unclear 
because of differences in the distribution schema for analog and digital. 
First, as we’ve already discussed, borrowing digital books can result in the 
creation of additional copies on the computers, phones, or other devices 
patrons use to read them.14 These extra copies arguably infringe on the 
copyright owner’s exclusive right of reproduction, unless they fall under 
an exception or limitation, such as the exhaustion principle or the fair use 
doctrine. Second, because ebook sales are largely modeled on software sales, 
they often come with complex licenses that muddy the waters around own-
ership. Since libraries don’t “own” the ebooks they buy in the same way as 
their physical book holdings, they can’t rely on the simple rules of exhaus-
tion to actuate large-scale lending on their own terms. While a few ebook 
publishers have allowed libraries to retain traditional ownership rights in 
ebooks, most publisher ebook licenses now attempt to dictate the precise 
terms under which libraries make works available to their patrons.
If this world view holds, then the shift to ebooks will change many 
fundamental functions within libraries—from acquisition and lending to 
archiving and fundraising. And it will have a profound effect on the ben-
efits that ownership and exhaustion have historically provided, including 
privacy, simplicity, preservation, and community.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020106  Chapter 6
Fabricating Friction
Most libraries believe in broad public access to their holdings. However, 
with ebooks, the introduction of licensing models rather than sales has 
complicated, and some would say undermined, the library’s mission. On 
the one hand, no one disputes that access to ebooks increases access to cul-
tural heritage and scientific knowledge. On the other hand, ebook licenses 
often incorporate artificial restrictions. Publishers may insist on these pro-
visions in order to introduce artificial friction between libraries and their 
patrons, to keep readers from becoming digital “booksneaks” and using 
libraries as a substitute for purchasing traditional and digital books.
There is no shortage of examples of this artificial friction. Publishers 
often limit the availability of titles by withholding them from circula-
tion throughout a given year. They impose distribution delays by enforc-
ing waiting periods between patron loan requests and downloads. They 
restrict lending geographically by deciding where a customer can borrow a 
book and even where they can read it. They cap the number of books each 
patron and each library can borrow and lend. And they charge libraries 
based on the number of times a book is lent instead of on a per-title basis. 
None of these limitations on libraries and their patrons exist for analog 
books. Library ownership of the books exhausts any attempt by publishers 
to assert such control. Yet ebook publishers use licensing and other tech-
nological constraints to attempt to wrestle back control over the world of 
digital library lending. And while there is certainly an appeal for libraries, 
who often suffer from severely constrained budgets, to embrace a more “on 
demand” and single-serving book acquisition business model, these prac-
tices when taken together raise real questions about the long-term impact 
they will have on library collections.
At first blush, such artificial friction may seem like an equitable balancing 
of intellectual property rights with digital media ownership. Even though 
such friction is unenforceable as a matter of copyright law for analog media 
because of exhaustion, those inefficiencies do attempt to simulate various 
market effects that would, in theory, reduce the impact of library lending of 
ebooks on publisher sales. The more friction patrons encounter, the more 
likely they will pay for the ebook instead of borrowing it from their local 
library for free.
Yet much like artificial gravity, there is a sense that such systems are a 
cheat of sorts. Rather than adapting to the new digital environment, these 
tactics seek to imperfectly impose restraints that would not naturally exist 
but for copyright holder concerns. Why shouldn’t public libraries struggling 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  107
under ever-increasing financial constraints be allowed to capitalize on the 
benefits of digital copying, especially when publishers benefit from the 
decreased costs of digital production and distribution.
From a purely economic perspective, artificial friction may well alleviate 
the concerns of the media industries and even save libraries money if the 
pricing is fair. Yet copyright law was never designed solely to benefit private 
market actors. Instead, as a constitutional matter, U.S. copyright law was 
intended to use private market incentives in ways that ultimately benefit-
ted the public at large, not exclusively or even primarily copyright hold-
ers. Thus, as enamored as some of the founders might have been with the 
romantic ideal of authors and inventors, it was ultimately public access to 
knowledge and the resulting “progress of science and the useful arts” that 
was the true metric of IP’s success.
A library’s ownership of its media—books, music, movies, newspapers, 
photographs, or software—vastly increases public access in ways that the 
private market alone cannot.15 This is true for both analog and digital 
media. The more friction one puts between the public and library holdings, 
the fewer patrons have access to those holdings.
Of course, copyright owners argue that unless they profit sufficiently, 
they won’t invest in the production of new works, which would result in the 
public having nothing to access. This well may be true at some point, but 
the exhaustion principle guarantees copyright owners at least one purchase 
per copy already—thus fulfilling some part of copyright’s bargain between 
the public and the author. But what if this isn’t enough in the digital age? 
As the Copyright Office asserted in a special report on “digital first sale” in 
2001, “the potential harm to the market and increased risk of infringement 
that would result from [a digital exhaustion rule] could substantially reduce 
the incentive to create.”16 While it is true that digital copies lack both the 
friction of physical ones—in other words, the time and energy it takes to 
transfer a copy from one person or institution to another—and the same 
decay rate, there is still no question that initial digital sales are providing 
substantial compensation to copyright owners with significantly reduced 
costs for production, distribution, and inventory. Allowing transfers of 
rivalrous digital rights, consistent with the exhaustion principle, could pro-
vide much of the friction of physical books. The key is finding systems 
that continue to balance these objectives for digital works in the way that 
exhaustion has done historically.
Moreover, copyright has always coexisted with individuals and institu-
tions owning copies as personal property. The idea that personal property 
rights in copies should always be subservient to copyright interests presents 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020108  Chapter 6
a dangerous precedent for property rights in general. A shift from balancing 
copyright ownership with library media ownership to one where control is 
entirely within the hands and licensing terms of copyright owners raises 
great concerns.
Libraries without Collections
Let’s take a step back and think about what all of these changes might do to 
the relationship between libraries and their patrons. As the inscription on 
the Boston Public Library facade proclaims, books on the shelves within are 
“free to all”—not only in the sense that no payment is required, but also 
in the sense that they come without strings attached—free from restraint, 
obligation, and complexity. However, in a world where every publisher 
insists on a different set of license terms and every ebook platform or DRM 
provider layers their own business models, software, and implementation 
on top of those licenses, library patrons nowadays are anything but free 
from complexity and restraint.17 That complex patchwork has created real 
problems for libraries and their patrons. One recent study found patrons 
suffered through an average of nineteen clicks in order to check out a single 
ebook from most public libraries.18
Libraries have responded to this in several ways. In order to act as a 
buffer for patrons, many have tried to shoulder the burden by negotiating 
licensing deals with ebook vendors and publishers. This has led to serious 
dependencies. For example, most people have never heard of OverDrive, 
Inc., but this Cleveland, Ohio-based software vendor services over 90 per-
cent of the library ebook market.19 Other vendors include 3M and Baker & 
Taylor.
These vendors provide an electronic gateway that connects publishers 
to libraries and their patrons. They allow libraries to license ebooks stored 
on vendor servers, and using vendor software the ebooks are transferred 
to patrons for temporary use on their phones, tablets, or computers. At 
first, this seems innocuous enough and perhaps even ideal, as libraries 
can simply defer all customer service and technical issues to the vendors 
directly. However, this shift in the architecture of ownership and power 
creates an entirely different dynamic among publishers, vendors, libraries, 
and patrons. Prior to these systems, libraries would simply buy books from 
wholesale vendors, or occasionally directly from publishers, and maintain 
full control over their offerings. Library staff decided how to organize the 
books on the shelves, how long to allow them to be lent out, and what 
records to keep about their usage. Under the exhaustion rule, once the 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  109
library purchased a copy of a book, the publisher and the distributor have 
absolutely nothing to say about how, when, to whom, or how often that 
copy was lent to a patron or institution. Now, even the most prestigious 
libraries are often beholden to intermediaries such as OverDrive for many 
of these functions. Upstream providers control when and how books are 
available, which titles persist and which disappear from digital shelves and 
search queries, and often, which patrons may or may not access them and 
under which circumstances.20
For example, in 2011, HarperCollins, a major publisher, announced that 
it would only allow libraries to lend its ebooks twenty-six times before forc-
ing them to expire. HarperCollins claimed these self-destructing books were 
calculated to represent the rate of physical decay in analog copies.21 If a 
book is lent to patrons for two weeks at a time, that means HarperCol-
lins expects libraries to replace popular hardcovers every year. Regardless of 
the accuracy of that estimate, this shift—from lending and borrowing as a 
normative, communal practice governed by copy ownership and internal 
library policies to a model that allows publishers to define the legal terms 
and technological conditions under which libraries lend books—raises seri-
ous concerns.22
In other instances, works simply aren’t available on a platform or in a 
medium that allows for lending. Kevin Smith, director of Copyright and 
Scholarly Communications at Duke University Libraries, has documented 
the dearth of options facing libraries in one such case. He described a new 
recording of celebrated conductor Gustavo Dudamel and the Los Angeles 
Philharmonic that is only available as a digital download via iTunes. As 
Smith explains, “The licensing terms that accompany the ‘purchase’—it 
is really just a license—restrict the user to personal uses. Most librarians 
believe that this rules out traditional library functions” like lending.23 When 
librarians tracked down Universal, the copyright holder in the recording, it 
offered to provide them an educational license for use of 25 percent of the 
album. That license would last only two years and would run them $250 in 
processing fees plus an unspecified additional amount. That’s the tangled 
web of licensing and negotiation with which libraries must now contend. 
Just a decade ago, a library could have bought the entire recording on a CD 
for less than $20 and lent it as it pleased.
Fortunately, it appears that some publishers are responding to these con-
cerns with more progressive policies. For example, Penguin Random House 
(now consolidated after a merger) will be offering its adult and children’s 
frontlist and backlist digital titles under a “one-e-Book and one-user” policy 
and dispensing with its one-year lending cap on all ebooks. Libraries will 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020110  Chapter 6
now be able to loan the book out to as many patrons as they want as long 
as they follow an “exhaustion-like” single copy per patron rule.24 Skip Dye, 
vice president of library sales for Penguin Random House, described the 
revised policy as an “opportunity for the full and permanent ownership 
of our titles purchased for [library] collections, which can evolve into a 
potentially unlimited number of library patrons borrowing that e-Book in 
perpetuity.” This is a significant win for the library community; however, it 
is worth noting that it took nearly five years to negotiate the terms back to 
their analog equivalent.
Another example of expansive vendor control over library ebook lend-
ing is the use of proprietary software to define how patrons access ebooks 
from their phones, tablets, computers, or other devices and how libraries 
facilitate that access. Most of the time when a patron selects a book to check 
out from the library’s catalog, they do so through the library website or app. 
However, as soon as the patron selects which book to read, the library is left 
out of the loop. The vendor takes over, transferring the ebook to the patron, 
and governing their interaction with the content.
At first, this may seem like just another technological evolution. How-
ever, it has serious implications for libraries and their patrons. For example, 
some vendors reserve in their software terms a unilateral right to terminate 
ebook access of any patron or library in the event that the vendor deter-
mines, in its sole discretion, that a patron or library fails to comply with 
the vendor’s terms and procedures. In other words, if the vendor decides its 
terms have been violated, it can cut off a community’s access to its ebooks. 
Imagine if Random House could walk into any library in the country and 
pull all of the books it published from the shelves if it suspected that a 
patron had made some objectionable use of them. That is the power that 
these vendors are now claiming.
Libraries have responded in a variety of ways, both institutionally and 
technologically. The ALA, its members, and other library associations have 
stepped up their emphasis on negotiating greater control in vendor con-
tracts, particularly around patron privacy, a topic to which we will return. 
In addition, a new project called Library Simplified, a joint effort of public 
libraries in Boston, Cincinnati, New York, and Sacramento, among others, 
is seeking to create a special ebook reader—one made for libraries, by librar-
ies—that consolidates and automates this complicated set of interactions, 
and reduces the number of clicks required to check out an ebook from nine-
teen to three. By reestablishing control over their relationship with their 
patrons, libraries may gain back some of their historical control over access 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  111
to knowledge and patron data, which they often protect more vigorously 
than commercial vendors do.
Libraries and Cultural Preservation
As we have noted, libraries, museums, and archives all serve an important 
function in preserving our culture, our history, and various forms of knowl-
edge. Yet these functions depend inherently on these institutions having 
control over the works they acquire. Traditionally, control came concur-
rently with book ownership, as acquisition of the physical property rights 
in books provided libraries with the authority they needed to decide how, 
when, and where, and by whom it would be held. It also exhausted intel-
lectual property rights in the book, preventing any interference with the 
library’s mission by copyright owners. With ebooks, this mission is much 
more complex and challenging to fulfill. On the one hand, digital books 
are easier to store—they take up less physical space and can be moved more 
easily. But as we’ve noted, publisher- or vendor-imposed licenses and tech-
nological restrictions on ebooks introduce new problems.
These problems become especially acute for works at risk when their 
economic value may be less than their cultural value. In such situations, 
libraries as well as other participants in secondary markets, such as used 
bookstores, have greater incentives than publishers or ebook vendors to 
maintain copies of books since publishers can charge a premium on newer 
versions. First editions or recent textbooks are good examples. For analog 
books, this discrepancy between profit and preservation objectives can lead 
to situations where institutions such as libraries are willing to pay to pur-
chase or digitize older works, but the works’ copyright owners have either 
gone out of business, disappeared, or become impractical to find.
For these “orphan works,” libraries often preserve physical copies and, 
in limited circumstances, make digital ones available to patrons. And while 
there is some concern that copyright owners might come out of the shad-
ows and reclaim their orphaned works, there is a strong case that such 
forms of digital preservation and access qualify as fair use, in part because 
many libraries map digital access to physical holdings on a one-copy-to-
one-copy basis.25 In a world where copies reside on publisher or vendor 
servers, subject to restrictive license terms, the virtual holdings of every 
library are at risk of vanishing, especially if they are orphaned.26 This fear 
has already become reality in the digital music industry, raising concerns at 
the Federal Trade Commission.27
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020112  Chapter 6
Consider a recent preservation project at Yale University to archive 2,700 
VHS tapes from the 1970s and 1980s featuring so-called “Scream Queens,” 
horror and exploitation movies emblematic of “the home-video revolution 
of the time, as well as the cultural mores and politics of the Reagan era 
they emerged in.”28 While many might consider such a collection uncouth 
or bizarre, to cultural critics it “tell[s] the story of a particularly significant 
gap between the old Hollywood model of the ’50s and ’60s and the corpo-
rate mergers of the ’80s that created today’s modern media behemoths. In 
the era of video tapes, independent producers and distributors could reach 
a mass audience using cheap technology and local stores, both of which 
lowered the profit threshold for moviemakers.”29 Harvard and Cornell have 
taken on similar efforts to collect archives related to the emergence of hip-
hop, and New York University has acquired its own collection of cultural 
artifacts related to the rise of Riot Grrrl, an underground feminist punk 
movement in the early 1990s. Such preservation efforts mainly come from 
secondary collectors, not the original publishers. In fact, in counterculture 
or low-budget genres such as these, publishers often go in and out of busi-
ness quickly and are nearly impossible to track down in order to secure 
various legal permissions. Were these collections held in digital form on 
now-defunct vendor servers or controlled with proprietary vendor technol-
ogy, it might have been impossible to save them for historical, cultural, and 
educational purposes.
The commitment to preservation itself is also cultural. Ownership of 
works over their lifetime promotes long-term thinking. As works age, librar-
ians, archivists, and museum workers are continually reminded of their 
duties to retain these objects in ways that do not diminish access. Ephem-
eral “on demand” access systems, intangible licensed rights, and technolog-
ical control mechanisms discourage these approaches and instead focus on 
more short-term goals such as convenience and instant gratification. Not 
that these short-term goals are unimportant or undesirable. In fact, they are 
some of the great benefits of the digital age. Librarians have been among 
the best at recognizing these benefits while at the same time understanding 
the long-term challenges.
In response, cultural institutions including many libraries are work-
ing to establish digital means of ensuring preservation. Efforts such as the 
Digital Preservation Network and Academic Preservation Trust are working 
to build federated “dark archives” that will keep redundant copies in case 
of catastrophic loss of originals. In order to do this, these efforts depend 
on both the doctrine of fair use and, in some cases, the narrow preser-
vation provision in the Copyright Act to shore up the gap between what 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  113
exhaustion previously provided and where digital libraries and archives  
sit today.
When Copyright Owners Attack: IP as an Adversary of Preservation
Lack of perceived profitability isn’t the only problem for preservationists. 
Modern history is replete with cases involving efforts to limit or decimate 
library holdings, often by political groups or governments.30 While most of 
these challenges have been via political muscle, copyright holders have also 
sought to censor access to works. Most famously, the German government, 
copyright holder of Adolf Hitler’s Mein Kampf, has prohibited the book’s 
publication in Germany for decades, and only now must allow it for the 
first time in seventy-five years because the copyright has finally expired.31 
Here in the United States, we have seen similar attempts to use copyright 
law for purposes that work counter to the goals of preservation.
Take, for example, the case of Worldwide Church of God v. Philadelphia 
Church of God, Inc.32 WCG was founded in 1934 as the “Radio Church of 
God” by Herbert Armstrong. Armstrong held the title of “Pastor General 
with the spiritual rank of Apostle” and led the church until his death in 
1986. Along with many other publications, he wrote a 380-page book enti-
tled Mystery of the Ages (MOA), of which WCG distributed over nine million 
free copies.
After Armstrong’s death, WCG decided to stop publishing and using MOA 
for several reasons, including the fact that the church’s positions on vari-
ous doctrines such as divorce, remarriage, and divine healing had changed. 
Philadelphia Church of God (PCG), a rival whose members claimed to fol-
low the “authentic” teachings of Armstrong, seized this opportunity and 
began printing and distributing MOA in its entirety. WCG sued PCG for 
copyright infringement and won, halting publication not because WCG 
would lose profits, but because WCG did not want PCG patrons to read it.
Now, to be fair, WCG did not request that anyone who already had MOA 
rid themselves of their copies or that any public libraries or archives destroy 
copies they owned. But it is important to note that WCG also lacked the 
legal authority to demand such actions. Copies of MOA, even infringing 
ones, cannot be reclaimed once sold because the copy is owned as personal 
property by the purchaser.33 However, for digital copies that libraries don’t 
own, any copyright holder who wants to remove a book from the shelf 
could simply terminate the libraries’ license and remove the book.
A more recent example involved the best-selling book The Boy Who 
Came Back from Heaven, allegedly recounting the story of six-year-old Alex 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020114  Chapter 6
Malarkey’s visit to heaven after being injured in a car crash. Nearly five 
years after publication, Malarkey admitted that the story was fabricated, 
prompting its publisher to take “the book and all ancillary products out 
of print.”34 While some were sympathetic to the desire to withdraw the 
book, others saw it as an important flashpoint in an ongoing cultural and 
political dialogue about religious communities in America, part of a popu-
lar genre of “heavenly tourism.”35 Because of exhaustion, all analog copies 
of the book are still available to be preserved, analyzed, assigned in classes, 
and critiqued over any objection from the authors or publishers. The fate of 
the digital editions is less clear. As Amazon demonstrated with the remote 
deletion of 1984, there is real risk of disappearing titles when copyright 
owners object to their existence.
Libraries and Safeguarding Patron Privacy
Libraries have also historically been safe spaces for readers who wish to pro-
tect their privacy.36 This is not only due to the strong legal and ethical codes 
protecting library records from disclosure, but also the physical ownership 
of library media. Once the library purchases a work, the copyright owner 
has no legal interest in that particular copy anymore and cannot track or 
meter its use or whereabouts. Contrast this with ebooks that libraries must 
license. Even in the hands of libraries and their patrons, publishers can use 
a combination of license terms and technological controls to track their 
use. This raises a host of privacy issues, including potential chilling effects 
on those who would seek out controversial or revealing subjects such as 
medical treatments, sexuality, or unpopular belief systems.37
Moreover, the danger to patron privacy becomes amplified in a system 
where multiple parties have an interest in and access to the ebook distri-
bution chain and related patron data. When a library owns a book, it can 
decide what patron records to keep and who can view them. Most ebook 
providers require that readers share data with multiple vendors, from DRM 
suppliers and e-reader app makers to the original publisher. Vendors may 
keep records on every transaction that flows through their servers, includ-
ing which books you’ve checked out and which you’ve placed on hold for 
future reading.38 Adobe’s software has even tracked each page you’ve read 
and how long you lingered on it. Some emerging library standards are mov-
ing toward demanding strong privacy protection from ebook vendors, but 
such protection is no longer a given in a world where libraries must negoti-
ate for it instead of one where they own and control the books directly.39
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  115
Our constitutional right to privacy that protects records of our reading 
habits from government surveillance and law enforcement subpoenas also 
depends, in part, on property rights in the media we access. The Fourth 
Amendment protects “the right of the people to be secure in their per-
sons, houses, papers, and effects.” Our “papers” include the things we 
write and the things we read. And our “effects” include the property we 
own. The Fourth Amendment was intended as a buffer between what we 
read and write and the government’s interest in gathering data on its citi-
zens.40 Obviously, we don’t own the books we borrow from the library. But 
through both state and federal statutes as well as keystone court decisions, 
it is well established that libraries can object to inappropriate government 
requests for library records on our behalf.41 But when that information is 
stored as part of a commercial transaction with vendors and publishers, it 
is often no longer within the protective ambit of the library’s code of ethics 
or statutory protection. Instead, it potentially falls within what’s called the 
third party doctrine, which holds that once a consumer voluntarily shares 
information—like what books they read and when—with a commercial 
entity, they may no longer have a reasonable expectation of privacy in that 
information, and the protections of the Fourth Amendment may no longer 
protect that information from disclosure.42
Yet why should we care if the government accesses the records of what 
we read or watch? Intellectual privacy of this sort is fundamental to a func-
tioning democracy. As Justice William O. Douglas observed, “Once the gov-
ernment can demand of a publisher the names of the purchasers of his 
publications ... fear of criticism goes with every person into the bookstall 
... [and] inquiry will be discouraged.”43 The most blatant example of such 
criticism and the anti-democratic effect it can have arose during the anti-
communist witch hunts of the 1950s and 1960s. At the McCarthy hear-
ings, many of those called to testify were questioned on whether they had 
read Marx and Lenin.44 They were asked whether their spouses or associates 
had books by or about Stalin and Lenin on their bookshelves.45 Congress 
even passed a law requiring individuals to file written requests with the 
U.S. Postal Service to receive “communist political propaganda” through 
the mails until the Supreme Court struck it down because it was “almost 
certain to have a deterrent effect” on speech and association protected by 
the First Amendment. The Court especially noted that “public officials, like 
schoolteachers who have no tenure, might think they would invite disas-
ter if they read what the Federal Government says contains the seeds of  
treason.”46
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020116  Chapter 6
This threat is not merely hypothetical. There have been several famous 
cases of government agents seeking lists of what we read and watch. One 
of the most prominent involved Monica Lewinsky, the White House intern 
involved with President Bill Clinton. In his investigation as Special Coun-
sel, Kenneth Starr issued subpoenas to Barnes & Noble and Kramerbooks, 
an independent book store in Washington, D.C., for a list of all Lewinsky’s 
purchases over a thirty-month period. Kramerbooks fought back and went 
to court to protest the subpoena, asserting that the First Amendment pro-
tected readers from the chilling effect of the government knowing what 
they were reading.47 Eventually, Lewinsky’s lawyers turned over some of 
the information directly to Starr, and the bookstore was never required to 
comply with the government’s request.48
Nor are such witch hunts solely vestiges of the analog era. In 2007, fed-
eral law enforcement came knocking on the door of Amazon.com, ask-
ing for the reading records of 120 of its customers. Amazon fought back, 
successfully convincing the trial court to reject the subpoena. In holding 
so, the court wrote: “If word were to spread over the Net—and it would—
that the FBI and the IRS had demanded and received Amazon’s list of 
customers and their personal purchases, the chilling effect on expressive 
e-commerce  would  frost  keyboards  across  America  ...  well-founded  or 
not, rumors of an Orwellian federal criminal investigation into the read-
ing habits of Amazon’s customers could frighten countless potential cus-
tomers into canceling planned online book purchases, now and perhaps  
forever.”49
Studies have confirmed this chilling effect. One survey found that 8.4 
percent of Muslim Americans changed their Internet usage because they 
believed their habits were being tracked by the government.50 Even the con-
troversial section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act, which the National Security 
Agency used to justify collecting millions of American phone records, was 
originally envisioned as the “library provision” that would allow the U.S. 
government to demand any patron’s library records simply because they 
were somehow relevant to a terrorism investigation.51
It is reassuring that both commercial book vendors and libraries have 
stood up for the privacy of information about our reading habits, and per-
haps they will be able to continue to do so even in the age of the ebook.52 
But what if they don’t? Do we have any rights to stop them from turning 
over our information? The further up the chain the information travels, 
the less claim we have to privacy. It’s one thing for your local library or 
bookstore to assert itself as a custodian of the record of your purchases and 
stand in your shoes to fight for your privacy; it’s another to claim that your 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  117
book-viewing data, passed from device to provider to publisher, is some-
how still yours. Thus, cloud storage and streaming books may also shift 
our sense of intellectual privacy if we are not able to secure it. Fortunately, 
California has taken a strong step in this direction by passing the Reader 
Privacy Act, which requires all vendors of electronic books and online book 
services to respect patron privacy. Perhaps other states will do the same.
Libraries and Innovation
In 1894, Historian John Willis Clark gave a lecture at Cambridge University 
entitled Libraries in the Medieval and Renaissance Periods in which he stated 
“[a] library may be considered from two very different points of view: as a 
workshop, or as a Museum. ... Mechanical ingenuity ... should be employed 
in making the acquisition of knowledge less cumbrous and less tedious; 
that as we travel by steam, so we should also read by steam, and be helped 
in our studies by the varied resources of modern invention.”53
How does one “read by steam” in the digital age? Numerous library-
related entities are exploring that question, from the Internet Archive’s 
Open Library to the Digital Public Library of America.54 Even the New York 
Public Library has a geek team, a group they call NYPL Labs.55 NYPL Labs has 
produced many interesting projects to date—from annotating Google Maps 
of New York City with photos from their city archives to assisting scientists 
in analyzing climate change by tracking fish prices from nearly a century 
of digitized New York restaurant menus. All of this is possible because they 
own the physical materials and thus, digitizing them for analysis is a much 
simpler project. Consider, however, materials that are licensed and not 
owned. How does a library expand the public’s understanding and engage-
ment with materials when they belong to someone else and sit on remote 
servers they cannot access?
Or  consider  HathiTrust,  a  consortium  of  digital  library  efforts.56 
HathiTrust houses well over five million digitized books, the vast major-
ity of which were scanned on behalf of the libraries by Google. When the 
Authors Guild sued HathiTrust for copyright infringement of these books, 
it asserted that the libraries had no right to lend the physical books they 
owned to Google for scanning purposes or to use the digital copies that 
Google provided them in exchange. Yet the courts that ruled on the case 
held that these actions were fair uses. HathiTrust transformed these paper-
and-ink books into a massive digital archive and database, an altogether 
different sort of work, suitable for very different purposes. At the same time, 
it greatly increased access to knowledge.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020118  Chapter 6
What would have happened if those books had not been physically 
on the shelves for the library to lend to Google, but rather on the servers 
of OverDrive or various publishers? If the libraries tried to hand over to 
Google millions of ebooks, publishers and vendors would have pointed out 
that independent of copyright concerns, this violated the terms of their 
license agreements. The fact that access was conditioned on a license rather 
than ownership also could have changed the fair use analysis significantly. 
One fair use factor courts consider is the impact of the use on the market for 
the copyrighted work.57 And if libraries are already negotiating and agree-
ing to license terms, presumably they could have paid more for terms that 
contemplated these sorts of uses. In this hypothetical scenario, the fact that 
libraries neglected to acquire such rights could be interpreted—wrongly, 
we think—by some courts as weighing against fair use. Regardless of the 
outcome, ownership of the books gave the libraries a certain independence 
from publishers as a practical matter. A library without physical books 
would be faced with the risk of losing access to their entire collection of 
ebooks if their actions upset vendors and publishers, putting them in a pre-
carious position to fight for fair use and academic freedom in the first place. 
The security of owning the physical copies of the books provided libraries 
with the strength to stand up for what was ultimately ruled to be legal.
A Library with No Friends
Scattered across the United States are countless “Friends of the Library” 
groups. These supporters exist to raise money and help local libraries thrive 
in their communities. One of the main ways they do this is to host book 
donation efforts. These efforts ask local citizens and institutions to donate 
old books—not for the libraries’ shelves, but to resell to help raise money 
for new library purchases. It is one of the most time-honored ways to give 
back, by giving away your old books so that the library can turn them into 
new ones.
But every single aspect of such fundraising depends on ownership. If 
patrons who buy ebooks don’t own them and libraries they support can’t 
own them, then how does one donate an ebook to one’s local library at all?
This is not just a problem for libraries, but for many other access points 
for knowledge and cultural heritage. For example, consider Project Cicero,58 
an annual nonprofit book drive designed to create and supplement class-
room libraries in under-resourced New York City public schools. Since 2001, 
Project Cicero has distributed 2.3 million books to more than 13,000 New 
York City classrooms, reaching over 550,000 students. It receives new and 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries  119
used book donations from more than one hundred independent, public, 
and parochial schools each year.
But what will the future of such projects look like in a world when par-
ents, teachers, students, and schools no longer own the books they use and 
read? What happens when your Kindle or iPhone won’t let you donate your 
book? Or the terms of service for your ebook provider or the license agree-
ment on the book itself forbid it? Or copyright law deems you an infringer 
for donating a used ebook to your local public library?
The problems facing libraries are, in many ways, the same problems 
confronting consumers writ large. Complex license terms, uncooperative 
technology, and outdated copyright laws interfere with the kinds of uses 
they’ve made for centuries. While some might suspect our fellow citizens 
of uncertain motives or questionable intentions, by focusing on libraries—a 
set of institutions and actors with a well-deserved reputation as responsible 
actors—it is easier to understand that a digital exhaustion doctrine is not 
meant to provide refuge for scofflaws and infringers. Instead, it’s a way 
to protect the network of socially valuable uses that owning books makes 
possible.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273329/9780262335959_cba.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20207  DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices
In Ray Bradbury’s iconic dystopian novel Fahrenheit 451, a war rages in a 
future society over the existence of books. Those in power seek to destroy 
them, both because of the controversial ideas they disclose and because 
of their perceived limited utility in a society filled with video-enabled 
walls and mobile media devices. Those who rebel against these rules hide 
books to preserve them for historical, political, and philosophical reasons. 
Bradbury’s infamous firemen—shock troopers who kick down doors and 
incinerate homes where books are hidden—and their mechanical drone-
like hounds that sniff out literary contraband are meant as provocations 
to incite our fears that the very book we hold in our hands might be taken 
away from us at a moment’s notice in the name of “public happiness.” By 
personifying this version of absolute control, Bradbury makes clear that 
notions of personal property or domestic privacy stand no chance in a soci-
ety that values centralized authority over individual autonomy and cultural 
heritage.
As a commentary on the McCarthy Era, Bradbury’s work is a reaction to a 
specific threat to our engagement with ideas and the cultural artifacts con-
taining them. And although the particular brand of control Bradbury had 
in mind has not manifested itself in contemporary U.S. culture, there is a 
different sort of threat to our freedom to read, explore, and share ideas—one 
that is more subtle, but all the more dangerous for it. This threat doesn’t 
kick down your door in the dead of the night; it already lives in your home. 
It’s embedded into the media you buy and stored on the devices you carry 
in your pocket. It doesn’t rely on physical force or the power of the state to 
enforce its rules, just the often unseen operation of software code.
Digital Rights Management (DRM) is the euphemism for a range of tech-
nologies implemented by copyright holders, device makers, retailers, and 
other intermediaries designed to control how, where, when, and whether 
consumers can use their books, movies, music, and other content. In a 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020122  Chapter 7
nutshell, DRM is a digital guard capable of silently monitoring your digital 
activity and enforcing any restrictions or limitations demanded by rights 
holders. DRM can prevent you from copying a file, even for legally permis-
sible reasons like personal backups. It can restrict your iTunes purchases 
to Apple-authorized products. Or it can prevent you from using your Kin-
dle’s read-aloud function to listen to a book—even if you are blind.1 It can 
stop your DVR from recording your favorite show if the copyright holder 
objects.2 Through region coding, DRM can stop you from watching a DVD 
you bought on vacation in London or Tokyo on your TV at home, or from 
using printer ink purchased abroad. It can even prevent you from skipping 
commercials and trailers before watching a movie that you own.
Push the limits of these rules, and DRM will push back. At that point, 
you will discover that your media and devices serve another master. Most 
of the time, they obey your instructions. But when your commands conflict 
with those of copyright holders, your stuff betrays you. Perhaps it simply 
refuses to execute a command, or it may politely inform you that you’ve 
exceeded your authorization. DRM might even disable your access or your 
device altogether. Much like Fahrenheit 451’s firemen and their hounds, if 
rather less imposing, DRM treats our access to the products we lawfully 
acquire as contingent and impermanent. DRM creates a world in which our 
purchases aren’t in our control. Even our very possession of them is contin-
gent on rules established by an external authority.
Consider the Apple iTunes DRM. For reasons we will discuss, Apple no 
longer sells music burdened by DRM. But movies and television shows, 
not to mention apps, are still subject to DRM. Apple spells out the substan-
tive constraints of its DRM in its Usage Rules, which it “reserves the right 
to modify ... at any time.” Your behavior will be “monitored by Apple for 
compliance purposes,” and Apple can “enforce [its] Usage Rules without 
notice.” Those rules provide in part:
• You shall be authorized to use iTunes Products only for personal, noncom-
mercial use.
• You shall be authorized to use iTunes Products on five iTunes-authorized de-
vices at any time.
• You shall be authorized to burn an audio playlist up to seven times.
• You shall not be entitled to burn video iTunes Products or tone iTunes  
Products.
The specific restrictions imposed by any DRM system are less important 
than the underlying dynamic they represent. Those restrictions were not 
created by law. Nothing in the Copyright Act even hints that creating seven 
audio playlists is lawful, but the eighth crosses the line of infringement. 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  123
These rules are not the result of a legislative process or judicial analysis. 
They enshrine an agreement reached between a retailer and a set of pub-
lishers and foisted on the public. Unlike the law, DRM allows for automatic 
enforcement. We’ve replaced courts and due process with code and license 
terms. The law can account for context and tolerate gray areas. It can make 
exceptions. DRM cannot. It hardwires restrictions on consumer behavior 
into our devices, robbing them of functionality.
While not nearly as dramatic as flamethrowers and fighting robot dogs, 
the unilateral right to enforce such restrictions through DRM exerts many 
of the types of social control that Bradbury feared. Reading, listening, and 
watching  become  contingent  and  surveilled.  That  system  dramatically 
shifts power and autonomy away from individuals in favor of retailers and 
rights holders, allowing for enforcement without anything approaching 
due process.
Imagine if a physical book publisher tried to create similar rules: you can 
read at night, but not during the day; you can read on the beach, but not 
on the subway; you can only loan the book to a friend once;3 and you can’t 
skip the preface.4 None of us would feel compelled to comply with these 
demands. No court would call you an infringer, and few would even find 
an enforceable contract. And the publisher would have no way to find out 
about our violations or force compliance. But because digital works depend 
on software and often network connections, copyright owners can con-
struct technologies that impose their whims on us. That power, particularly 
when it is reinforced through law, creates no shortage of harm.5
Smart Cows and Dumb Code
The first efforts to use technology to prevent copying emerged in the early 
days of the retail computer software industry. In those days, users shared 
time on mainframes and often wrote their own code. Later, hardware mak-
ers viewed software as a tool to drive computer sales. But once software was 
understood as an independently marketable product, some software mak-
ers saw the ease of copying floppy disks as a problem in need of a techno-
logical solution. Aside from casual sharing of software among friends and 
colleagues, swap meets and flea markets began to include computer soft-
ware—both legitimate and infringing copies among their wares—or warez, 
if you are of a certain generation. This period of unauthorized distribution 
had some unexpected consequences; it led to later commercial success for 
companies that built loyal user bases for future products. It also encouraged 
innovation. One early video game, Spacewar!, was improved and developed 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020124  Chapter 7
in part through unauthorized copying. Even Bill Gates, whose attitude 
about copying shifted significantly during his tenure at Microsoft, learned 
to program on unauthorized software.
But understandably, most software companies wanted to cut down on 
unauthorized copies in order to improve sales. Some attempted to impose 
speed bumps—relatively minor impediments that would slow down the 
rate of copying and separate legitimate purchasers who wanted to make 
backups or share with a few friends from rogue copyists. These early DRM 
technologies included the linguistically and logistically awkward dongle—a 
hardware device that had to be inserted into the input/output port of your 
computer before the software would run. In other cases, DRM was tied to 
software documentation. For example, on launch a program would prompt 
the user with a question like, “What is the first word on page 14 of the 
user manual?” Of course, in response users began exchanging information 
about how to circumvent these systems, quickly diminishing them to mere 
annoyances, a pattern that would repeat itself with increasing speed for 
every DRM system to come.
In the 1990s, this small-scale arms race began to heat up as copying 
and storing large numbers of software titles became easier because of vast 
improvements  in  storage  capacity  and  disk  speeds.  Coupled  with  the 
increasing ease of data transmission over the newly popular Internet and 
the introduction of peer-to-peer networks like Napster, designed for shar-
ing files with a global community, the perceived need for DRM increased 
dramatically. Soon copyright holders, who now included Hollywood and 
the music industry in addition to software makers, invested more and more 
resources in the hopes of finding a technological fix to the problem of 
unauthorized copying.
But what proponents of this silver bullet strategy failed to understand, 
at least initially, is that every DRM system is susceptible to attack. That’s 
theoretically true of every system for obscuring or encrypting information. 
But DRM, by its very nature, is particularly vulnerable. Normally, if you buy 
a lock to protect valuables inside your house, you lock the door to outsid-
ers. And you keep the key safe in your pocket, sharing it only with insiders 
such as family or friends. Outsiders might try to break in, but as long as 
the lock is well made and they don’t get their hands on the key, most will 
be deterred. With DRM, however, the threat is not from outsiders. It’s the 
insiders rights holders worry will make off with the valuables.
A DRM system that locks out consumers altogether has no value. If 
Apple’s DRM, for example, refused to let you watch a movie after paying 
for it, even the most fervent Apple loyalists would get their digital movies 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  125
elsewhere. To let customers watch their movies, Apple has to share the 
key to this digital lock at some point. Since most of us are not particularly 
tech savvy, DRM makers share the key, but they hide it somewhere we are 
unlikely to find it. Cryptography works well in preventing attacks from 
outsiders who want to intercept a message. It is bound to fail when it is used 
to protect against misuse by the intended recipient of that message. Given 
enough time and users, discovering the key that unlocks any given DRM 
system becomes inevitable and often trivial. There are just too many ways 
to pick a lock from the inside.
And once a single sophisticated user unlocks a DRM system, it usually 
doesn’t take long until the average person can remove that DRM with the 
push of a button—or simply download an unencumbered copy from the 
Internet. The inescapable challenge is what Mike Godwin, a pioneering 
technology lawyer, once called “the problem of the smart cow.”6 Imagine 
every single cow in the world locked up in a giant barn with a state-of-
the-art lock. No matter how good the lock, eventually one cow will figure 
out how to escape. Once that cow is out, the other cows—no matter how 
unskilled at lock picking—are out too. This is the second fundamental flaw 
in the DRM approach. All it takes is one motivated and skilled person to 
defeat DRM.
In response, DRM makers have pushed for tighter control over more 
components of the distribution and playback chains, undermining con-
sumer ownership of their devices and software each step of the way. In 
the process, DRM has shifted from a largely benign form of authentication 
to a technologically embodied philosophy that views all users—customers 
included—as threat vectors, monitoring their actions and enforcing limits 
on their use of the things they buy. Lawful, mundane consumer behavior—
watching movies, listening to music, reading ebooks, or making backup 
copies—are regulated by code. For many people, the frustration and incon-
venience of DRM makes paying for content look like a poor value when 
DRM-free versions of the same works are widely available. When DRM 
treats paying customers like criminals, denying them the freedom to use 
their devices as they see fit, it actually encourages them to infringe.
The Battle for Your Living Room
The transition from a market in which people truly owned and controlled 
their devices to one tightly regulated by technologies that owe us no real 
allegiance can be illustrated in the contrast between two familiar technolo-
gies: the VCR and the DVD player. The VCR, which hit the U.S. market in 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020126  Chapter 7
the late 1970s, empowered the individual. By owning this device, people 
could assert a degree of control over their television viewing experience 
that we take for granted today, but was unheard of at the time. No longer 
subject to the minor tyranny of broadcast schedules, viewers could record 
shows and watch them at a time of their choosing and on their own terms.
Faced with this prospect, copyright holders were gripped by a hysteria 
that seems almost laughable in retrospect, but was earnestly felt at the time. 
Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, testi-
fied before Congress—with a straight face—that “the VCR is to the Ameri-
can film producer and the American public as the Boston strangler is to 
the woman home alone.”7 Unable to convince Congress to ban the VCR, 
a group of movie studios, led by Universal and Disney, sued device maker 
Sony in 1984.
Universal accused Sony of creating a piracy machine that allowed view-
ers to make illegal copies of broadcast television programs. Although the 
VCR was certainly used by some to create infringing stockpiles of shows 
and movies, it was also commonly used for legitimate purposes like time-
shifting—the practice of recording a show to watch later. Some producers, 
notably PBS mainstay Fred Rogers, had no objections to viewers making 
recordings, in part because it enhanced consumer control. Rogers under-
stood that once a person bought a VCR, it gave the buyer newfound power. 
Hollywood had no practical means of controlling what they did with their 
personal property. And once VCRs were in the market, neither did Sony. It 
had no way of tracking how people used the device, no knowledge of their 
choices, and no way to limit them. So the studios urged the U.S. Supreme 
Court to impose legal control over the design and use of the VCR instead. 
But the Court refused for two interrelated reasons.
First, the Supreme Court ruled that Sony could not be held responsible 
for designing and selling the VCR if it could be used for both legitimate 
and illegitimate purposes. If the design of general-purpose devices like a 
VCR were controlled by content owners, their functionality would be lim-
ited to features that supported Hollywood’s business plans at the expense 
of Sony’s interest in producing the most attractive device and the public’s 
interest in controlling its viewing experience. Second, the Supreme Court 
decided that the VCR was in fact capable of substantial non-infringing uses. 
It found that many VCR owners used them for time-shifting, which the jus-
tices deemed a fair use of broadcast television programming. According to 
the Court’s decision, “the business of supplying the equipment that makes 
such copying feasible should not be stifled simply because the equipment is 
used by some individuals to make unauthorized reproductions.”
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  127
The Sony decision, while it benefitted device makers most directly, more 
subtly vindicated the personal property interests of consumers. It protected 
their right to acquire general-purpose technology, even if it could be used to 
infringe. It reaffirmed that we can use the devices we own in non-infringing 
ways despite the objections of copyright holders. And it protected our liv-
ing rooms from the kind of surveillance and supervision that would be 
necessary to police the private use of property.
But the Court’s decision in Sony sent shock waves through Hollywood. 
Unlike record labels and publishers, which were accustomed to the unavoid-
able loss of control that comes from selling copies to the public, the movie 
industry resisted loosening its grip on its works. Traditionally, studios were 
able to police public consumption of their works because viewers accessed 
them through public exhibition, not private taping or sales of copies. They 
were either shown in movie theaters or over broadcast television and could 
be tracked accordingly. Even the theaters that showed films didn’t own the 
prints. They typically remained the property of the studio and had to be 
returned. The idea that an individual could own a copy of The Good, the 
Bad and the Ugly—by recording it from a broadcast, no less—represented 
a dramatic shift in the power dynamic between copyright holders and 
consumers.
Even after the VCR was introduced, Hollywood resisted the home video 
market. Titles were withheld from release or priced extravagantly. In part, 
that’s because Hollywood had its own vision for the home video market, 
and it didn’t include the record button. Universal and Disney supported 
a competing technology, DiscoVision, which allowed viewers to watch 
movies at home on large optical discs, predecessors to laser disc and DVD 
technology. But DiscoVision, unlike the VCR, didn’t support recording 
over-the-air programming or private copying. The design of the technology 
precluded those lawful behaviors. And as a result, it didn’t stand a chance in 
the market. Instead, Hollywood watched as the VCR emerged as the domi-
nant technology.
But Hollywood learned its lesson. When it came time for home video—
by then the movie industry’s primary source of revenue—to make the tran-
sition to a digital format, the studios threw their weight behind the DVD, 
in part because it enabled the kind of control over copying that VHS tapes 
never did. When the DVD was introduced in 1996, virtually every com-
mercial release featured a new DRM system called the Content Scramble 
System (CSS). By encrypting the contents of DVDs, CSS promised copy-
right holders much more control over what viewers did with the movies 
they purchased. Playing a movie requires a secret key, and those secret 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020128  Chapter 7
keys are only available to authorized devices. A device maker who wants to 
manufacture a DVD player has to get permission from the DVD Copy Con-
trol Association, an organization made up of major movie studios, DRM 
vendors, and Hollywood-friendly DVD manufacturers. Not surprisingly,  
device makers interested in adding features that Hollywood found threat-
ening—like the ability to make backup copies of DVDs, record televised 
programming, save small clips for educational use, or even skip previews 
or advertisements—were not approved.8 DVDs, like their Blu-ray succes-
sors, even use region coding to prevent playback of lawfully purchased and 
imported discs.
Through their tight control over the design of the DVD format, movie 
studios achieve the goals that the Supreme Court denied them in Sony. If 
Jack Valenti can get away with analogizing the VCR to the Boston strangler, 
we feel confident noting the parallels between the DVD player and the Tro-
jan horse. Enticed by the prospect of high-quality digital home video, view-
ers embraced this new technology. But Hollywood understood the DVD 
format as a means to infiltrate our living rooms and to turn our home enter-
tainment systems into covert assets. By controlling how we use the devices 
we assume we own, studios could regulate our private activities, including 
those outside the scope of any copyright interest.
DRM Goes to Washington
For a time, that strategy worked just as Hollywood had hoped. But like 
all DRM systems, CSS had a fatal cryptography problem baked into its 
design. It was only a matter of time until someone found the secret key that 
unlocked DVDs for licensed and unlicensed players alike. And in 1999, CSS 
was cracked. We will return to that story shortly, but first we should discuss 
the steps Hollywood took to prepare for this inevitable outcome. Copyright 
holders who enthusiastically adopted DRM understood that code alone 
would never be enough to maintain control over consumer behavior. They 
needed to enlist the law. But early cases gave copyright holders very little 
confidence that the courts would reinforce the non-legal rules DRM tried 
to implement.
Two cases from the period between the Sony decision and the introduc-
tion of the DVD illustrate the problem. The first involved software com-
pany Vault, an early DRM pioneer. It sold a program called Prolok that was 
intended to stop unauthorized copying of software. To do so, Prolok stored 
a digital fingerprint on disks and prevented computers from accessing 
the contents of those disks if the fingerprint was missing. Quaid Software 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  129
looked at Prolok and saw an opportunity. It created a program called Ram-
key and its own storage disks that imitated the Prolok fingerprint and effec-
tively broke Vault’s DRM. Quaid sold Ramkey as a backup utility, a function 
that Prolok prohibited legitimate purchasers of software from performing. 
Vault sued Quaid, claiming that defeating its DRM violated copyright law.
The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, much like the Supreme Court in Sony, 
decided the case by looking to the behavior of users who bought Ram-
key. Although some were engaged in infringing distribution, a substantial 
number used it to make perfectly lawful backup copies of software they 
owned. Because backing up software you own is legal under the exhaustion 
principle and specifically section 117 of the Copyright Act, the court was 
convinced that Quaid couldn’t be held responsible for those who used the 
program for less laudable purposes. Breaking, disabling, or avoiding DRM 
was not, in itself, illegal.
A few years later, the Ninth Circuit underscored that point in a case 
brought by Sega, developer of the Genesis video game console. Sega made 
its own titles for the Genesis system, but also licensed third-party develop-
ers to create compatible games. Accolade was unwilling to agree to Sega’s 
licensing terms, which required that Sega, rather than Accolade, manufac-
ture the game cartridges. So instead, Accolade decided to create Genesis 
games without Sega’s approval. It purchased a Genesis console and three 
Sega game cartridges to discover the interface specifications that allowed 
the game to communicate with the console. In the process, Accolade dis-
covered Sega’s DRM, the trademark security system (TMSS). TMSS was, 
truth be told, a terrible DRM implementation, even by the low standards of 
the field. It consisted of little more than a twenty-byte initialization code 
followed by the letters S–E–G–A. The console searched the game cartridge 
for the initialization code in a specified location. If it found it, the game 
would load.9 If not, gamers saw a blank screen. Accolade copied this lockout 
code onto its own cartridges to render them compatible with the Genesis 
hardware.
Sega sued, arguing that Accolade infringed its copyrights by copying its 
game code in the process of reverse engineering the Genesis interface and 
implementing TMSS. The court disagreed. Even though Accolade copied 
Sega’s software code in its entirety, it had to in order to figure out how 
the Genesis communicated with games. That interface information and the 
TMSS lockout code are beyond the scope of copyright protection, the court 
held, because they serve a purely functional purpose. Just as in Vault v. 
Quaid, copyright holders were rebuffed in their efforts to use copyright law 
to stop consumers and competitors from defeating their DRM.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020130  Chapter 7
In response to these losses, copyright holders took their case to Con-
gress. In the face of ubiquitous personal computing, new digital media for-
mats, and the popularity of the Internet, they argued that some legislative 
intervention enshrining the DRM strategy was necessary. Their decade-long 
effort culminated in two laws—the Audio Home Recording Act (AHRA) and 
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). The first was narrowly 
focused on a single technology and is viewed by most legal commenters as 
a footnote—or perhaps a punchline—in the history of legal regulation of 
technology. The second was motivated by grander ambitions and has had a 
lasting impact, though not for the reasons its proponents anticipated.
The AHRA addressed digital audio tape (DAT), which was billed as the 
next hit format for recorded music after the introduction of CDs. Because 
DAT allowed for digital copying, copyright holders worried it would lead 
to widespread infringement. So they convinced Congress—in exchange for 
granting DAT player manufacturers immunity from copyright infringement 
claims—to require all DAT players to include DRM.10 The statute makes it 
illegal for anyone to manufacture, distribute, or import a DAT player unless 
it incorporates the Serial Copy Management System (SCMS) or its equiva-
lent. SCMS itself was a simple system that encoded data in DAT recordings 
that dictated whether additional copies could be made. A record company 
could, for example, prohibit copies altogether, permit a single copy to be 
made, or allow copies without restriction. Despite the deep degree of con-
gressional oversight into the design of DAT—or perhaps because of it—the 
format was a flop in the United States.
Six years later, Congress took up the DRM question again. By the late 
1990s, the Internet’s potential as a digital marketplace had been recognized 
but not yet realized. Digital distribution of music and other content was 
technologically feasible, but because of understandable fears that their prod-
ucts would be freely and widely copied, copyright holders were reluctant to 
experiment with digital marketplaces. They argued that legal protection 
for their DRM schemes would give them the confidence necessary to take 
their first tentative steps toward online marketplaces. Congress responded 
by passing the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) of 1998.
The act had two major components. The first created safe harbors from 
copyright liability for Internet intermediaries like search engines and ISPs. 
The second was meant to bolster DRM. Section 1201 of the DMCA made it 
unlawful to circumvent—that is, bypass, disable, or remove—any techno-
logical measure that restricted access to copyrighted material. Essentially, 
it made breaking DRM illegal, even if doing so did not result in copyright 
infringement. To return to Mike Godwin’s cow parable, it’s a rule meant to 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  131
stop the smart cow. But the DMCA had a strategy for dealing with the dumb 
cows as well. Section 1201 made it illegal to make or distribute tools or 
technologies designed to circumvent. So even if some motivated teenager 
well outside the reach of the U.S. legal system cracked a new DRM scheme, 
anyone who shared a software program implementing that crack was on 
the hook as well. These anti-circumvention provisions are subject to a num-
ber of narrow and largely ineffective exemptions for activities like reverse 
engineering and encryption research. The Copyright Office even holds a 
process every three years to decide on temporary exemptions from these 
rules.  The exemption process forces consumers to bear the heavy burden of 
establishing that their use of the devices and content they own are lawful. 
And these exemptions only address potential liability under the DMCA; 
they offer no protection against traditional copyright infringement claims. 
Even when exemptions are granted, they are based on existing harms to 
consumer rights that often highlight the absurd overreach of section 1201. 
Since their implementation, the anti-circumvention rules have consistently 
undermined the property relationship between consumers and their stuff 
by giving legal weight to DRM’s intervention.
DRM Goes (Back) to Court
Fresh off their victory in Congress, copyright holders began targeting defen-
dants who made or distributed tools that helped defeat DRM. And their 
track record in those cases suggests that the DMCA gave copyright holders 
just what they had asked for.
In the first of these disputes, RealNetworks—an early provider of stream-
ing media content—sued a company called Streambox. RealNetworks devel-
oped technology for streaming audio and video files. It relied on a digital 
“secret handshake” between its server and its player to ensure that third-
party applications could not stream RealMedia files. Without the secret 
handshake, an application was denied access. Streambox developed the 
“VCR,” an application that mimicked the secret handshake to interoperate 
with RealNetworks’ server in order to enable the same sort of time-shifting 
the Supreme Court okayed in Sony. Yet when RealNetworks sued, the court 
had no trouble finding that the VCR software circumvented RealNetworks’ 
DRM because section 1201 had shifted the balance of power in favor of 
copyright holders.
After this promising test run, copyright holders set their sights on a big-
ger target. A Norwegian teenager named Jon Johansen solved the puzzle of 
CSS, the DRM on DVDs, in 1999. He then wrote a simple program called 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020132  Chapter 7
DeCSS, which decrypted the content of any DVD. Johansen’s goal was to 
enable DVD playback for users of Linux operating systems. Although there 
were plenty of licensed DVD player software options for Windows and Mac 
users, there wasn’t a single Linux-compatible program on the market. That 
meant those Linux users who had lawfully purchased DVDs couldn’t watch 
them on their desktops or laptops.
When DeCSS was subsequently published across the Internet for the 
world to see, it caught the attention of Eric Corley, a journalist and pub-
lisher of 2600: The Hacker Quarterly. For years, 2600 served as a news outlet 
and forum for the hacker community, broadly defined. Corley wrote a story 
about DeCSS and published it on his website, along with the DeCSS code 
and links to other sites hosting the code. As he would reiterate later in 
court, Corley added the code to the story because “in a journalistic world, 
... you have to show your evidence.”11
Eight movie studios quickly filed suit against Corley and others, claim-
ing that by publishing DeCSS they trafficked in technologies that circum-
vented DRM in violation of section 1201. The defendants pointed to a 
number of non-infringing uses DeCSS made possible. They included the 
time-shifting so crucial in Sony and the backups found lawful in Vault. Even 
more intuitively, they argued that DVD owners had the right to play their 
discs on their own hardware, just like any other item of personal property. 
But the court held that the legality of these uses was irrelevant to the ques-
tion of anti-circumvention liability. That charge did not hinge on any act 
of infringement, much less the question of substantial non-infringing use. 
The studios had succeeded in Congress where they had previously failed in 
the courts. Breaking DRM was unlawful, regardless of the reason. Personal 
property rights had to give way to copyright owner control. DeCSS was 
banned, and other courts soon followed suit.12
A Failure, at Best
Given these decisive early legal victories, copyright holders could be forgiven 
for deeming the DMCA a rousing success. But any champagne popping that 
happened in 2001 would soon prove premature. Even from the perspective 
of copyright holders, the DMCA’s anti-circumvention provisions would be 
charitably described as a mixed bag. And from the perspective of the public, 
the DMCA has been an unmitigated disaster. It has jeopardized their pri-
vacy and security, impeded innovation and encouraged lock-in, and paved 
the way for an unprecedented loss of control over the devices they own.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  133
The DMCA has not achieved its stated goals. Almost every major com-
mercial DRM system introduced since it was enacted has been broken, and 
at an increasingly rapid pace.13 It took three years from the introduction of 
DVDs for Johansen to crack CSS—not bad, considering he was twelve at the 
time CSS was released. By the time Apple launched its iTunes FairPlay DRM 
in 2003, Johansen had more coding experience under his belt. He circum-
vented that one within a few months. A few years later, the “unbreakable” 
BD+ DRM used on Blu-ray discs was broken within a month. Princeton 
researcher Ed Felten led a team that defeated the music industry’s Secure 
Digital Music Initiative in just a matter of weeks. And game maker Ubisoft’s 
DRM didn’t even last a day.14 It would appear there are just too many smart 
cows out there. Nor has the DMCA been effective in clamping down on the 
availability of circumvention tools for the rest of us. Any middle schooler 
with a smartphone and a few minutes to spare can find them. Or so we’ve 
been told. As a result, titles protected by DRM find their way to file sharing 
networks and other sources of infringing material just as quickly as their 
non-DRMed counterparts.15
The other pitch for the DMCA—that it was necessary to convince copy-
right holders to risk the waters of digital distribution—turned out to be 
false. It may have been true in the late 1990s, but it certainly isn’t any-
more. In fact, DRM often hurts copyright holders as much as it helps them. 
The market rewards publishers who abandon DRM and punishes those 
who insist on it.16 This rise and fall of DRM for digital music downloads is 
instructive. When Apple launched the iTunes Music Store, the first licensed 
digital music download store to feature content from the major labels, 
every track was wrapped in its FairPlay DRM. To hear Steve Jobs tell it, the 
labels insisted on DRM, and Apple played along. As he wrote in his widely 
circulated open letter, Thoughts on Music: “When Apple approached these 
companies to license their music to distribute legally over the Internet, they 
were extremely cautious and required Apple to protect their music from 
being illegally copied. The solution was to create a DRM system, which 
envelopes each song purchased from the iTunes store in special and secret 
software so that it cannot be played on unauthorized devices.”17 If that’s 
the case, the labels came to regret their insistence once they discovered that 
DRM benefitted Apple much more than it did copyright holders.
Through a combination of being first, creating a seamless experience 
for end users, and designing gorgeous devices, Apple soon became the top 
music retailer in the world. Once it established its dominant position, record 
labels got their first glimpse of the dangers of DRM. Apple’s FairPlay-pro-
tected tracks, which music fans collectively spent tens of millions of dollars 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020134  Chapter 7
buying, couldn’t be played on competing hardware. The costs of switching 
from an iPod to a Zune—remember those?—were too high for most people 
to bear. That hurt competition among device makers and music stores alike. 
So DRM reinforced Apple’s dominant position and weakened the labels’ 
leverage to negotiate over prices, promotions, and other concerns.
Apple was so committed to maintaining this tight control over the retail 
download market that when one-time DRM crusader RealNetworks created 
a software tool called Harmony that allowed customers of its competing 
music store to replicate FairPlay DRM so that tracks purchased from Real-
Networks could be loaded on iPods, Apple called them hackers and threat-
ened a DMCA suit. Nearly a decade later, a key Apple engineer even testified 
that the company’s DRM was part of an anti-competitive strategy.18
At this point, the labels figured out that the only way out of this mess 
was to free themselves from the chains of DRM. As Cory Doctorow explains 
in his book Information Doesn’t Want to Be Free:
The labels came to realize that they’d been caught in yet another roach motel: 
their customers had bought millions of dollars’ worth of Apple-locked music, and 
if the labels left the iTunes Store, the listeners would be hard-pressed to follow 
them. ... But Amazon offered the labels a lateral move: give up on digital rights 
management (DRM) software and sell your music as “unprotected” MP3s (which 
also play on iPods), and you can start to wean your customers off the iTunes 
Store—or at least weaken its whip-hand over your business. You can set your own 
pricing, Amazon said; we’ll help you with the promos you’re looking for, and to-
gether we can get some competition into the market. The music industry bought 
into it, and iTunes dropped DRM not long afterward.19
A Disaster, at Worst
As bad as DRM ended up being for the music industry, it has been worse for 
the public. The lock-in problems that finally convinced the record labels 
to jettison DRM, for example, were felt acutely by consumers. Many of us 
are attracted to digital copies because of their relatively low prices. Oddly, 
digital copies are more than occasionally more expensive than their digital 
counterparts. But digital usually wins on sticker price. When you can pay 
$8.99 for an ebook instead of $22.99 for a hardcover, it seems like an easy 
call. But those low prices are misleading. If you can’t resell your books, you 
can’t recoup any of your costs. Tired of the latest dystopian young adult 
novel? Too bad; you’re stuck with it. Before DRM, you could always head 
down to the local used bookstore or flea market to sell your hardbacks and 
paperbacks. With DRM, your purchases are tied to a particular technology 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  135
platform. And that fact raises the cost of switching to a new platform, 
which in turn means less competition and higher prices.
Because it often requires ongoing communication or authentication, 
DRM focuses on the present rather than the future. Content is generally 
most valuable in the initial period after its release.20 After that, content pro-
ducers, DRM vendors, and device manufacturers have significantly reduced 
incentives to respond to concerns about DRM. The short history of DRM is 
littered with the remains of failed or abandoned protection measures, too 
often leaving the files they supposedly protected locked away. This leads to 
problems of unavailability and obsolescence. It also creates serious barri-
ers to preservation. Even without DRM, these are thorny issues. DRM only 
makes them worse.
Ownership unfettered by DRM encourages innovation, customization, 
exploration, and repair.21 This “freedom to tinker,” as Ed Felten calls it, 
allows individuals to contribute to technologies, often in ways that the 
original manufacturer can’t or won’t.22 We see this threat most vividly in 
connection with the growing class of software-controlled and network-con-
nected devices that make up the so-called Internet of Things. We turn to 
those in chapter 8. But it’s equally true for digital media.
For example, when gamers discovered a way to change the appearance 
of characters in Ninja Gaiden, Dead or Alive 3, and Dead or Alive Xtreme Beach 
Volleyball—admittedly, in some cases to make them appear nude—video 
game publisher Tecmo sued.23 These enhancements didn’t enable infringe-
ment; they could only be used by owners of the games in question. If any-
thing they added to the appeal of and demand for the games. Nonetheless, 
Tecmo sued the tinkerers who created the modifications and the website 
that hosted them. The suit was dropped only after the site was taken down. 
Similarly, Blizzard—the maker of World of Warcraft—used the DMCA to tar-
get volunteers who developed software that allowed owners of its games 
to play together online.24 Years later, Blizzard again relied on the DMCA to 
stamp out a program called Glider that allowed players to automate repeti-
tive tasks like farming, crafting, and collecting items.25
There’s no shortage of DRM horror stories, but perhaps the most egre-
gious one took place in 2005, when Sony—once a staunch defender of 
consumer autonomy—hijacked the computers of nearly two million cus-
tomers.26 Sony, gripped by the fear of peer-to-peer infringement, decided 
it was necessary to prevent CD owners from copying their music to their 
computers. Writing software that prevents CD ripping is an easy enough 
task. But since people own their computers, they can decide what software 
to install and what software to delete. That posed a problem for Sony since, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020136  Chapter 7
of course, no one would actually want to install a program that crippled 
their computer and made their CDs less valuable. So Sony needed a way to 
hide its DRM on customers’ computers to prevent them from deleting it.
Sony used a tool called a rootkit, rarely employed by legitimate software 
developers, to achieve this subterfuge. Rootkits are programs that covertly 
modify a computer’s operating system to blind it to certain files and pro-
cesses. Once a computer has been compromised by a rootkit, it hides any 
files that meet certain criteria from both the computer’s user and the 
machine’s operating system. So if you open a folder containing a malicious 
program on a rootkit-infected computer, you won’t see it. Or if you use an 
activity monitor to view the processes currently running on your machine, 
the hidden program—in this case Sony’s DRM—won’t be visible.27
If all Sony’s rootkit did was allow it to hide its copy protection software, 
that would be bad enough. It’s an underhanded move that denies people 
the right to control what code is running on hardware that they own. But 
the impact of the rootkit went well beyond DRM. It created security vulner-
abilities that left users open to an array of potential attacks. Sony’s rootkit 
was programmed to hide any file or process that began with the prefix 
“$sys$.” If an attacker wanted to install malicious code on your machine 
and make sure it went unnoticed by you, your operating system, and your 
anti-virus software, all they would have to do is add that prefix to the file 
name.
The range of attacks that could exploit this vulnerability is limitless. The 
user’s data could be altered, deleted, or even held for ransom; the machine 
could be rendered inoperable; a program could sniff sensitive passwords or 
collect financial records and other personal data. The list goes on; just use 
your imagination. The threat was more than theoretical. Within days of the 
public learning about the rootkit, malicious code leveraging it was spread-
ing across the Internet. A program called Backdoor.Ryknos was transmit-
ted via spam email. Once on a user’s system, it opened a communications 
channel that let the attacker remotely control the user’s system—down-
loading, deleting, and executing files, and gathering and sending informa-
tion from the compromised machine. So while Sony customers nominally 
owned their computers, they no longer controlled them.
After independent discovery of the rootkit by at least three different 
groups of researchers—one of which, in full disclosure, was represented by 
one of this book’s authors—Sony was forced to confront its decision when 
Mark Russinovich went public with his findings. The response from Sony—
then the world’s second-largest record label—was underwhelming. First, 
it downplayed the importance of the rootkit. Thomas Hesse, president of 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices  137
Global Digital Business, asked, “Most people, I think, don’t even know what 
a rootkit is, so why should they care about it?” Eventually, Sony released 
tools to uninstall its DRM and the associated rootkit, but those tools caused 
security concerns of their own. Finally, Sony recalled millions of unsold 
infected CDs.
The Sony rootkit incident reveals, in an admittedly dramatic fashion, the 
underlying problems with DRM. The devices and content that consumers 
reasonably believe they own are guided by secret loyalties and hidden agen-
das that run counter to consumers’ best interests. The things we buy are 
technologically tethered to their creators, subject to ongoing surveillance, 
recall, or even destruction. They are not under our control. The rootkit inci-
dent also exemplifies the attitude behind DRM. We are not to be trusted, 
not even with our own computers. And our interests in autonomy, security, 
and privacy are secondary to rights holders’ perceived need for greater con-
trol over our behavior. Copyright holders, in condemning infringement, 
often implore the public to show greater respect for property rights. They 
might try taking their own advice.
The Effort to Copyright Garage Door Openers
In light of the power the DMCA created to control how people use tech-
nology, it was only a matter of time until DRM spread beyond traditional 
entertainment industries to companies in other sectors. Soon we began to 
see DRM inside common everyday devices like garage door openers, print-
ers, and coffeemakers. These efforts sought to control consumer behavior 
not out of a fear of infringement, but as a strategy to reduce competition 
from firms that wanted to lure customers away with cheaper alternatives. 
With section 1201 as a powerful new tool, electronics companies had strong 
incentives to put DRM everywhere.
As DRM-restricted products hit the market, competitors of course found 
ways to circumvent those controls. Predictably, litigation soon followed. 
One of the first examples was in 2002, when Chamberlain, a maker of 
garage door openers, sued its competitor Skylink for making an inexpen-
sive universal remote that could be programmed to open almost any garage 
door, including those made by Chamberlain. Skylink marketed its remotes 
as replacements for customers who lost their original Chamberlain remote 
or as an additional remote for drivers who had second or third vehicles. 
Chamberlain sold its own replacement remotes for a hefty sum, a market 
it wanted to control exclusively. So Chamberlain embedded DRM in its 
garage door opener that required remotes to send a proprietary code before 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020138  Chapter 7
they could open the door. After some experimentation, Skylink discovered 
the algorithm for this secret code and built it into its own remote.
Chamberlain sued, arguing this was an act of circumvention. The court, 
recognizing the obvious tension between the personal property rights of 
owners of garage door openers and the claimed IP rights of Chamberlain, 
rejected this attempt to expand the reach of the DMCA. As the district court 
explained, “A homeowner who purchases a Chamberlain [garage door 
opener] owns it and has a right to use it.”28 The owner of the device can use 
it in ways that conflict with the prerogative of its manufacturer. On appeal, 
the Federal Circuit held that claims under section 1201 needed to establish 
some relationship between the circumvention of DRM and a plausible act of 
copyright infringement. But that nexus was missing here because “consum-
ers who purchase a product containing a copy of embedded software have 
the inherent legal right to use that copy of the software.”29 Again, owner-
ship undermined the effort to control how consumers used their devices.
A similar case was filed that same year by printer manufacturer Lexmark 
against Static Control Components, Inc. (SCC), an aftermarket supplier of 
replacement parts and ink cartridges. Much like razor companies that make 
most of their money on replacement blades, Lexmark relied heavily on 
sales of expensive ink cartridges. SCC competed by selling its own compat-
ible cartridges. Like Chamberlain, Lexmark embedded DRM in its printers 
and cartridges that prevented its printers from accepting non-Lexmark car-
tridges. SCC reverse engineered the system and designed its own cartridges 
to be compatible by fooling Lexmark’s DRM. Lexmark sued SCC, claim-
ing that by plugging a rival cartridge into the printer, owners of Lexmark 
printers were circumventing the company’s DRM. But like Chamberlain, 
Lexmark was rebuffed. As the court explained it, “Purchase of a Lexmark 
printer ... allows ‘access’ to the program” that runs the device.30 So Lex-
mark’s effort to assert ongoing control over that piece of personal property 
failed.
These cases show that courts are still sensitive to the concerns of private 
property owners, at least in some circumstances. But they also illustrate the 
deep desire among device makers to retain control over consumer devices 
after they have been sold. As we explore in more detail in chapter 8, there 
are tools aside from the DMCA that they can use to make that vision a 
reality.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273330/9780262335959_cbi.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20208  The Internet of Things You Don’t Own
The door refused to open. It said, “Five cents, please.”
He searched his pockets. No more coins; nothing. “I’ll pay you tomorrow,” he 
told the door. Again he tried the knob. Again it remained locked tight. “What I 
pay you,” he informed it, “is in the nature of a gratuity; I don’t have to pay you.”
“I think otherwise,” the door said. “Look in the purchase contract you signed 
when you bought this conapt.”
In his desk drawer he found the contract; since signing it he had found it 
necessary to refer to the document many times. Sure enough; payment to his 
door for opening and shutting constituted a mandatory fee. Not a tip.
“You discover I’m right,” the door said. It sounded smug.
From the drawer beside the sink Joe Chip got a stainless steel knife; with it he 
began systematically to unscrew the bolt assembly of his apt’s money-gulping 
door.
“I’ll sue you,” the door said as the first screw fell out.
Joe Chip said, “I’ve never been sued by a door. But I guess I can live through 
it.”
—Ubik by Philip K. Dick (1969)
Cars, refrigerators, televisions, Barbie dolls. When people buy these every-
day objects, they rarely give much thought to whether or not they own 
them. We pay for them, so we think of them as our property. And histori-
cally, with the exception of the occasional lease or rental, we owned our 
personal possessions. They were ours to use as we saw fit. They were free to 
be shared, resold, modified, or repaired. That expectation is a deeply held 
one. When manufacturers tried to leverage the DMCA to control how we 
used our printers and garage door openers, a big reason courts pushed back 
was that the effort was so unexpected, so out of step with our understand-
ing of our relationship to the things we buy.
But in the decade or so that followed those first bumbling attempts, 
we’ve witnessed a subtler and more effective strategy for convincing people 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020140  Chapter 8
to cede control over everyday purchases. It relies less—or at least less obvi-
ously—on DRM and the threat of DMCA liability, and more on the appeal 
of new product features, and in particular those found in the smart devices 
that make up the so-called Internet of Things (IoT). IoT has become some-
thing of a buzzword, intended to cover a range of devices from smartphones 
and networked thermostats to self-driving cars and wearable technology. 
These products generally combine embedded software, network connec-
tivity, microscopic sensors, and large-scale data analytics. In essence, they 
are computers. As Chief Justice John Roberts recently wrote about mobile 
phones: “The term ‘cell phone’ is itself misleading shorthand; many of 
these devices are in fact minicomputers that also happen to have the capac-
ity to be used as a telephone. They could just as easily be called cameras, 
video players, rolodexes, calendars, tape recorders, libraries, diaries, albums, 
televisions, maps, or newspapers. ... It is no exaggeration to say that many 
of the more than 90 percent of American adults who own a cell phone keep 
on their person a digital record of nearly every aspect of their lives—from 
the mundane to the intimate.”1
That’s certainly true of our phones, but it’s equally true of so many of 
the objects of modern life. Your car is a computer with wheels; a plane is a 
computer with wings; your watch, your child’s toys, even your pacemaker 
are all computers at their core.2 And as computers, they are susceptible to 
the same sort of external limitations and controls we’ve witnessed with pre-
vious generations of digital goods. Even if we resist it, we’re accustomed to 
software telling us whether we can watch a digital movie. But what happens 
when computer code dictates when your light bulbs have to be replaced?3 
Or how fast you can drive?4 Or whether you can fly your drone in a par-
ticular neighborhood?5 Or what brand of cat litter you can use?6 What are 
the social consequences of a smart mattress that collects and analyzes heart 
rate and breathing data, monitors your movements, and provides you a 
nightly summary?7 That’s what Samsung’s new Sleepsense device promises. 
Samsung even suggests you track your loved ones by “simply put[ting] the 
sensor under their mattress ... to receive an analysis of the quality of their 
sleep via email.” What could possibly go wrong?
With so many networked devices in their homes, consumers are relying 
on home automation hubs—devices that allow them to control their home 
security systems, lights, garage door openers, and entertainment systems 
from any place with an Internet connection. The maker of one such device, 
Revolv, was acquired by Google-owned IoT company Nest in 2014. The 
Revolv hub sold for $300 and touted a “lifetime subscription” for updates 
and new features.8 But in April of 2016, Nest announced it would no longer 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Internet of Things You Don’t Own  141
support the Revolv. What’s more, Nest planned to exercise its software-
enabled remote control over the devices to render them entirely inoper-
able. After a May 15 software update, it explained, “The Revolv app won’t 
open and the hub won’t work.”9 Alphabet, Google’s recently-created parent 
company, which has its sights set on the self-driving car and medical device 
markets, decided it was within its rights to reduce a device that consumers 
bought to nothing more than an overpriced paperweight. Consider that 
before you buy a Google car.
In this chapter, we look at a small sampling of IoT devices across a wide 
range of sectors and consider their consequences for ownership and con-
sumer welfare more broadly. In many cases, these technologies offer real 
benefits. Yet the core cultural and legal shifts they represent strike another 
blow against ownership in the digital economy.
Jailbreaking Is Not a Crime
The exact origin of the Internet of Things is difficult to pinpoint, but one 
significant moment in its early history was the introduction of the iPhone 
on January 9, 2007. Steve Jobs told the assembled crowd, “Today, Apple is 
going to reinvent the phone.”10 He proceeded to wow them with “a rev-
olutionary mobile phone, a widescreen iPod with touch controls, and a 
breakthrough Internet communications device” combined in a single prod-
uct.11 But like nearly every Apple product, the user experience was carefully 
choreographed and tightly controlled. iPhone users could only run Apple’s 
iOS. They could only configure the settings Apple allowed them to access. 
They could only use Apple-approved mobile carriers. And they could only 
run the applications Apple provided. And later, once Apple launched its 
App Store, they could only install software that Apple approved—on the 
basis of opaque and inconsistent standards. What you could do with this 
remarkably powerful pocket computer depended entirely on what Apple 
let you do.
This  walled-garden  approach  was  a  dramatic  departure  from  the 
approach of general-purpose computers, including Macs, which allowed 
third-party applications and considerable freedom for user modification. 
In some ways, Apple’s approach to the iPhone was more in line with an 
earlier phone maker, AT&T. During its decades-long reign as a telecommu-
nications monopolist, AT&T—née Bell Telephone—used a number of strat-
egies to maintain strict control over telephones. As the holder of Alexander 
Graham Bell’s patents, AT&T had total control over the design, produc-
tion, and distribution of phones. And even after those patents expired, it 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020142  Chapter 8
extended that control by leasing phones rather than selling them, making 
certain that users didn’t acquire property rights in their devices. They also 
used contractual provisions and legal threats to stamp out innovation, no 
matter how innocuous.
In the 1940s, AT&T exercised this power by targeting the Hushaphone, 
a small non-electronic accessory that attached over a telephone receiver 
to increase privacy and cut down on noise. AT&T forbade its use, and it 
took nearly a decade of legal battles before the D.C. Circuit rejected that 
restriction as an “unwarranted interference with the telephone subscriber’s 
right reasonably to use his telephone in ways which are privately benefi-
cial without becoming publicly detrimental.”12 This case, along with the 
FCC’s subsequent Carterphone decision, which permitted the attachment of 
wireless technology to AT&T’s phones, paved the way for competition and 
individual ownership of landline phones.
In  some  ways,  Apple’s  control  over  the  iPhone  is  a  throwback  to 
these bad old days. But it’s one that many consumers happily accepted 
in exchange for the convenience of integrating all of their online activi-
ties into a single device. But not everyone was willing to go along quietly. 
Apple’s restrictions sparked a movement to “jailbreak” iPhones in order 
to regain some semblance of ownership. “Jailbreaking” refers to the act of 
eliminating software restrictions and DRM that limit how phone owners 
can use their devices. With a jailbroken iPhone, you can install any soft-
ware you choose, replace Apple’s operating system with one you prefer, and 
customize the look and feel of your phone. Jailbreaking is related to, but 
distinct from, unlocking a mobile phone—the process of removing soft-
ware locks that prevent you from switching wireless carriers—from AT&T 
to T-Mobile, for example.
Jailbreaking  is  not  a  new  practice.  Similar  homebrew  communities 
formed around other devices long before the iPhone launched, from Xbox 
hacks to do-it-yourself DVRs.13 But nothing galvanized that community 
more than the thought of turning Apple’s powerful and ubiquitous product 
into an open platform. The first iPhone jailbreak was announced on July 
10, 2007, just eleven days after the device launched. With each inevitable 
Apple software update, the jailbreaking community would free that new 
version within weeks, if not days.14
Although it didn’t file suit, Apple insisted that jailbreaking was illegal. 
In 2009, the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) filed a petition with the 
U.S. Copyright Office requesting formal permission for iPhone owners to 
jailbreak their devices without fearing anti-circumvention liability. This 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Internet of Things You Don’t Own  143
provoked Apple to explain precisely why jailbreaking should be banned. 
Despite referring to consumers as “iPhone owners” throughout its filing, 
Apple asserted that “iPhone users are licensees, not owners, of the copies 
of iPhone operating software.”15 In other words, when you buy an iPhone, 
all you own is the physical hardware. The software stored on it that make 
it work and account for much of its value—from the operating system that 
enables basic functionality to the built-in Weather and Stocks apps—still 
belong to Apple.
While perhaps shocking to those with an iPhone in their pocket, this 
stance was a logical conclusion for Apple, a company with one foot in the 
software industry and a commitment to controlling the user experience 
that bordered on zealotry. And because Apple has consistently proven its 
nearly unrivaled skill as a designer of end user experiences, it succeeded in 
selling us DRM in the guise of a smart device. It made us believe that a bug 
was a feature. Consumers recoiled at the idea of these sorts of restrictions 
when Chamberlain and Lexmark tried to sneak them into our garage door 
openers and laser printers, but when Jobs offered us the same vision, we 
lined up to give Apple our money.
Eventually, the Copyright Office ruled in favor of the right to jailbreak 
phones. However, in doing so, it sidestepped the contentious issue of 
ownership and focused on jailbreaking as a fair use of Apple’s copyrighted 
iOS. And in 2014, an otherwise hopelessly gridlocked Congress passed, 
and President Obama signed, the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wire-
less Competition Act in response to a petition signed by over 100,000 
Americans.16 Although each of these measures suggests both that people 
still care deeply about owning their devices and that government can be 
responsive to those concerns, they are temporary fixes. Both the Copy-
right Office exemptions and the unlocking legislation expire after three  
years.
Apple’s battle for ownership of our phones signaled the beginning of a 
much broader shift. Every day, we learn of yet another object that will come 
with embedded software, location detection sensors, and network connec-
tions that limit consumer control and surreptitiously communicate back to 
its corporate mother ship. And while companies like Apple are slowly mak-
ing their devices more open and user-configurable as a result of public pres-
sure and competitive threats from open-source mobile operating systems 
such as Android, whole other areas of our lives are becoming constrained 
and preconfigured for us, often without our knowledge.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020144  Chapter 8
Old MacDonald Licensed a Farm
Farmers have enough to worry about. Banks are coming to foreclose on 
their land. Locusts are eating their crops. Immigration policy is complicat-
ing their hiring practices. And corporate agri-business long ago redefined 
the economics of their way of life. On top of all of this, today’s farmers have 
to contend with intellectual property.
It began with seeds. For years, Monsanto successfully sold Roundup, an 
herbicide that helped farmers control weeds and other unwanted vegeta-
tion. But Roundup also often damaged the crops themselves, so Monsanto 
began manufacturing crops resistant to Roundup. It patented so-called 
Roundup Ready soybeans and later added alfalfa, canola, corn, cotton, and 
sugar beets to the list of Roundup-resistant products.17 Initially welcomed 
by many farmers, some were troubled by Monsanto’s claim that its seeds 
were licensed for a single season, not sold. This meant that no matter how 
many seeds you saved, they couldn’t be replanted the following year, a 
centuries-old farming practice. Instead, you had to buy new seeds from 
Monsanto or else contend with pests and less-effective pesticides.18
Seed patents were just the beginning of the IP frustrations facing farm-
ers. Software has also found its way onto the farm. The iconic John Deere 
tractor now contains no less than eight control units—hardware and soft-
ware components that regulate various functions, ranging from running 
the engine to adjusting the armrest to operating the hitch.19 When tractors 
were purely mechanical, farmers could easily maintain, repair, and modify 
their own equipment as needed. But now, software stands in their way. That 
barrier is no accident. Tired of losing revenue to industrious farmers who 
repaired their own tractors or bargain hunters who took their equipment 
to an independent repair shop, John Deere decided to force their custom-
ers to have their equipment serviced by authorized John Deere dealers. By 
interposing a software layer between farmers and their tractors, John Deere 
created a practical hurdle. And by wrapping its software controls in DRM, it 
created a legal one. A quick glance at the John Deere owner’s manual gives 
you a good indication of the result. Almost any problem—from high cool-
ant temperature to a parking break that’s not working or a seat that’s too 
firm—ends the same way, with a trip to the John Deere dealer.20
Fed up with John Deere’s tactics, a group of farmers petitioned the Copy-
right Office in February of 2015 for a temporary DMCA exemption, like 
the one granted to smartphone jailbreakers, that would give them clear 
legal authority to repair, upgrade, and modify their tractors. John Deere 
responded with adamant opposition, insisting that tractor owners had no 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Internet of Things You Don’t Own  145
right to look under the digital hood, even if the fix was quick and techni-
cally simple.21 Its argument hinged on ownership. John Deere claimed it 
owns the software, and not just as an abstract matter of copyright law. It 
owns the copies of its code embedded in the tractors it sells to farmers, 
code that is essential to the functioning of the equipment. Farmers, in John 
Deere’s words, merely had “an implied license for the life of the vehicle to 
operate the vehicle.”22 That means you get to keep driving the tractor you 
bought from John Deere for tens of thousands of dollars unless and until it 
tells you otherwise.
John Deere’s attitude toward ownership has a number of important 
implications that typify the core risks presented by the Internet of Things. 
Most obviously, by denying farmers the right to repair—a right entrenched 
enough that even patent protection can’t disturb it23—John Deere has effec-
tively raised the price of its products for farmers. It has also done serious 
harm to the market for repair services, which are less competitive since 
farmers have no real choice of mechanics.
Less obvious is the harm locking down tractors can have on innovation. 
Sir Isaac Newton once said, “If I have seen further, it is by standing on 
the shoulders of Giants.”24 Of course, Newton borrowed the phrase from 
Bernard of Chartres, but that only underscores the point. Innovation is, in 
nearly every instance, an incremental affair. Small contributions add up, 
sometimes in unexpected ways. As Eric von Hippel describes in Democratiz-
ing Innovation, user innovation—the process by which users take, modify, 
and improve upon manufactured goods—is a valuable source of new inven-
tive contributions.25 Farmers have a long history of just such ingenuity and 
creative problem solving. As MIT Media Lab researcher Ethan Zuckerman 
wrote: “If you’ve flown over the western U.S., you’ve seen green circles 
dotting the landscape. This is a model of irrigation that’s far more efficient 
than setting up huge systems of piping—instead, fields are centered on a 
well and a rolling pipe rotates through the field. This technique was inno-
vated by farmers, but is now in wide use. Ask the companies who manu-
facture these systems who invented them and they’ll claim creation. Show 
them a photo of the systems developed by farmers, and they’ll say, ‘But you 
should have seen their welds—they sucked.’”26
Kyle Wiens, a self-described right to repair activist, sees farmers’ innova-
tions as part of a broader movement: “In the tech industry, we tend to talk 
about the exploding Maker Movement as if tinkering is something new. 
In fact, it’s as old as dirt: farmers have been making, building, rebuilding, 
hacking, and tinkering with their equipment since chickens were feral. I’ve 
seen farmers do with rusty harvesters and old welders what modern Makers 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020146  Chapter 8
do with Raspberry Pis and breadboards. There’s even a crowdsourced maga-
zine, Farm Show, that’s catalogued thousands of clever farming inventions 
over the past three decades.”27
But if farmers don’t own the tools, equipment, and seeds they use on 
a daily basis, this potentially fertile ground for innovation will lie fallow.
Less Fast, More Furious
John Deere is not alone. Other vehicle manufacturers including Ferrari, 
Ford, General Motors, and Mercedes-Benz are finding new ways to use tech-
nology and law to weaken the property interests of drivers. These efforts 
take a number of forms—DRM that prevents repair and customization, soft-
ware that monitors and controls your driving, even restrictions on vehicle 
resale. The car, once a symbol of freedom and independence, is increasingly 
a tool for control.
Modern cars, much like John Deere’s tractors, rely on dozens of elec-
tronic control units. Access to the software code on those control units 
is necessary for many common repairs. The code is also crucial if a driver 
wants to change the default tuning of their vehicle to get more horsepower 
or better fuel efficiency from the engine, for example. Researchers investi-
gating potential safety and security flaws likewise need to look under the 
metaphorical and literal hood. But control unit code is often inaccessible 
because carmakers use DRM to keep it under lock and key. Until recently, 
car owners who broke these software locks risked liability under the DMCA, 
not to mention voiding their warranties. That meant only people with per-
mission from carmakers can do repairs or research without fear of liability. 
When car owners asked for permission to access the software that controls 
their vehicles, GM told the Copyright Office that car purchasers mistak-
enly “conflate ownership of a vehicle with ownership of the underlying 
computer software in a vehicle.”28 But when code is inseparable from the 
essential functions of the vehicle, ownership of a collection of spare parts 
provides little comfort. Even those who miss their car payments have begun 
to fear “The Remote Repo Man”—an embedded program that disables auto-
mobile operation when the purchaser fails to make their monthly payment 
with no ability to override, even in emergency circumstances such as rush-
ing to the hospital.29
Mercedes-Benz has also followed suit. It offers mbrace, a feature that 
provides remote vehicle controls, service diagnostics, directions, and vehi-
cle tracking. It also connects to Verizon to provide roadside assistance, 
emergency help, and even geographic, speed, and temporal restrictions on 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Internet of Things You Don’t Own  147
teenage drivers.30 These bells and whistles sometimes offer real benefits. 
But what Mercedes-Benz doesn’t advertise is that the code running these 
features doesn’t belong to you. As part of the Terms of Service, Mercedes-
Benz insists that “you do not acquire any rights in such software, including 
any right to use or modify the software[.]”31 They go on to state: “We may 
update the software contained in your Vehicle’s systems or the Equipment 
from time to time. We may do this remotely without notifying you first. ... 
These software updates may affect or erase data that you have previously 
stored on the Equipment in your Vehicle (for example, specific route or 
destination information). We assume no responsibility for lost or erased 
(or otherwise affected) data.” In other words, Mercedes can remotely enter 
your car without notice or consent to update or erase any digital infor-
mation or feature at any time without taking any responsibility for dam-
age that it might cause. If you own a copy of 1984, don’t store it in your 
E-Class.
Consumer advocates have pushed back against these efforts, passing a 
Right to Repair law in Massachusetts and pressuring manufacturers to nego-
tiate a Memorandum of Understanding with aftermarket repair shops and 
part suppliers that allows those businesses access to diagnostic informa-
tion for repair and replacement purposes, but not for automobile owners.32 
According to the Automaker’s Alliance, “The real issue of concern here is 
that the sophisticated computers in vehicles are so intertwined that they 
shouldn’t (for security and safety and environmental reasons) be allowed to 
be tinkered with.”33 But carmakers themselves have a troubled history with 
their own sophisticated systems. Recent experience suggests that extra eyes 
reviewing this code might be helpful. Half a million Fords were recalled 
because of software glitches that prevented their engines from shutting off.34 
And Chrysler recently recalled 1.4 million vehicles because their onboard 
infotainment systems were vulnerable to hackers. Independent researchers 
uncovered that flaw when they wirelessly hacked a Jeep driven by a col-
league, giving them control over the vehicle’s steering and braking.35
The notion that car owners can only control the parts of their vehicles 
that don’t yet incorporate software or electronic sensors has serious impli-
cations for ownership. Under GM’s theory, you can check the air pressure 
in your tires—for now—but you can’t run a diagnostic test on your GPS to 
make sure you won’t end up in a lake. Every time you put gas in your car, 
there are security, safety, and environmental risks. But unless you live in 
Oregon or New Jersey, you’d be shocked if you were locked out of your own 
gas tank. There are pressing public safety concerns associated with operat-
ing a car, but they should be addressed by accountable public agencies such 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020148  Chapter 8
as the Department of Transportation, the DMV, state and highway patrols,  
and the EPA, not through private IP enforcement. As we learned from Volks-
wagen’s “Defeat Device,” which allowed it to cheat on federal emissions 
tests for its diesel vehicles,36 intellectual property laws that protect embed-
ded software from independent testing and examination have potentially 
massive consequences for the environment, public confidence, and vehicle 
resale value.37
Fortunately, the Copyright Office, along with the National Telecommu-
nications and Information Administration, agreed to allow vehicle owners 
to break DRM and access the software in their cars for purposes of security 
research, personal modification, and repair under a special DMCA exemp-
tion.38 However, as noted, these exemptions last only three years. They are 
hardly a permanent response to these problems.
Not satisfied with controlling who repairs your vehicle, carmakers want 
to decide how you drive as well. Ford sells a car equipped with its Intel-
ligent Speed Limiter, which uses onboard cameras to scan road signs for 
speed limits and then adjusts the fuel to prevent drivers from exceeding 
posted limits.39 This sort of technology gives Ford an immense amount of 
information about your driving habits. As a Ford executive boasted in 2014, 
“We know everyone who breaks the law, we know when you’re doing it. We 
have GPS in your car, so we know what you’re doing.”40 And while there 
may be good reason to embrace tools that reduce speeding and increase 
safety, they fundamentally change what it means to own the car you drive 
and the autonomy we are used to having inside it. As vehicles move toward 
computer-assisted and self-driving, the incidents of ownership will likely 
grow more and more distant.
For Ferrari, the antipathy toward owners reached new levels. The com-
pany now requires customers to sign a Right of First Refusal Agreement that 
bars the new owner of a $200,000 car from selling it without checking with 
Ferrari first.41 The relevant part of the agreement reads: “Customer hereby 
grants to Dealer, as a material consideration for the opportunity to purchase 
[the vehicle], an option to repurchase the [vehicle] at its market value (but 
in no event more than the original Manufacturer’s Suggested Retail Price) 
at any time within two (2) years of the date of delivery.”
Granted, this is a purely contractual restriction. But it provides a window 
into the sort of control carmakers want over owners. Even more than con-
tracts, software and the DMCA might give it to them.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Internet of Things You Don’t Own  149
Free as in Coffee
Those in the free software movement are fond of distinguishing between 
two ways in which we use the word “free.” “Free as in beer” refers to price. 
“Free as in speech” refers to liberty, the freedom you have to use a thing as 
you choose.42 Until recently, you could be confident that if you overheard 
someone talking about free coffee, it meant Starbucks was running a pro-
motion. But thanks to Keurig, the maker of the popular K-Cup brewing 
system, conversations about coffee now have to account for questions of 
liberty as well.
The Keurig saga began in 2012, when several of the coffee company’s 
key patents expired. Those patents covered its pod-based brewing system. 
Users placed single-serving portions of coffee or other brewed beverages in 
the machine, hit a button, and got a consistent drink each time. Without 
patent protection, Keurig had to contend with competition. As it turned 
out, Keurig wasn’t a fan. Rival companies started producing compatible 
pods and undercutting Keurig’s prices. In response, Keurig released new 
machines featuring “Keurig 2.0 Brewing Technology which reads each lid 
to deliver on the promise of excellent quality beverages.”43 Marketing speak 
aside, what that meant was that Keurig’s machines would only accept pods 
embedded with a code that verified your coffee came from a licensed sup-
plier. And it also killed off its generic pod that let you supply your own cof-
fee grounds. If you tried to brew rogue coffee, your Keurig machine greeted 
you with this cheerful message:
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020150  Chapter 8
The public reaction was swift and vicious. Angry Facebook posts and 
irate Amazon reviews flooded the Internet. As Brian Barrett wrote, “A coffee 
maker limiting your choice of grind seems as out of place as a frying pan 
dictating your eggs.”44 It didn’t take long for competitors to capitalize on 
this outrage by cracking the Keurig DRM.45 Coffee drinkers even figured out 
how to defeat it with a single piece of tape.46 Soon Keurig was persuaded 
to reverse course, at least in part. It appears to be sticking to its guns when 
it comes to blocking pods from competitors, but it announced plans to 
reintroduce the My K-Cup product that allowed coffee drinkers to fill their 
own pods. Nonetheless, the company and its investors have paid a price for 
its overreach. Keurig stock dropped by 10 percent in the wake of the DRM 
controversy.47
The Keurig example shows that people still care deeply about owning 
and controlling their devices and that they have the potential to make their 
voices heard in the marketplace. But it also cautions that market pressure is 
often only partly effective in protecting consumer interests.
Open the Pod Bay Doors, Barbie
At this point, it should come as no surprise that the Internet of Things 
threatens our sense of control over the devices we purchase. However, those 
threats aren’t limited to intellectual property and DRM; they also include 
battles for control over information about our behavior and our inner lives. 
One troubling example is the Wi-Fi-enabled Hello Barbie doll from Mattel. 
This IoT Barbie looks like many of her predecessors but offers a unique fea-
ture. She can engage in conversation with a child and learn about them in 
the process. Barbie does this by recording her conversations and transmit-
ting them via network connections to ToyTalk, a third-party cloud-based 
speech recognition service. ToyTalk then uses software and data analytics 
to analyze those conversations and deliver personalized responses. It’s an 
impressive trick, but the implications for our sense of ownership are quite 
shocking. For many children, talking to toy dolls is a way to share their 
unfiltered thoughts, dreams, and fears in a safe, private environment. But 
according to the terms of the Hello Barbie EULA, ToyTalk and its unnamed 
partners have wide latitude to make use of information about your child’s 
conversations in ways that few parents would anticipate:
All information, materials and content ... is owned by ToyTalk or is used with 
permission. ...
You agree that ToyTalk and its licensors and contractors may use, transcribe 
and store. ... Recordings and any speech data contained therein, including your 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Internet of Things You Don’t Own  151
voice and likeness as may be captured therein, to provide and maintain the 
ToyTalk App, to develop, tune, test, enhance or improve speech recognition tech-
nology and artificial intelligence algorithms, to develop acoustic and language 
models and for other research and development purposes. ...
By using any Service, you consent to ToyTalk’s collection, use and/or disclo-
sure of your personal information as described in this Policy. By allowing other 
people to use the Service via your account, you are confirming that you have the 
right to consent on their behalf to ToyTalk’s collection, use and disclosure of 
their personal information as described below.
In other words, ToyTalk claims to own anything you, your child, or even 
their friends say to Barbie. Conversations with the doll are corporate prop-
erty. The safety and privacy of a child’s bedroom is compromised by the 
collection, sharing, and commercial use of those conversations. And while 
these services may offer benefits, they come with significant new risks. 
Shortly after the IoT-enabled Barbie shipped, security vulnerabilities that 
could allow hackers to intercept a child’s conversations with the doll were 
revealed.48 And those worries aren’t just hypothetical. Around the same 
time, VTech—maker of the children’s smartwatch Kidizoom and InnoTab 
mobile device—disclosed that more than six million children had their 
personal information, including photos and chat messages, stolen from 
VTech’s servers.49
Hello Barbie is just the latest example of this trend of networked appli-
ances. Samsung shipped a SmartTV with a default listening mode—and 
accompanying  privacy  policy—intended  to  continuously  eavesdrop  on 
viewers and send audio back via the cloud for analysis.50 In a pitch to inves-
tors, Vizio recently touted the fact that its smart televisions will be able to 
detect any content that users watch, regardless of the source, and use that 
information to customize advertising and programming.51 The June smart 
oven features cameras and software that can recognize the food you cook.52 
Google’s Nest thermostat takes a similar approach to learning about you. 
Amazon’s Echo, Apple’s Siri, Microsoft’s Cortana, and Google Now go a step 
further by encouraging us to interact with disembodied soothing, friendly, 
and—by default—female voices. Science tells us that we engage more read-
ily with technology that mimics human interaction. A recent study showed 
that gamblers risk more on slot machines with humanlike features.53 Of 
course, such services have the potential to offer real benefits. But such a 
service relationship comes not only with divided loyalties but also dimin-
ished autonomy. It is very different from owning an object completely and 
suggests we should be mindful of exactly who controls our relationship 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020152  Chapter 8
with any object we purchase. A person’s home may be their castle, but their 
appliances may belong to someone else.
Our Bodies, Our Servers
As if our connection to the Internet of Things wasn’t intimate enough, 
network-enabled and software-dependent devices are now inside our bod-
ies. When open source advocate Karen Sandler found out at age thirty-one 
that she could die suddenly from a heart condition, she did what most of us 
would do. She went to the doctor to fix it. In her case, that meant implant-
ing a pacemaker-defibrillator in her chest to give her heart a jolt in the 
event it gave out. The device—about the size of an avocado—was literally a 
life-saving invention. But because it ran proprietary software, Sandler had 
no way to tell how it worked or how likely it was to fail. As she explained 
in an interview, “A statistic came out recently that 25 percent of all medical 
device recalls in the last few years have been due to software failure. When 
you read these statistics it becomes very personal.”54
It turns out that Sandler’s questions about her pacemaker weren’t so 
easy to answer. Much like Apple and its iPhone, pacemaker manufacturers 
won’t let patients look inside or test the devices they purchase. Nor are you 
allowed to read the data from your own device while you are at home or on 
the road—even in the midst of a medical emergency.55 Instead, you can only 
access your health data from manufacturer-approved sources. And until 
recently, you couldn’t even test your device to make sure it is functioning 
correctly or was running the latest software or security update. The reason 
for such restrictions? According to a filing with the Copyright Office, the 
Advanced Medical Technology Association “believe[s] that patients have 
an inherent right to access their own medical data, however, this in and of 
itself does not necessitate bypass of any intellectual property protections.”56 
In other words, even if you own the physical parts of the pacemaker, the 
manufacturer’s copyright trumps any claim you might have to see how it 
works or what data it collects on you—even when it is implanted inside 
your body.
Dana Lewis proved what patients can do when they own their devices 
and control their care. Lewis is a diabetic living in Seattle who relies on 
a glucose monitor and a handheld wireless device to alert her when her 
blood sugar is too high or low.57 Yet Lewis often wasn’t able to hear the 
alarm, especially when she was sleeping. So she and her partner, Scott 
Leibrand, built a new program that displayed blood sugar levels with new 
louder alarms and a snooze button. They even added the ability to send the 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020The Internet of Things You Don’t Own  153
information to other mobile devices, such as Leibrand’s Pebble watch. Next 
they turned to Lewis’s insulin regime. Traditionally diabetics control their 
insulin levels manually. But Lewis and Leibrand began experimenting with 
the data to devise an algorithm specific to Lewis’s needs—something that 
would automate and adapt based on the data her device was sending out. 
It could predict her insulin needs thirty, sixty, and even ninety minutes in 
the future. Eventually they hope to produce an artificial pancreas that will 
essentially automate this process. No IP law, and certainly not one designed 
to stop infringers from sharing movies online, should stand in the way of 
patients adapting equipment they own to keep them alive.
These concerns are not limited to those of us with life-threatening con-
ditions. More than 20 percent of Americans currently use “wearables”—
computing devices attached directly to your body.58 When you buy a Fitbit 
wearable tracker, its Terms of Sale specifically state that “to the extent the 
Products contain or consist of software in any form ... such Software is 
licensed to you, not sold[.] Terms such as ‘sell’ and ‘purchase,’ as used in 
these Terms, apply only to the extent the Products consist of items other 
than Software.”59 Again all you own is the shell and the components. 
Everything digital—including physical storage media—belongs to Fitbit. 
While Fitbit’s privacy policy does promise to remove personally identifiable 
information whenever it shares your records with third parties, it reserves 
the right to keep everything else indefinitely, even after you delete your 
account.60 Every move you make, every step you take, Fitbit will be tracking 
you. And as Kate Crawford wrote, because the type of information collected 
by these devices is so personal, and so intimate, it is almost as if the device 
itself becomes a more authoritative source about us than we are.61
Network security has also become an issue for medical devices. From 
insulin pumps to cochlear implants and powered prosthetic joints, more 
and more medical devices rely on transmitting medical data to providers 
through Wi-Fi and Bluetooth protocols.62 These connections have already 
opened the door to numerous security issues.63 Even former Vice President 
Dick Cheney claims to have switched off the wireless functionality on his 
own pacemaker to prevent terrorists from hacking it.64 Fortunately, much 
like with vehicle security testing, the Copyright Office granted an exemp-
tion for testing exterior medical devices and passively testing those that are 
implanted in ways that don’t affect functionality.65 The ability to innovate 
and improve these devices, however, remains highly contested.
Karen Sandler’s dream of an open source pacemaker may inspire us, but 
it also presents complications. Open source could allow patients to exam-
ine, test, and improve devices in ways far more flexible and permissive 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020154  Chapter 8
than the current proprietary model, but they don’t give us autonomy in 
quite the same way as analog ownership. Instead they offer a future with 
different, more user-friendly restrictions to navigate. Focusing on medical 
devices, the argument for individual ownership and control resonates more 
viscerally. For the rest of the stuff we buy, the stakes may be lower, but the 
arguments are the same. If you don’t own your devices, you can’t repair or 
customize them. You can’t innovate with them. And in the end, the prod-
ucts you buy may end up using you more than you use them.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273331/9780262335959_cbq.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 20209  Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life
Imagine walking into an auto dealership to buy a new car. You look around, 
find a promising model, and approach the salesperson to find out the price. 
They explain: “Oh, have I got a great deal for you! This beauty is 10 per-
cent off the normal sticker price, but there is a small catch. The discount 
requires that you only use our special ‘single-use’ tires. That means you can 
drive on them as much as you like, but once they get a flat or are low on 
air, you can’t repair or refill them yourself; instead you have to order new 
‘single-use’ tires from our online store. Otherwise, I’m afraid you’ll infringe 
our patents.”
To some, the notion that the tires you buy couldn’t be refilled seems 
not only inefficient but also absurd. And the idea that refilling them could 
somehow put you on the hook for patent infringement is even more bizarre. 
Yet, the most influential patent court in America recently held that these 
sorts of restrictions on any patented product are legal and enforceable.
The case, Lexmark v. Impression Products, involves printer manufacturer 
Lexmark, a company that has fought for over a decade to stop its customers 
from buying competing ink cartridges or refilling authorized ones, using 
the combination of intellectual property rights and DRM. Much like Keu-
rig’s coffee scheme, Lexmark’s strategy involves selling customers a device, 
but conditioning their use on the purchase of authorized accessories. You 
buy the coffee maker, but can only use Keurig’s coffee pods; you buy the 
printer, but can only use Lexmark ink cartridges, and only once.
When Lexmark customers buy one of its ink cartridges, they may dis-
cover text on the outside of the packaging telling them that if they open 
the box, they “agree to return the empty cartridge only to Lexmark for recy-
cling.” If they don’t accept those terms, they are instructed to “return the 
unopened package to your point of purchase.” If they prefer to pay more, 
“a regular price cartridge without these terms is available.”
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020156  Chapter 9
Crucially, Lexmark maintains that consumers who violate these restric-
tions are patent infringers. How could you infringe a patent by reusing a 
product you paid for? Lexmark argues that even if consumers own their 
printers, they don’t actually unconditionally own the cartridges that con-
tain the ink. Lexmark customers, the company says, merely license the ink 
cartridges for a single-use, and the act of refilling them infringes its patented 
technology. If Lexmark is right, a customer’s ability to use the printer they 
own is contingent on Lexmark’s permission. A printer is useless without 
ink, after all. It also means that Lexmark—or any device maker—can lever-
age its patents over one product to control aftermarkets for related ones.
For Lexmark, attempts to tie its products and accessories together are 
nothing new. In 2002, as we discussed in chapter 7, the company tried to 
use the DMCA’s anti-circumvention rules to accomplish the same goal. It 
claimed that the software that exchanged data between its printer and its 
cartridges contained DRM that protected the printer software from being 
accessed without authorization. Fortunately, this theory was rejected by the 
Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. Recognizing the anti-competitive and anti-
consumer impact that such claims could have, one judge wrote: “If we were 
to adopt Lexmark’s reading of the statute, manufacturers could potentially 
create monopolies for replacement parts simply by using similar, but more 
creative, lock-out codes. Automobile manufacturers, for example, could 
control the entire market of replacement parts for their vehicles by includ-
ing lock-out chips.”1
That result is clearly not what Congress intended. Despite this rebuke, 
Lexmark shifted tactics from copyright to patent law, hoping that it could 
achieve the same control over downstream use via a different legal doc-
trine. Whether or not it can will depend on how the Supreme Court views 
the interaction between patent owners and purchasers of patented devices 
and whether it will recognize the crucial role of patent exhaustion.
Patent Law’s Flexible Approach to Exhaustion
Much like copyright exhaustion, patent exhaustion historically has played 
a central role in curbing attempts to monopolize post-sale uses of patented 
goods. And while copyright law has focused largely on the statutory embodi-
ment of the first sale rule over the last century, patent law embraces a more 
flexible common law exhaustion regime. As early as 1852, the Supreme 
Court held in Bloomer v. McQuewan that once a patented good was sold, 
the patent owner could not interfere with the rights of purchasers to use it 
“in the ordinary pursuits of life.”2 It announced this rule for many of the 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life  157
reasons we’ve already discussed, emphasizing personal property: “[W]hen 
the machine passes to the hands of the purchaser, it is no longer within the  
limits of the [patent] monopoly. ... The implement or machine becomes 
[the purchaser’s] private, individual property.”3
But what does it mean to use a digital good in the ordinary pursuits of 
life? At the very least, you would expect to be able to use a device for its 
intended purpose, to repair it, and to transfer it. But according to Lexmark 
and many manufacturers of the things that make up the Internet of Things, 
those customary uses depend on patent holder permission. Yet the history 
of patent exhaustion directly contradicts that assertion. A mere twenty-six 
years after the Bloomer decision, the Supreme Court stated with unusual 
clarity that the purchase of a patented product “carrie[s] with it the right to 
the use of that machine so long as it [is] capable of use.”4 Equally clear was 
that this right to use one’s purchases trumped any attempt by patent own-
ers to impose restrictions on how or where one could use the product. The 
case, Adams v. Burke, involved a coffin maker who sold special coffin lids to 
undertakers in the Boston area. The lid-maker tried to impose a territorial 
limit that barred use of its lids outside of a ten-mile radius. But the Supreme 
Court rejected this attempt under the rule of patent exhaustion. According 
to the Court, it is part of “the essential nature of things” that when a patent 
holder sells a device, it “parts with the right to restrict [its] use.”5
Two years after Adams v. Burke, the Supreme Court again struck down an 
attempt by a patent holder to impose post-sale restrictions on a purchaser. 
In Keeler v. Standard Folding-Bed Co. the Court said in no uncertain terms 
that “one who buys patented articles of manufacture from one authorized 
to sell them becomes possessed of an absolute property in such articles, 
unrestricted in time or place.” The Court was convinced that “the incon-
venience and annoyance to the public that an opposite conclusion would 
occasion are too obvious to require illustration.”6
One of the most controversial technological innovations of all time—
the electric chair—helps illustrate the power exhaustion gives product own-
ers to ignore the objections of the patent holder. On August 6, 1890, the 
Westinghouse Electric Company’s Alternating Current Dynamo was put to 
a novel use—killing a human being. One year earlier, William Kemmler, a 
twenty-eight-year-old seller of fruits and vegetables in Buffalo, N.Y., had 
wandered home drunkenly and murdered his lover Tillie with an ax. After 
the attack, Kemmler allegedly told a bystander, “I’ve done it and I expect 
to take the rope.”7 But technology was one step ahead of Kemmler. Earlier 
that year, the State of New York became the first to authorize electric execu-
tion, and on May 13, 1889, Kemmler was sentenced to “die by electricity.”8
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020158  Chapter 9
During the previous decade, the use of alternating current, or AC, to kill 
humans had been the center of a contentious political and publicity war 
between two of the most famous Americans of the Gilded Age—industrial-
ist millionaire George Westinghouse and Thomas Edison, inventor of AC’s 
rival, direct current (DC). Despite Edison’s ingenuity, Westinghouse, with 
the brief help of the electrical savant Nikola Tesla, had been gaining ground 
quickly in the electric power market. Desperate to promote DC, Edison 
sought to highlight the dangers of AC. The electric chair thus became the 
perfect symbol of what the Edison camp was calling “the killing current.”9
But Westinghouse owned patents on the key components of AC and 
refused to license them for use in execution. Still, Edison’s agents would 
not be deterred. Recognizing that Westinghouse’s patent rights could be 
exhausted for individual dynamos after their initial sale, they reached out 
to one of Westinghouse’s disgruntled licensees and secretly bought up used 
Westinghouse alternators in order to build the first three electric chairs in 
history. Westinghouse objected, but patent exhaustion prevented him from 
controlling the devices after they entered the stream of commerce. In this 
way, patent exhaustion helped Edison demonstrate how deadly AC could 
be using Westinghouse’s own patented products.10 Had Westinghouse been 
able to restrict the use of his dynamos like Lexmark and other patent hold-
ers do today, the debate about the electric chair would have focused on 
hypotheticals instead of the gruesome reality that became the center of the 
discussion.
It’s easy to see why patent holders might object to these sorts of unau-
thorized uses. But the Supreme Court understood that patent exhaustion 
furthered important interests in terms of both competition policy and 
consumer protection. So it resisted attempted end runs around patent 
exhaustion by companies that used techniques like those adopted today 
by Lexmark. In two 1917 cases, the Court rejected efforts to attach strings 
to the sale of patented devices. In the first, Straus v. Victor Talking Mach. 
Co., the Court struck down a licensing notice that attempted to both fix 
the resale price of phonograph players and also force purchasers to use the 
patent holder’s records and needles exclusively. The Court held that this 
was nothing more than an attempt “to sell property for a full price, and 
yet to place restraints upon its further alienation.” Such tactics, the Court 
explained, are “hateful to the law” and “obnoxious to the public interest.”
The second case, Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Manufactur-
ing Co., involved Edison’s patented film projectors. Edison was happy to 
use Westinghouse dynamos over the patent holder’s objections, but when 
it came to his own patents, Edison had a very different view. His projectors 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life  159
were extremely popular, but Edison quickly realized that the real money 
was in selling film reels, which he had also patented. So he attached a large 
steel plate to each of his projectors that asserted that they could only be 
used with Edison reels. After his patent on the reel expired, the defendants 
decided to make their own compatible film reels for use with Edison’s pro-
jector. Edison sued them and their customers, claiming that use of the new 
reels with the patented projector violated the restriction stamped on the 
side of the device.
For Edison—much like Lexmark and Keurig—tethering a device that 
customers are likely to buy only once to a consumable accessory product 
like ink, coffee, or reels of film looked like a savvy business model. By lock-
ing out competitors, Edison could keep the more lucrative film reel market 
to himself. However, the Supreme Court’s Motion Picture Patents Co. deci-
sion ultimately rejected Edison’s attempt to trump patent exhaustion. It 
explained that “the primary purpose of our patent laws is not the creation 
of private fortunes for the owners of patents, but is ‘to promote the progress 
of science and the useful arts.’” As a result, “the right to vend is exhausted 
by a single, unconditional sale, the article sold being thereby carried out-
side the monopoly of the patent law and rendered free of every restriction 
which the vendor may attempt to put upon it.”11
This “single-recovery” approach is rooted in the basic purposes of IP pol-
icy. By limiting patent holders to a single profit per sale, it maximizes the 
incentives to distribute new inventions to as many people as possible and at 
the same time encourages purchasers to fully utilize the products they buy. 
It also avoids idiosyncratic arrangements of rights that impose high infor-
mation costs on purchasers.12 Limiting patent holders to a single recov-
ery also guards against the abuse that would likely occur if patent holders 
were granted ongoing control over products released into the stream of 
commerce: “A restriction which would give to the plaintiff such a poten-
tial power for evil ... is plainly void because wholly without the scope and 
purpose of our patent laws, and because, if sustained, it would be gravely 
injurious to that public interest, which we have seen is more a favorite of 
the law than is the promotion of private fortunes.”13
Just as the Supreme Court recently reiterated in the copyright context, 
the foundation of patent exhaustion is “the common law’s refusal to permit 
restraints on the alienation of chattels.”14 In Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc.—the used textbook case—the Court emphasized “the importance of 
leaving buyers of goods free to compete with each other when reselling or 
otherwise disposing of these goods.” In large part, exhaustion is a reflection 
of the fact that “American law ... has generally thought that competition, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020160  Chapter 9
including freedom to resell, can work to the advantage of the consumer.”15 
That’s just as true for patented devices as it is for copyrighted works.
The Return of Edison’s Label
In light of such powerful statements in favor of exhaustion over the last 
150 years, you might wonder how companies like Lexmark can continue 
to insist that they have the right to control how we can use the products 
we buy. If the Supreme Court rejected Edison’s film projector label, what 
makes the conditions on Lexmark’s printer cartridges any different? The 
answer comes in the form of a case decided by the Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit—the court that handles all patent appeals in the United 
States—just a couple of decades ago. In Mallinckrodt v. Medipart,16 the Fed-
eral Circuit tried to rewrite the history of patent exhaustion. And it may 
have succeeded.
But to understand how Mallinckrodt departed from the settled law of 
patent exhaustion, we need to step back fifty years. Before the age of semi-
conductors, electronics relied on vacuum tubes to control electric current. 
General Talking Pictures v. Western Electronic17 involved patents on vacuum 
tube amplifiers. Western Electric, a subsidiary of AT&T, licensed its patents 
to the Transformer Company to manufacture tubes for private home use. 
But Western Electric reserved the right to license their vacuum tube ampli-
fier patents for commercial use—in movie theaters, for instance. In other 
words, the Transformer Company was authorized by the patent holder to 
make and sell devices only for the private home market; it wasn’t allowed 
to make or sell devices for the commercial market. The Transformer Com-
pany sold those devices to General Talking Pictures, which supplied them 
to movie theaters, drawing Western Electric’s ire and eventually a lawsuit.
On its face, the facts of the case seemed straightforward. The manufac-
turer knowingly made and sold the invention without a valid license. To 
manufacture a patent device, you need permission from the patent holder. 
Otherwise you are an infringer. Western Electric could have granted the 
Transformer Company a license that permitted it to make as many devices 
as it could, for whatever purpose, and sell them to whomever it chose. But 
that’s not what Western Electric did. It granted a license “expressly con-
fined to the right to manufacture and sell the patented amplifiers for radio 
amateur  reception,  radio  experimental  reception,  and  home  broadcast 
reception.” Exhaustion requires a sale authorized by the patent holder. But 
when the Transformer Company sold devices to General Talking Pictures, 
those sales were anything but authorized. They were expressly forbidden, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life  161
as both parties knew. As the Supreme Court put it, “The patent owner did 
not sell to [General Talking Pictures] the amplifiers in question or authorize 
the Transformer Company to sell them or any amplifiers for use in theaters 
or any other commercial use.”18 So those unauthorized sales were infring-
ing. For more than fifty years, this seemed like the obvious and accepted 
holding of the case.
In 1992, however, the Federal Circuit decided Mallinckrodt. There, the 
court adopted a novel interpretation of General Talking Pictures. Rather than 
being a case about unauthorized sales, the Federal Circuit interpreted Gen-
eral Talking Pictures as a case about “conditional” sales. But that reading 
was inconsistent with more than a century of Supreme Court law denying 
patent holders the right to place conditions on patented objects that had 
been legitimately sold.
Mallinckrodt involved patented aerosol delivery devices used in hospitals 
to dispense a mist for use in diagnostic lung X-rays. The devices cost about 
$10 to make but were sold for closer to $50. The patent holder, Mallinck-
rodt, labeled the devices “Single use only,” allegedly to encourage their 
proper disposal as “biohazardous waste.”19 Of course, Mallinckrodt was 
surely aware that the single use restriction would boost device sales as well. 
But rather than buying new devices after every use, some hospitals sent 
the depleted devices to defendant Medipart, who recharged them and sent 
them back to the hospitals for reuse. Mallinckrodt sued, claiming that its 
“Single use only” label trumped exhaustion and precluded hospitals from 
working with Medipart to recondition the devices.
The judges hearing the case faced the question that all such cases pose—
how to balance the interests of intellectual property owners with the rights 
of  consumers  and  aftermarket  competitors.  Perhaps  influenced  by  the 
adoption of licenses in the software industry, the Federal Circuit sided with 
the patent owner, finding that unless the restrictions placed on purchasers 
somehow rose to the level of an antitrust violation for monopolizing an 
industry, consumers and competitors could simply choose not to purchase 
the restricted goods.
When  confronted  with  the  Supreme  Court  precedents,  including 
Motion Picture Patents, the judges effectively shrugged their shoulders. They 
equated those precedents with antiquated notions of consumer protec-
tion and outdated economics. Instead the court favored the “freedom of 
contract”—the idea that parties should be free to strike whatever bargain 
they think is best—ignoring the fact that similar restrictions on the sale of 
patented goods had been rejected for the previous hundred years and fail-
ing to distinguish between a breach of contract and the infringement of a  
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020162  Chapter 9
patent. Whatever the agreement between Mallinckrodt and the hospitals, 
Medipart—the defendant in the case—never agreed to anything.
With this ideology in hand, the Federal Circuit embraced a distorted 
rewriting of General Talking Pictures. That case, it suggested, stands for the 
proposition that a “valid condition of the sale” of patented goods bars 
exhaustion and limits what the purchaser can do with a product. How-
ever, the court failed to explain adequately how Mallinckrodt’s “Single use 
only” label differed from Edison’s or the restrictions in Bloomer v. McQue-
wan, Adams v. Burke, Keeler v. Standard Folding-Bed Co., or Straus v. Victor 
Talking Machine Co. Its reading ignored the longstanding hostility toward 
such restrictions. It also leads to the conclusion that, simply by including a 
label on a product, a patent holder can eliminate exhaustion and the rights 
that go along with it.
In the aftermath of Mallinckrodt v. Medipart, the world of patent exhaus-
tion has been in disarray for over two decades. What exactly is the differ-
ence between a “valid condition of the sale” and an unenforceable post-sale 
restriction? Can you refill your coffee cups and printer cartridges or not?
Even the Supreme Court’s most recent forays into patent exhaustion 
suffer from their own lack of clarity. In a 2008 case, LG Electronics sued 
Quanta Computer for using LG’s patented semiconductor chip technology 
in Quanta products. Quanta purchased the chips from a licensed retailer, 
Intel. So by all accounts, it owned the chips outright. However, LG argued 
that its contract with Intel specified that Intel had the right to sell LG-
licensed chips, but Intel’s customers couldn’t actually use those chips with-
out a separate patent license from LG.
Legally, this argument has some appeal. Patent rights can be divided up 
into bits and pieces, just like real property. So why, LG argued, shouldn’t it 
be allowed to sell the right to make a semiconductor chip to Intel and then 
sell the rights to use the chip to Intel’s customers? Among other things, 
that strategy might allow for price discrimination. The buyers of the chips 
might be willing to pay considerably different sums for the privilege of 
using them.
But the Supreme Court wisely rejected those arguments. It understood 
that “the initial authorized sale of a patented item terminates all patent 
rights to that item.”20 LG couldn’t maintain control over the use of their 
patented devices after an authorized sale. When a patented item is lawfully 
made and sold, “there is no restriction on [its] use to be implied for the ben-
efit of the patentee.”21 After all, what would the point of buying something 
be if you couldn’t use it? Moreover, the Court recognized that if it allowed 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life  163
patentees to avoid exhaustion through the use of artful drafting by their 
lawyers, they could “shield practically any patented item from exhaustion.”
Because the Supreme Court rebuffed LG’s attempt to condition down-
stream use of its products, many have read the Court’s opinion in Quanta 
as undermining the foundation of Mallinckrodt. In holding that LG’s pat-
ent rights were exhausted, the Quanta decision acknowledged that contract 
law, not patent law, is the proper framework for enforcing post-sale restric-
tions. The Court suggested that even though an authorized sale occurred, a 
breach of contract claim might survive.22 For the Court, potential remedies 
under the contract were separate from the question of exhaustion.
Mallinckrodt had assumed the opposite, concluding that “[u]nless the 
condition violates some other law or policy (in the patent field, notably the 
misuse or antitrust law), private parties retain the freedom to contract con-
cerning conditions of sale,” and thereby retain their patent rights as long as 
the restriction is “reasonably within the patent grant.”23 But Quanta found 
that if there is an authorized sale of an article, no amount of contracting 
can change the fact that the patent owner’s rights in the article have been 
exhausted.
Self-Replicating Technologies and the Puzzle of the Perpetual Copying 
Machine
Similar to copyright, patent exhaustion has also been complicated by tech-
nological advances, and in particular technologies where reproduction or 
replication is simple or even self-executing. In 2013, the Supreme Court 
again revisited the doctrine of patent exhaustion, this time in relation to 
genetically modified soybean seeds. Monsanto owned patents on these 
seeds, and sued farmers who saved seeds from prior seasons and replanted 
them, claiming this infringed the exclusive right to “make” their patented 
products. Bowman, one of these farmers, argued that patent rights in the 
seeds were exhausted when farmers bought the original batch, and any 
subsequent seeds that came from the harvested plants were subject to 
exhaustion as well. Seeds, he argued, are naturally “self-replicating”; they 
grew themselves. The Court rejected Bowman’s arguments, including the 
so-called “blame-the-bean” defense, but it noted that its holding was lim-
ited to the facts of the case; other technologies might, in fact, self-replicate 
“outside of the purchaser’s control” or that self-replication might be “a nec-
essary but incidental step in using the item for another purpose.” In not-
ing this, the Court cited to section 117 of the Copyright Act, which you’ll 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020164  Chapter 9
recall allows for the creation of essential step copies and modifications of 
software programs.
Another self-replication case will likely arise in the near future, present-
ing courts with even greater challenges for balancing intellectual and per-
sonal property rights. The fact that farmers are confronting them in the 
context of their seeds and combine harvesters shows exactly how uncertain 
ownership of technology has become. After all, if we can’t easily enjoy the 
ordinary pursuits of life on the farm, where can we?
Selling Globally, Exhausting Locally
Just as copyright law confronted the question of international exhaus-
tion in Kirtsaeng, patent law is trying to decide what to make of sales of 
patented devices that occur outside of the United States. If foreign sales 
trigger exhaustion, products bought overseas—sometimes at much lower 
prices—can be imported into the U.S. market. If they don’t, global com-
merce becomes fragmented and complex for any product containing a pat-
ented technology.
The confusion over this issue began in 2001, when despite a long line 
of cases finding exhaustion could be triggered by any authorized sale in 
the world, the Federal Circuit found just the opposite in Jazz Photo Corp. v. 
International Trade Commission.24 The case involved Fuji Photo, a company 
that patented the disposable camera—a novelty hit at weddings, gradua-
tions, and birthday parties before ubiquitous camera phones. Event plan-
ners would hand them out to attendees, who would snap photos during the 
festivities and then leave the cameras behind to be developed as a batch. 
Fuji’s competitors saw an opportunity to take the used cameras, ship them 
oversees to be restocked with film, and then import them back into the 
United States for sale. Fuji sued, claiming that despite lawfully purchas-
ing the used cameras, these companies infringed Fuji’s patent. Refurbishing 
them, Fuji argued, was the equivalent of making a new patented product.
The Federal Circuit held that, for cameras purchased in the United 
States,  patent  exhaustion  applied  and  refurbishing  was  perfectly  legal. 
However, for cameras bought abroad, refurbishing was infringement. Why 
the difference? According to the court, “United States patent rights are not 
exhausted by products of foreign provenance.” In support, the decision 
cited a single Supreme Court case from 1890, Boesch v. Graff, for the propo-
sition that “a lawful foreign purchase does not obviate the need for license 
from the United States patentee before importation into and sale in the 
United States.”25
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life  165
The Boesch case, however, said no such thing. In that case, the patentees 
held patents on lamp-burners in both Germany and the United States. The 
defendant purchased lamp-burners in Germany, not from the patent holder, 
but from Hecht. Hecht was permitted, as a “prior user” under German law, 
to make and sell the lamp-burners. The question in the case was whether 
the defendant could resell the lamp-burners purchased from Hecht in the 
United States. The Supreme Court concluded that sales made by Hecht—as 
opposed to sales made by the patent holder—did not trigger exhaustion.26 
Again, the fundamental requirement of exhaustion is an authorized trans-
fer of the object by the rights holder. So in Boesch, there was no exhaustion—
not because the sale occurred overseas, but because the defendants didn’t 
purchase the products from the patent holder. Rather than see the case for 
what it was, a holding that refused to apply exhaustion in the absence of an 
authorized sale, the Federal Circuit’s reading of Boesch gave patent holders 
the worldwide right to geographically discriminate, a major departure from 
over a hundred years of exhaustion precedent.27
The Supreme Court’s decision in Kirtsaeng, rejecting territorial limits 
on copyright exhaustion, casts serious doubt on the continued viability of 
Jazz Photo. As we noted earlier, Kirtsaeng stressed the common law roots of 
exhaustion, which made no territorial distinctions. Those roots are shared 
by patent exhaustion. Kirtsaeng warned of the absurd results that a strict 
national exhaustion regime could inflict on commerce. The Court noted 
that under such a rule, for example, cars made overseas couldn’t be resold 
by their domestic owners because they contained copyrighted code. That’s 
equally true of the thousands of patented components in your vehicle or 
smartphone. Kirtsaeng also dismissed the notion that copyright holders 
were entitled to segment markets geographically: “The Constitution’s lan-
guage nowhere suggests that [copyright] should include a right to divide 
markets or a concomitant right to charge different purchasers different 
prices for the same book, say to increase or to maximize gain. Neither, to 
our knowledge, did any Founder make any such suggestion. We have found 
no precedent suggesting a legal preference for interpretations of copyright 
statutes that would provide for market divisions.”28
Despite the cold reception it received at the Supreme Court, that’s pre-
cisely the argument patent holders make against international exhaustion. 
If foreign sales trigger exhaustion, it throws a wrench in their carefully laid 
plans. One response to this argument is to say, as the Supreme Court did 
in Kirtsaeng, “too bad.” Patents, like copyrights, do not entitle their holders 
to control all valuable uses of their products. Those rights have limits, and 
patent holders have to live with them.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020166  Chapter 9
Yet just as John Wiley pointed to the positive impact price discrimina-
tion could have on students in developing countries who need cheap text-
books, patent holders have told their own, even more compelling story of 
the upside of market segmentation. Instead of cheap books, patent hold-
ers point to cheap pharmaceuticals. Citizens in developed countries like 
the United States can generally afford to pay much more for a product 
than those in poorer or less developed nations. By charging rich countries 
more, drug companies can charge poor countries less. And often that’s what 
happens. For example, one 2010 study examined the difference in interna-
tional drug prices and found that in the top five countries, the prices were 
almost five times as high as they are in the bottom five countries.29 The 
result, patent holders claim, is a net increase in access to potentially life-
saving medicine.
Putting aside the fact that the pharmaceutical industry doesn’t tell us 
much about the market for smartphones or ink cartridges, there are reasons 
to doubt the accuracy of this simple story.30 No doubt, some patients in 
developing economies benefit from price discrimination. But not all do. 
Drug companies are sometimes tempted to take advantage of the vast dis-
parities of wealth within poor countries by selling their products at high 
prices to a lucrative minority. Many drugs are still unaffordable in develop-
ing countries despite strict bans on exporting them.31 And countries like the 
United States have their own problems with wealth inequality. When rich 
countries supply subsidies through high consumer prices, the poor in those 
countries don’t fare well.32 Ultimately, while pharmaceutical companies feel 
public pressure to keep drug prices low in the developing world, the goal of 
price discrimination is not to increase social welfare but to maximize prof-
its. Just like textbook publishers, large drug companies enjoy extraordinary 
profits. In 2014, Forbes reported Pfizer’s profits at an astounding 42 per-
cent.33 That’s not a company that sets prices on the basis of social welfare.
Even  accepting  the  argument  that  price  discrimination  should  be 
encouraged, it is far from clear that it depends on restricting patent exhaus-
tion. If Pfizer wants to charge different prices in different countries, it has 
plenty of tools at its disposal. As a patent holder, it has incredibly strong 
bargaining power and can insist on contract terms that restrict imports into 
the United States. Product tracking technologies have improved dramati-
cally, so detecting breaches through customs inspections and other forms 
of commercial surveillance are much more likely today than even a decade 
ago. Aside from avoiding breach, pharmaceutical manufacturers and dis-
tributors have reputational incentives to keep up their end of such a deal. 
There’s also the nonpatent regulation of pharmaceuticals to consider. For 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life  167
prescription drugs made in the United States and sold abroad, the FDA 
explicitly prohibits re-importation, even if those drugs aren’t patented. In 
short, it’s not clear that a national exhaustion rule is necessary for price 
discrimination.
Exhaustion’s End?
And so we arrive at Lexmark v. Impression Products, decided in February 
2016.34 In that case, the majority of a twelve-judge panel of the Federal 
Circuit upheld Lexmark’s right to restrict resale of printer cartridges the 
company had authorized for sale but had marked with a “Single Use” label, 
reaffirming the court’s commitment to the flawed reasoning of Mallinckrodt. 
And at the same time, it stuck to its guns on the Jazz Photo rule, holding 
that authorized sales outside of the United States do not trigger exhaustion, 
despite the Supreme Court’s holding in Kirtsaeng.
In its opinion, the Federal Circuit articulated a radical rewriting of not 
only patent exhaustion, but the nature of consumer property interests. 
According to the court, when a patentee sells you a product, the extent of 
your rights to use and enjoy that product are entirely dependent on the 
wishes of the patent holder. The sale, in the Federal Circuit’s understand-
ing, represents an implied license to use or transfer the product—not unlike 
John Deere’s theory that farmers merely have an implied license to drive 
their tractors. But if the patent holder announces—through a label, sticker, 
or some other means—its desire to restrict your behavior with respect to 
things you’ve bought, your property rights have been unilaterally rede-
fined. But that’s not how property law works. Nor is it how courts have 
historically understood exhaustion. Property rights in chattels, even pat-
ent-protected ones, are not subject to the attachment of these kinds of pup-
peteer’s strings. If consumers’ rights to use and transfer the things they buy 
were really contingent on implied permission, those rights can be taken 
away at any time. That is not what ownership looks like.
Aside from its mangling of the post-sale restrictions question, the Fed-
eral Circuit also sidestepped Kirtsaeng’s universal exhaustion rule. Instead 
of acknowledging the shared common law origins of patent and copyright 
exhaustion, the court took pains to distinguish the two bodies of law. It 
pointed out that despite rewards abroad, international exhaustion could 
also deny patent holders the reward of an initial sale in the United States, 
but that is equally true for copyright holders under Kirtsaeng. It pointed out 
that the scope and availability of patent protection varies between coun-
tries, but copyright laws are not uniform either. It also invoked the principle 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020168  Chapter 9
of territoriality—the notion that the United States cannot regulate conduct 
outside our borders—but exhaustion does not require extraterritorial appli-
cation of the law, merely the recognition of facts that occurred abroad. And 
in any case, Kirtsaeng rejected that same argument in the copyright context. 
Perhaps more effectively, the Federal Circuit relied on the fact that Kirtsaeng 
turned on the Supreme Court’s interpretation of section 109 of the Copy-
right Act and that the Patent Act has no equivalent statutory provision, so 
the Court’s textual analysis is inapplicable. But the Supreme Court’s reading 
of the statute was heavily influenced by the centuries of personal property 
common law that preceded it, a history that should have informed the 
Federal Circuit’s understanding of patent exhaustion just as it informed 
the Supreme Court’s understanding of copyright exhaustion. As we write, 
petitions have already been filed in the Supreme Court. If the Court agrees 
to hear the case, we hope it will recognize some measure of respect for the 
rights of buyers. Otherwise, ownership in the digital economy will be at 
even greater risk.
Whether it’s international exhaustion, self-replicating technologies, or 
attempted post-sale restrictions, patent law is confronting the question at 
the heart of this book—what do you own when you buy a product? It’s 
the question the Supreme Court asked more than 150 years ago in its first 
patent exhaustion decision and the one the Federal Circuit continues to 
struggle to adequately answer. In the next and final chapter, we turn to 
some ways courts and lawmakers might answer the question more clearly 
and more fairly.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273332/9780262335959_cbx.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 202010  Ownership’s Uncertain Future
So far, this book has explained the shifting relationship between consum-
ers and the products they acquire, and the factors driving those changes. 
Overlapping developments in the law, technology, and the marketplace 
have undermined our sense of ownership of the digital and tangible goods 
that surround us. In this concluding chapter, we have two objectives. First, 
we will explain why—despite the many benefits of rentals, subscriptions, 
and sharing—an economy in which ownership disappears is a cause for 
concern. And second, we will offer a sketch of the kinds of interventions 
we think could help safeguard ownership and the many interests it serves. 
Our goal is not to turn back the clock or forestall innovation. Instead, we 
want to highlight the consequences of undermining ownership in hopes of 
preserving meaningful choice and the many benefits of personal property.
Ownership, Sharing, and Choice
A future that deemphasizes ownership is not only inevitable, it’s already 
here. The explosive growth of streaming services like Netflix and Spotify, 
accompanied by plummeting physical media sales, tells only a small part 
of the story. Likewise, digital media and devices hobbled by license restric-
tions and DRM are already facts of life. Although important in their own 
right, these are all examples of a much broader and deeper cultural shift 
away from ownership.
We see evidence of this transformation in the emergence of the so-called 
“sharing economy.” For those unfamiliar with the term, it refers broadly to 
services and business models that enable individuals and organizations to 
share, rent, and reuse resources, often enabled by technology. If you’ve ever 
gotten a ride in an Uber or spent the night in an Airbnb rental, you’ve taken 
part in the sharing economy. The range of goods and services in the shar-
ing economy is staggering. In addition to rides and apartments, there are 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020170  Chapter 10
platforms for renting parking spots, bicycles, private planes, and clothes. 
Other platforms help neighbors share tools and household goods. Leftover-
Swap and EatWith even apply the sharing model to meals.
In everyday English, “sharing” implies something given freely. A few 
sites like NeighborGoods and Streetbank actually facilitate sharing in the 
literal sense. And that sort of sharing, of course, is premised on individ-
ual ownership. You usually can’t lend something that you don’t own. But 
many of the services lumped together under the “sharing economy” moni-
ker are premised on short-term, for-profit rentals. Most are built around 
the exchange of money for temporary access. Some services rely on a dis-
tributed network of individual owners connecting to end users through a 
technology platform. Others depend on a single provider that coordinates 
the needs of lots of users.
The rapid growth of some of these efforts has attracted lots of attention. 
But we rented cars, stayed in hotels, and endured rented bowling shoes 
long before the first iPhone app. So what is it—if anything—that makes the 
sharing economy “disruptive”? For one, we see nonownership models mov-
ing from out-of-the-ordinary circumstances, like renting a car on vacation, 
to the everyday convenience, like ride sharing on your commute to work.
In large part, the expansion of temporary-access models is a function of 
technology. Before everyone had a smartphone in their pocket, the transac-
tion costs of renting your bike for a few hours were prohibitive. By making 
it easier for owners and users to connect, technology enables more efficient 
use of existing resources. Cars, for example, are parked most of the time. If 
you can reliably press a button to summon a ride that takes you where you 
need to go—especially if it’s cheaper—why own a car? Of course, public 
transit users have been asking and answering that question for decades.
The decline of ownership is also a function of reduced wealth, particu-
larly among millennials. Post-recession, young people are less likely than 
previous generations to prioritize traditional financial milestones like buy-
ing a car or house. The number of young people who own cars or homes 
has dropped significantly in recent years.1 Increasingly, ownership looks 
like a luxury they can’t afford. In that sense, Uber isn’t much different from 
Spotify. If you have money to spend, you can own a car or a record collec-
tion. Or you could spend a lot less for access to services that provide rides 
and music.
People are understandably attracted to the appeal of a lower sticker price. 
But sometimes the price tag fails to reflect hidden costs and other risks. 
Ownership has long-term upsides for individuals and society as a whole 
that aren’t always readily apparent—in terms of privacy, autonomy, and 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  171
competition, among others. That’s not to say we should do away with new 
models of allocating and sharing resources, or that we should favor incum-
bents at all costs. But we need to be fully aware of the bargains we are 
striking.
There are losers in the sharing economy, and they aren’t just legacy taxi 
companies and expensive hotels. The savings Airbnb users realize and the 
company’s profits are in part the result of externalities—costs that Airbnb 
and its users aren’t bearing. In cities big and small, there is evidence that 
Airbnb contributes to rent increases for residents.2 As more housing units 
are devoted to the sharing economy, fewer are available for locals to rent. 
Long-term renters have even been evicted to make room for vacationers.3
The unseen costs of the sharing economy are also borne by the increas-
ing number of workers classified as independent contractors. By insisting 
on that classification for its drivers, Uber—currently valued at over $50 bil-
lion—avoids paying the minimum wage, payroll taxes, health insurance, 
unemployment benefits, and workers compensation for the vast majority 
of its workers.4 That cost shifting isn’t apparent to Uber users. All they see 
is the few dollars they saved compared to a taxi and the free bottle of water.
These problems are hardly insurmountable. They are largely the func-
tion of business models that have outpaced the law. But the law will catch 
up. Airbnb is under increased scrutiny by local authorities. And Uber is in 
the midst of litigation over the employment status of its drivers. In all likeli-
hood, the savings that flow from the efficiency introduced by the innova-
tions of the sharing economy are here to stay. But the externalities they’ve 
relied on so far are not.
Temporary-access models also leave us vulnerable to fluctuations in 
price. When we depend on resources owned by others, we have to pay the 
prices they demand. Uber’s controversial surge-pricing model illustrates the 
point. When demand for rides is high—because of a sporting event or a hos-
tage crisis5—Uber responds by increasing prices, by as much as eight times 
the normal fare.6 Uber defends its policy on the grounds that higher prices 
should convince more drivers to hit the road to meet consumer demand. 
And competition puts some limits on price. If you don’t want to pay Uber’s 
inflated rates, you can take a rate-regulated taxi, or public transit, or drive 
your own car. That’s true for now, at least. But once we head down the 
path of temporary access, it might be hard to reverse course. In a world of 
licensed, robot-driven cars—a world that may soon be upon us—it might 
not be so easy to drive yourself.
As the benefits of temporary access models—primarily price and con-
venience—contribute  to  their  spiking  popularity,  we  worry  about  the 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020172  Chapter 10
long-term impact on choice. If we neglect the physical and legal infrastruc-
ture of ownership, we may see it disappear. Manufacturers are building cars, 
electronics, and other devices that we can’t truly own; DRM keeps them 
loyal to another master. Publishers are launching digital-only imprints.7 
And despite the recent resurgence of vinyl, there are only twenty pressing 
plants in operation in the United States, and they struggle to meet demand.8 
Without the means of production and delivery, ownership becomes more 
expensive, if not impossible. Once the record stores are gone and the CD 
plants have closed, the competitive checks on the price of services like Spo-
tify weaken.
Just as important, when we trade ownership for access, we sacrifice reli-
ability. Most of us have had the experience of realizing the movie we were 
hoping to watch has disappeared from our Netflix queue.9 Titles come and 
go all the time as licenses expire and new deals are negotiated. Or maybe 
your favorite album is pulled from your subscription music service because 
the artist signed an exclusive deal with a competitor. These are minor incon-
veniences, to be sure, but they highlight the contrast between a model in 
which the consumer has control and one in which control is entrusted to 
a third party. More troublingly, works can disappear altogether. In a world 
without individual ownership, a publisher could pull a controversial book, 
movie, or album from the handful of subscription services, and it would be 
like it never existed.
And when you don’t own your devices, you lose control over the kinds 
of uses you can make of them. So far, limitations on use have for the most 
part treated everyone the same: “you cannot lend this ebook,” or “your 
rental period is twenty-four hours.” But as technology reduces the costs of 
monitoring and valuing individual behavior, we are likely to see increas-
ingly  fine-grained,  individualized  use-based  restrictions.  Imagine  your 
reasonably-hip crossover vehicle alerting you after your third after-school 
stop, “I’m sorry; you’ve reached your limit of daily passenger drop-offs. 
Would you like to upgrade your vehicle plan to CarPoolPro?” As if that 
weren’t indignity enough, your carmaker’s pricing algorithm—relying on 
information it has gathered about property values in your neighborhood, 
your driving patterns, and your in-car search history—predicts exactly 
how much you are willing to pay for the privilege of dropping off that last 
cranky first grader.10 This is exactly the goal of the price and geographic dis-
crimination tactics we have discussed throughout the book—to divide our 
lives into individual transactions and charge as much as we are willing to 
pay for each one. Shifting away from ownership is an essential step toward 
that future.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  173
Temporary-access models are not inherently harmful. Whether they are 
the right choice for any particular consumer will depend on a number of 
factors—the type of resource, the use they want to make of it, how they 
value that use, their income, their desire for durability, and a constellation 
of other considerations. Someone who embraces Netflix might treasure 
their record collection. And a commuter who could never part with their 
bicycle might enthusiastically sign up for a robot car service. There’s no one 
solution for all occasions. What’s important is that we can choose between 
ownership and temporary access depending on our needs.
Physical formats and business models come and go. Columbia House 
is actually relaunching for vinyl. What separates the shift we are wit-
nessing  today  from,  say,  the  demise  of  the  illuminated  manuscript  is 
that  the  conceptual  and  legal  framework  of  ownership  is  crumbling. 
In the rest of this chapter, we look at ways we can preserve the choice  
to own.
Avenues for Legal Reform
One way to safeguard ownership is through changes in the law. Law is a 
powerful tool for regulating markets and protecting the interests of indi-
viduals. The notion of intellectual property itself is a creation of the law—a 
legislatively crafted reprieve from competition. Considered in this light, 
balancing the rights of IP holders and consumers is inescapable, regardless 
of who comes out ahead. The law can favor rights holders, as it often does. 
Or we can leverage law as a tool to help preserve the benefits of ownership. 
But there is no single legal fix for the full range of issues we’ve detailed in 
this book.
Of course, legal change faces hurdles. The judicial process is slow, and 
courts tend to be incremental in their innovations. The legislative process 
suffers from its own difficulties. In the current political climate, Congress 
can barely avoid regular government shutdowns, let alone reach agreement 
over substantive policy changes. And historically, copyright lawmaking has 
done a poor job of taking the public interest into account.11 But despite 
these stumbling blocks, large-scale copyright reform is underway. Spurred 
by Register of Copyrights Maria Pallante’s call for the “next great Copyright 
Act,” Congress has taken some initial steps toward rethinking the law for 
our digital economy.12 What will come of that effort remains to be seen.
That said, there are steps lawmakers, courts, and regulators can take 
if they understand the problems facing consumers and are motivated to 
address them. Some are a matter of enforcing existing law. Others depend 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020174  Chapter 10
on courts interpreting aspects of the law in ways that are more sensitive to 
the threats to ownership. Others require legislative change.
Preventing False Promises of Ownership
One partial solution we’ve already discussed centers on making sure we have 
accurate information when we choose between the ownership and access 
models. Today, consumers have no good way to distinguish between a sale 
that confers meaningful rights of ownership and a license that imposes all 
manner of restrictions on their use of a product. Both are labeled “sales,” 
and we are encouraged to “buy” and “own” with nary a mention of the 
special meaning those words are intended to convey in the digital context. 
And as we’ve shown, lots of people are in fact deceived. If consumers want 
to choose rentals or subscriptions, they should be free to do so. But they 
shouldn’t be fooled into sacrificing ownership by misleading language. 
Since consumers can’t easily challenge these practices themselves, courts 
are unlikely to ever hear a false advertising case challenging the “Buy Now” 
lie. That leaves responsibility for policing these abuses in the hands of the 
Federal Trade Commission, an enforcement agency that is more than capa-
ble of targeting these behaviors. We urge the FTC to investigate the “Buy 
Now” button and encourage retailers to adopt a short notice that clearly 
identifies what buyers can and can’t do with digital goods.
Limiting Form Contracts
As we argued in chapter 4, courts should stop analyzing licenses as contracts 
and regard them instead as pure grants of permission. But even if courts 
insist on the license-as-contract framework, bringing contract law to its 
senses is another way to chip away at the edges of the ownership problem. 
Licenses that attempt to redefine the relationship between consumers and 
their purchases rely on the legal fiction of freely negotiated agreements. But 
that fiction does not reflect reality and should be cast aside by the courts. 
Being put on notice of a contractual term is not the same thing as agree-
ing to one. And the law’s imposition of a “duty to read” that holds people 
accountable for terms they didn’t examine is a holdover from a bygone era 
when purchases were not routinely accompanied by thousands of words 
of legal limits. Today, no one can be expected to read the overwhelming 
onslaught of complex terms and conditions—many of which are longer 
than this chapter—that consumers confront in the digital environment. It’s 
time courts stop pretending we should.
Ideally, courts should protect individuals by reining in the worst offenses 
of EULAs through the contract law doctrine of unconscionability. For an 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  175
agreement to be unconscionable, it has to be shockingly one-sided as a 
result of unequal bargaining power between the parties. Courts could refuse 
to enforce licenses that claim to eliminate ownership in a transaction that 
has all the hallmarks of sale by deeming them unconscionable. Those take-
it-or-leave-it agreements are certainly one-sided, and some provisions, like 
ones that unilaterally reserve the right to terminate or alter the agreement 
certainly appear unreasonable. But courts aren’t eager to find unconscio-
nability out of a reluctance to intervene in the marketplace. But when the 
marketplace is riddled with unread terms and misleading marketing, inter-
vention is necessary.
Perhaps contract law’s embrace of marketplace dynamics and its over-
reliance on notice rather than requiring meaningful assent means that it is 
incapable of addressing concerns about EULAs. If so, we need to look else-
where for solutions. One promising tactic is the FTC’s approach to advertis-
ing disclosures. Faced with print, TV, and online ads for a range of products 
that “quoted prices, but didn’t adequately disclose the strings that were 
attached,” the FTC announced a policy that requires clear and conspicuous 
disclosure of the relevant terms.13 Disclosures are evaluated using the FTC’s 
Four Ps: prominence, presentation, placement, and proximity.14 Prominence 
requires that the disclosure be easily readable, and the fine print of a EULA 
doesn’t suffice. Presentation looks at whether the disclosure is written in a 
way that will be easily understood; dense legalese fails that test. Placement 
considers whether the disclosure appears in a place consumers are likely to 
look; presumably that disqualifies EULAs that no one reads. And proxim-
ity examines the relationship between the disclosure and the claim that it 
modifies; a “Buy Now” button isn’t particularly proximate to a revelation 
that “this product is licensed not sold” disclosed in a linked EULA. If these 
sorts of standards were used to scrutinize most EULAs on digital media and 
devices, those terms would fail miserably.
The EU’s Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive offers another 
example of a legal regime that requires extra scrutiny for certain types of 
consumer contracts.15 In general, when contract terms are not individually 
negotiated, the Directive considers them unfair to the extent they lead to a 
significant imbalance in the rights and obligations of consumers and mer-
chants. The Directive also provides a number of specific examples of unfair 
terms familiar from many EULAs for digital goods. They include terms that: 
limit the legal rights of the consumer in the event of nonperformance or 
inadequate performance by the seller; obligate the consumer even where 
the seller does not perform its obligations or where its performance is 
optional; allow the seller to terminate a contract without reasonable notice; 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020176  Chapter 10
and permit the seller to alter the terms of the contract or the characteristics 
of a product unilaterally.
Under the Directive, unfair terms are not binding. In addition, the Direc-
tive requires that terms are drafted in plain language and that ambiguities 
be interpreted in consumers’ favor. EU states are required to enforce these 
standards under their national laws. If the United States adopted similarly 
rigorous standards for form contracts, some of the most egregious abuses in 
EULAs could be avoided.
Another way to rein in contracts would be to strengthen the doctrine 
of copyright preemption. When a state law—like contract—conflicts or 
interferes with a federal law—like copyright—federal law wins. Theoreti-
cally, courts could rule that EULAs that are inconsistent with copyright 
law—if they deny owners the right to transfer, for example—are unenforce-
able. However copyright preemption is rare because courts mostly focus 
their attention on the issue of whether or not the rights defined by a con-
tract overlap with the rights of a federal copyright. They almost never ask 
whether a contract interferes with the rights of consumers of the copy-
righted work. We think that view misunderstands not only the relationship 
between licenses and copyright, but also the fundamental purpose of our 
IP system.
Freeing Owners from DRM
Even  without  contractual  restrictions,  the  machine-code  limitations 
imposed by DRM remain a major barrier to owners’ control over their 
property. DRM can constrain how owners use digital media and software-
embedded devices in ways that were impossible in the predigital era. Look-
ing at the anti-circumvention provisions of the DMCA nearly twenty years 
after their creation, we see them as a major policy misstep. They have sti-
fled innovation and competition, fragmented markets, impeded research, 
stymied educators, and compromised security. Unintended consequences 
aside, those provisions have proven ineffective and unnecessary when it 
comes to their stated purposes. DRM has rarely prevented or even slowed 
infringement, and at least one study has shown it actually reduces sales.16 As 
the music download market has shown ever since Apple abandoned DRM, 
technological protections are not needed to convince copyright holders to 
sell content online or for fans to buy it. And the most outrageous abuses of 
DRM—in our garage doors, printers, and vehicles—bear no connection to 
copyright infringement at all.
We see very little downside to scrapping section 1201 altogether.17 But 
if policymakers are insistent on keeping it, there are two partial solutions 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  177
to the problems it creates for ownership. Courts have already held that 
unless an act of circumvention bears some “reasonable relationship” to an 
act of copyright infringement, the DMCA cannot stand in the way of break-
ing digital locks.18 Where a use is protected under the fair use doctrine or 
section 117—which articulates exhaustion rights in computer software—
some courts have found that “critical nexus” to infringement is missing.19 
It would be a modest expansion of existing law to recognize that circum-
vention undertaken for purely personal use—like repairing your tractor 
or reading a book on an unsupported device—or to enable a transfer of 
ownership—like giving away your digital movie to a friend—should also be 
immune from DMCA liability.
A cleaner solution, but one that would require legislative action, would 
exempt owners from section 1201 altogether. If you own a digital good—
whether it’s a movie or a car—software locks shouldn’t stand in the way 
of you accessing or using your property in ways that are otherwise lawful. 
DRM that prevents you from reading an ebook on a new device or diagnos-
ing your sluggish engine does not protect any legitimate copyright holder 
interest. And someone who hacks a car’s operating system in order to sell 
infringing copies to competing carmakers would still be liable for copyright 
infringement.20 The legal dragnet of the DMCA, however, ensnares more 
average users than it does determined hackers. We’d also exempt makers of 
tools that enable circumvention from liability to the extent those tools are 
primarily designed for and used by owners of digital goods. We shouldn’t 
expect every ebook reader to figure out on their own how to make an iBook 
work on a Kindle.
That’s not to say the DMCA’s anti-circumvention rules would be entirely 
toothless. Under this proposal, DRM could still enforce the clearly articu-
lated limits of rentals and subscriptions. Since renters and subscribers are 
not owners, rights holders could prohibit circumventing software code that 
limits access to and use of a digital good. So if a user exceeds the twenty-
four-hour rental period or fails to pay the monthly subscription fee, self-
executing code could cut off their access. We think this distinction is an 
intuitive one. While we might find them annoying, we accept limitations 
on our use of products we rent. But that’s quite distinct from code that con-
trols what we can do with digital content or devices that we own.
Reinvigorating Patent Exhaustion
As this book is being written, the Supreme Court is weighing the outcome 
of the Federal Circuit’s decision in Lexmark v. Impression Products, the case 
that decided it was illegal for you to refill your ink cartridges. There are two 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020178  Chapter 10
distinct questions presented to the Court in that case—first, whether patent 
holders can restrict how a purchaser uses a product after it has been sold, 
and second, whether authorized foreign sales should be treated the same 
as domestic ones in terms of triggering exhaustion. With respect to both of 
these questions, we urge the Supreme Court to correct the Federal Circuit’s 
efforts in recent decades to rewrite the law of patent exhaustion. Instead, it 
should return to the well-established rules in patent law that rejected post-
sale restrictions and artificial geographic limits on exhaustion and reaffirm 
the positions it outlined in Quanta Computer v. LG and Kirtsaeng v. John 
Wiley & Sons.
The other alternative is legislation. Intervention by Congress is prefer-
able to living with the Federal Circuit’s current perspective on exhaustion. 
But even acknowledging that court’s missteps over the past two decades, we 
remain confident that a flexible common law approach that allows courts 
to apply the fundamental principles of exhaustion to evolving facts is the 
best way to resolve disputes in a fast-changing market.
Reforming Copyright Law
Addressing the core of the ownership crisis requires changes to copyright 
law. Those changes could be achieved through legislation; they could take 
the form of courts embracing a more expansive view of exhaustion; or they 
might require both.
A number of legislative solutions have been proposed over the years. 
One of the earliest came in 1997 when then-Representative Rick Boucher 
introduced the Digital Era Copyright Enhancement Act.21 That bill, pro-
posed as an alternative to what became the DMCA, would have amended 
the statutory first sale rule to permit the owner of a lawfully made copy “in 
a digital format” to reproduce, perform, display, and distribute the copy-
righted work to a single recipient, so long as the owner “erases or destroys” 
their copy “at substantially the same time.” In essence, the bill would have 
allowed an owner to transfer their interest in a digital good, even if that 
meant making copies, so long as they didn’t keep any for later use. The 
bill was prescient and boasted fifty bipartisan cosponsors. But it failed after 
copyright holders worried that it would lead to widespread infringement 
since, they argued, no existing technology could have ensured compliance 
by copy owners.22
More recently Representative Blake Farenthold introduced the You Own 
Devices Act or YODA in 2015.23 That bill addressed the more narrow but 
pressing problem of transfers of software-enabled devices. As we’ve seen, 
many device makers insist that purchasers don’t own the software built into 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  179
their phones, cars, and appliances. That could render resale of those devices 
an act of infringement. YODA would prevent that absurd result. Under the 
bill, when a computer program enables a product to operate, the owner of 
that product “is entitled to transfer an authorized copy of the computer 
program, or the right to obtain such copy, when the owner sells, leases, or 
otherwise transfers” the product. That right cannot be waived by contract. 
So far, these sensible amendments have garnered little support. However, 
in a promising turn, Senators Grassley and Leahy have recently asked the 
Copyright Office to study the extent to which copyright law undermines 
legitimate uses of software-enabled devices by consumers.24
If Congress fails to act, the courts should step in. After all, it was the 
courts, not Congress, which created the exhaustion principle in the first 
place. And courts tended to be more flexible in its application. Before the 
first sale doctrine was codified in the Copyright Act, courts interpreted 
exhaustion more broadly. Exhaustion went beyond the right to distribute 
a copy. It included the rights to modify it and to make reproductions to 
repair or restore a copy. We think that same sort of context-sensitive adju-
dication could allow courts to apply the basic principle of exhaustion to 
digital goods. Statutory changes tend to be narrow and rigid, but judicial 
change offers flexibility. But given the text of sections 109 and 117, courts 
understandably feel constrained when it comes to pushing the accepted 
boundaries of copyright exhaustion. So although we believe courts have 
the power today to revive a broader approach to exhaustion, they might 
need some additional encouragement from Congress.
Ideally, Congress would endorse a less rigid approach to exhaustion 
that can accommodate the realities of the digital marketplace, but one that 
would empower courts to engage in the sort of careful balancing of com-
peting interests they are particularly well suited to do. This solution paral-
lels the history of copyright law’s other crucial limitation—fair use. That 
doctrine got its start as judge-created common law. When it was eventually 
incorporated into the Copyright Act of 1976, Congress wisely adopted a 
flexible framework of four nonexclusive factors to guide judges in fair use 
cases.25 And although fair use has not always been a model of perfect clar-
ity, this framework has allowed copyright law to adapt to new technologies, 
market conditions, and uses of works with reasonable predictability.26
So what would a multifactor framework for exhaustion look like? Of 
course, the first question a court would need to decide is whether a particu-
lar consumer is an owner or not. We outlined the sorts of considerations 
we think courts should take into account there in chapter 4. They include 
the length of possession by the consumer, whether payment is one-time or 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020180  Chapter 10
ongoing; and how the transaction is characterized to the public. In short, 
we think a one-time payment made in exchange for permanent or open-
ended possession of or access to a digital good—whether it’s a tangible copy 
or an intangible asset—results in ownership. That’s especially true when 
the transaction is characterized using words like “sale,” “buy,” or “own.” 
So when you click “Buy Now” and pay $9.99 for a digital movie, you own 
it, even if no permanent copy is ever stored on your device. And when you 
exchange cash for a coffee maker, you own both the hardware and the soft-
ware embedded in it.
Assuming the court is dealing with an owner, next it has to decide 
whether the actions they have taken fall within the scope of exhaustion. In 
other words, did they exercise their property rights or did they make a use 
reserved for the copyright holder. Right now, the prevailing view is that—
with the exception of computer software—exhaustion covers distribution 
and little else.27 For the reasons we’ve described, digital exhaustion should 
permit acts of reproduction, and even the creation of derivative works, to 
the extent necessary to enable the transfer of rights from one owner to 
another. In some cases that transfer of rights will involve moving a par-
ticular copy from one location to another. In other cases, it will require 
the creation of new copies. And in others, it will be a matter of associating 
permission to access some intangible resource with a new user. But no mat-
ter the mechanics, exhaustion can’t be a pretext for a digital free-for-all, 
figuratively or literally. Establishing limits on what an owner can do with 
their purchase is crucial.
In making this determination, courts should consider:
1. The extent to which the owner parted with possession of or access to the 
digital good;
2. The extent to which the use deprives rights holders of a fair return; and
3. Whether the owner has materially altered the underlying expression of 
the copyrighted work.
The first factor identifies the central feature of a lawful sale, rental, or 
gift. When you transfer your rights in a resource, whether permanently or 
temporarily, you lose access to it. If you sell your car, you don’t get to keep 
driving it. If you rent out your spare bedroom for the week—unless you 
are the worst Airbnb host ever—you don’t get to sleep in it. With tangible 
goods this result is partly dictated by physics. That’s the nature of rivalry. 
But it’s also a function of the legal construct of property. For digital goods 
no less than physical ones, a transfer of rights can’t lead to an increase in 
the number of people simultaneously enjoying the work. So if an owner 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  181
doesn’t give up their rights—if, for example, they “sell” their digital record 
collection but listen to a backup copy—their behavior isn’t protected by 
exhaustion.
The extent to which they are required to give up their access depends 
on what rights they have and the kind of transfer at issue. If you bought 
two copies of a favorite book, you could keep one and lend one. The same 
should be true of digital goods. And different types of transfers demand 
different degrees of loss. A gift or a sale dictates a permanent loss; lending 
or rental would entail a temporary one. Sometimes, there will be hard ques-
tions. Should the owner of a multivolume work—Julia Child’s two-volume 
Mastering the Art of French Cooking, for example—be allowed to lend one 
ebook but keep the other? What does it mean for a digital work to be pub-
lished in two volumes? Does it depend on whether the two volumes were 
sold separately or as a bundle? As a practical matter, physical copies make 
these sorts of questions easier. But the definition of the work is a problem 
copyright law struggles to answer in a number of contexts.
The second factor looks at the impact of the use on the economic incen-
tives of rights holders. Part of the justification for exhaustion is that a sale 
offers a strong indication that the rights holder has been fairly compen-
sated.28 Rights holders set the sale price, after all. So complaints about 
reduced revenue from secondary markets can’t be enough to overcome 
exhaustion. If that were the case, libraries and used record stores would 
be outlawed. But there are important differences between digital and ana-
log goods that, in some circumstances, could divert enough revenue from 
rights holders to undermine the incentive structure of copyright. Courts 
need a way to identify and address those circumstances.
In the analog world, copyright holders could rely on the inherent limits 
of physical goods to curb the impact of exhaustion. You can only lend a 
favorite novel to so many friends before wear and tear, and the occasional 
spilled drink, take their toll. But digital goods are different. They can be 
transferred far more quickly and at much lower cost. And in the short term, 
digital goods are more durable. An ebook of that same novel can be read a 
thousand times with no wear and tear. Over the long term, however, digital 
goods face their own challenges. Hardware and software evolve quickly. 
Storage media and file formats that were popular just a decade or two ago 
can quickly become ancient relics, leaving digital works practically inacces-
sible long before their analog counterparts.29 And hard drives, flash mem-
ory, and CD-ROMs all degrade over time. Nonetheless, courts need to be 
sure that resale and lending don’t undermine the basic incentive structure 
of copyright law in light of the characteristics of digital goods.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020182  Chapter 10
Imagine an online community for ebook lending. Thousands or even 
millions of users sync their ebook collections with this service, enabling 
them to search for books they want to read. When you borrow a book 
from user A, it gets transferred to your device, and no one else, includ-
ing user A, can access that book. So far, this doesn’t sound much different 
from analog book borrowing. But imagine that the ebook lending platform 
knows whether the book is being read at any given moment. If not, it lets 
another user check out user A’s book. With a large enough user base, this 
far more efficient lending system could guarantee that once sold, an ebook 
would never have a wasted cycle. Someone, somewhere would be reading 
it every second of every day—without any fear of broken bindings or torn 
pages—all thanks to a single purchase by user A. If exhaustion allowed this 
sort of system, we could see sales and publisher revenue plummet, perhaps 
below the threshold of profitability. One response would be to dramatically 
raise prices to offset lost sales, or to abandon sales altogether and move to 
a subscription model. None of these are outcomes copyright law should 
encourage.
This hypothetical illustrates why we cannot simply port the exhaustion 
rules of the analog world over to the digital marketplace. Courts need a 
way to assess the impact of uses potentially enabled by exhaustion to see 
if they cause undue harms to rights holders. Our second factor is meant to 
do exactly that. What counts as undue harm is admittedly a tough ques-
tion. That’s largely because policymakers—despite the rhetoric of incen-
tives—have consistently failed to measure the economic impact of IP rights, 
much less begin a serious conversation about the ideal level of incentives. 
The more incentive, the better, they seem to believe. But no serious assess-
ment could support that conclusion. Limitations on exclusive rights—and 
by extension, incentives—like exhaustion are essential. But how far should 
they go?
There are two ways to identify uses that give rise to undue harm to copy-
right holder interests. First, we could leave it to the courts. That’s what 
the fair use doctrine has done. The fourth fair use factor requires courts 
to consider “the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value 
of the copyrighted work.”30 If a use causes enough harm, that fact weighs 
heavily against fair use. The statute doesn’t tell courts exactly how much 
or precisely what sort of harm, but over decades of common law reasoning, 
courts have developed a reasonably clear understanding of market harm. 
There’s no reason they couldn’t do the same when it comes to exhaustion.
If that creates too much uncertainty, either Congress or the courts could 
identify categories of use that are beyond the scope of digital exhaustion. 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  183
The Copyright Act already adopts this approach. It prohibits rental, lease, 
or lending of music and software—though not video games. Noncommer-
cial lending remains lawful, however.31 And section 117 sets up a fairly 
detailed set of rules  regarding archival, adaptation,  and  necessary-step  
copies, and their transfer. Policymakers could do something similar with dig-
ital goods. They could permit resale and gifts, but prohibit rental and lend-
ing. Or they could distinguish between private and public lending, allowing 
you to lend an ebook to a friend, but not a stranger. They could even try to  
replicate some of the transaction costs of the analog world by limiting the 
number of times an owner could lend their digital content, or how fre-
quently. Given these options, there is no reason to insist that exhaustion 
can’t be reconciled with digital distribution.
The third factor is simply meant to prevent exhaustion from becom-
ing a back door to changes to a work that are better considered under fair 
use. Sometimes an owner will want to modify their copy for compatibility 
purposes—to make their iBooks work on a Kindle, for example. Exhaustion 
should permit that, just as section 117 allows owners to adapt their com-
puter programs to work with new hardware and software. But exhaustion 
isn’t the right framework to analyze the legality of remixing or making 
other expressive changes to a work.
Our approach allows courts to directly and transparently assess the 
impact of exhaustion on owner and rights holder interests. It will cement 
a set of ownership rights that are rooted in longstanding property rules, 
but are attuned to the differences of the digital economy. Those rights 
will be dictated by law, not privately drafted fiat. We think this framework 
addresses the concerns at the heart of the exhaustion debate and will prove 
adaptable to the inevitable changes in the marketplace.
But there’s another objection copyright holders raise to exhaustion that 
we should address. They worry that exhaustion could be used as a cover for 
widespread acts of infringement. Armed with the right to lend and resell 
digital goods—the worry goes—purchasers will share copies with friends 
and strangers, or even resell multiple copies of a single purchase. The con-
cern isn’t that exhaustion would permit or excuse that behavior, but that it 
would somehow makes it easier to get away with. Given the ease of copying 
online, they say, there’s too much infringement already. Any change that 
would increase the risk of infringing behavior is a nonstarter.
We understand this hesitation, but don’t find it particularly persua-
sive. First, those who want to acquire copyrighted material without pay-
ing for it already have ample opportunity. Second, exhaustion is what’s 
called an affirmative defense. That means the doctrine identifies a set of 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020184  Chapter 10
behaviors—lending  or  reselling,  for  example—that  would  normally  be 
unlawful, but are excused for one reason or another. And as an affirma-
tive defense, exhaustion places the burden of proof on defendants. So if a 
copyright holder suspects that some person or entity is going beyond the 
lawful scope of exhaustion, it is that person or entity who has to prove that 
their actions are legal. They’d have to show that the initial purchase was 
lawful, that they were owners at the time of the resale or lending, and that 
their actions were of the sort permitted by the exhaustion rule. If they can’t 
prove that, they are infringers.
Granted, monitoring secondary markets and finding potential infring-
ers imposes costs on copyright holders that they would rather avoid. But 
the possibility of infringement around the edges of resale markets is hardly 
new. Nothing stopped you from burning a backup copy of your CD col-
lection before selling it to the used record store, or taping your LPs to reel-
to-reel in an earlier era. And the expectation that copyright holders bear 
the costs of rooting out infringers is well established both offline and on. 
Surprise visits to used record stores and flea markets to find unauthorized 
copies were just a cost of doing business in the analog world. And courts 
have reaffirmed that obligation again and again on the Internet—whether 
it’s Tiffany’s duty to locate counterfeit jewelry on eBay32 or the burden of 
copyright holders to identify unauthorized videos on YouTube.33
Despite the dire predictions and fears of copyright holders, consumers 
outside of the United States are already allowed to resell their digital goods. 
And the sky has not yet fallen. In a case called UsedSoft GmbH v. Oracle, 
the European Court of Justice ruled that purchasers are entitled to resell 
the software they buy, even when it is delivered digitally and subject to a 
restrictive license agreement.34 Oracle sued UsedSoft for allowing users to 
purchase second-hand software. Oracle claimed that when UsedSoft users 
downloaded the software, they illegally reproduced the code. The court dis-
agreed, explaining that since the software was originally purchased lawfully 
from Oracle, exhaustion applied. The court understood that exchanging a 
one-time payment for the right to download and use the software was a 
sale. But that sale was not tied to any particular download or copy, rather it 
was tied to the right to use the software.
More  recently,  a  Dutch  court  extended  the  UsedSoft  rationale  to 
ebooks.35 In 2014, Tom Kabinet launched a secondhand ebook store that 
allowed readers to resell their ebooks after certifying that they were legally 
purchased and that any local copies had been deleted. Tom Kabinet was 
promptly sued by the Dutch Publishers Association. After initially refus-
ing to shut down the site in light of the UsedSoft decision, the court ruled 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  185
that the site could remain open only if it took additional steps to ensure 
that the ebooks it resold were lawfully acquired.36 In short order, Tom Kabi-
net implemented a digital watermark system. Although not a guarantee 
against infringement, the Dutch Court of Appeals (Hof Amsterdam) refused 
to shutter Tom Kabinet’s resale marketplace.37
Both our proposed exhaustion framework and the one being adopted in 
Europe embrace shifting focus away from particular copies to instead think-
ing about rights to use particular works. Copyright, as the name implies, 
has been preoccupied with copies for a long time. But in the digital world, 
copies are everywhere. Instead of determining whether a particular behav-
ior is lawful by carefully counting copies, we think courts should be focused 
on tracking who has rights to use and enjoy a work. A more radical—but 
admittedly more elegant—way to achieve this result is by taking the copy 
out of copyright altogether. Christina Mulligan has suggested we solve the 
digital exhaustion problem, among others, by eliminating copyright law’s 
reproduction right and hinging liability on commercially valuable uses of 
a work, like display or performance.38 If creating a new copy didn’t trig-
ger infringement liability, digital goods would stand on the same footing 
as analog ones. You could transfer them freely. Infringement would occur 
when a nonowner displayed or performed a work, even privately. This 
proposal is promising, but its implications go well beyond the question of 
ownership.
Generally, we prefer reforms that place considerable authority in the 
hands of the courts, but there is no shortage of ways that policymakers 
could update copyright law to reinforce ownership in the digital market-
place. But often, legal change—particularly when it comes to intellectual 
property—is  prompted  by  developing  technologies.  We’ve  already  dis-
cussed how companies like ReDigi created software that forces us to rethink 
both the application of the law and our assumptions about the nature of 
resale markets. We will now outline other technologies with the potential 
to change the way we conceptualize ownership.
The Role of Technology
As early as the late 1990s, “forward and delete” technologies were under 
discussion in copyright policy circles. These software tools—purely theo-
retical at the time—would have kept users honest when they transferred 
ownership of digital goods.39 So if you sold or lent an ebook to a friend, 
the software would forward the file to them and delete your local copy. The 
fact that technology capable of safeguarding those sorts of transfers was 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020186  Chapter 10
unavailable at the time contributed to the failure of Representative Bouch-
er’s effort to update copyright exhaustion.40 It also led to the Copyright 
Office’s 2001 decision to oppose expanding exhaustion to digital goods.41
Serious efforts to conceptualize and develop technologies that would 
allow for transfer of ownership of digital goods didn’t begin for nearly a 
decade. One early effort was led by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE), an association of engineers, scientists, and other technical 
experts and one of the world’s most influential standards-setting bodies. 
In 2010, the IEEE formed a working group to develop a standard for “con-
sumer-ownable digital personal property” (DPP).42 But to date, no standard 
has emerged.
Around the same time, companies like Apple and Amazon were develop-
ing systems that would enable transfers of digital content between consum-
ers. Amazon for example patented a “secondary market for digital objects.”43 
That system lets a user store ebooks, audio, video, and applications in a 
cloud locker. When the user decides they no longer want it, the system 
allows the user to transfer their now-used digital content to another user. 
At that point, the digital content is deleted from their account. Similarly, 
Apple patented a method of “managing access to digital content items.”44 
Apple’s system also permits the transfer of digital content between users. It 
envisions that when a user sells their purchased digital content to a second 
user, an online store—here, iTunes—stores data about these transactions to 
establish “which user currently has access to the digital content.” Once the 
user transfers their music, movie, or other purchase, they are “prevented 
from accessing the digital content.” Other patents on “providing a market 
for digital goods” and a “secondary marketplace for digital media content” 
cover much the same territory.45
No major U.S. retailer has deployed these technologies yet, although 
there are shades of this approach in Amazon’s experiments with restricted 
ebook “lending.” Nonetheless, these patents suggest two things. First, these 
technologies have moved from theoretical speculation to practical reality. 
Second, the dominant players in the digital retail market recognize the 
economic potential of systems that facilitate property-like rights in digital 
assets. But the patents also reveal that those systems, at least as envisioned 
by Amazon and Apple, incorporate some potentially troubling limitations. 
Amazon, for example, describes suspending or terminating transfers of 
digital content after an unspecified number of transactions, presumably 
defined in a license agreement and bowing to the demands of publishers.
Apple’s patent contemplates a different kind of burden on transfers—
a portion of the resale price would be diverted to the publisher.46 Resale 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  187
royalties, which give the original creator of a product an ongoing cut of 
future sales, have been the subject of debate in the courts and Congress for 
decades. Bills that would create this right—reminiscent of J. K. Rowling’s 
goblin property discussed in chapter 2—have been repeatedly introduced 
and defeated in the muggle Congress, most recently with the American 
Royalties Too (ART) Act of 2014.47 And California’s state-level Resale Roy-
alty Act was recently ruled unconstitutional as to sales that take place out-
side of that state’s borders.48 Typically, this legislation focuses on visual 
artists—painters, sculptors, and the like—on the grounds that they are espe-
cially unlikely to capture the full value of their works at the time of their 
initial sale. Because resale royalties tend to favor only the most successful 
visual artists and introduce costly bureaucracies, the case in favor of them 
is weak.49 When applied to record labels and movie studios—hardly the vic-
tims of unequal bargaining power in the market—that case is nonexistent.
These two aspects of the Apple and Amazon patents point to a more 
general problem with privately administered digital markets. When mar-
kets are run according to rules negotiated between copyright owners and 
technology platform providers, we trade property rights for conditional 
privileges. Private actors should not be in a position to define what owners 
can do with their property, even if they write the next generation of license 
agreements in a more consumer-friendly way. The baseline for property 
rights should be a function of the law, not contingent on the kindness of 
copyright holders and retailers. So these ersatz digital markets might give 
the appearance of property rights, but what they would actually provide is 
a slightly relaxed set of license restrictions.
That might be better than nothing, but we don’t think it’s good enough. 
There’s no shortage of reasons to favor the kind of free secondary market-
place that genuine property rights would enable over these tightly con-
trolled sandboxes. For one, privacy and anonymity would be sacrificed. 
Retailers and publishers would know what books you bought, sold, and 
borrowed, not to mention who you borrowed them from or lent them 
to. And because Apple, Amazon, and other retailers are likely to operate 
distinct, non-interoperable platforms, these systems balkanize the market-
place. They also increase the risk of lock-in. If your ebook collection and 
network of lenders, borrowers, and resellers is within the Apple ecosystem, 
you’re far less likely to make the switch to Kindle, for example.
What’s  more,  since  their  rights  would  hinge  on  the  deals  reached 
between each platform and publisher, consumers would have to contend 
with significant information costs. Some digital content could be lent, but 
not resold. Some could be lent two times in the course of a month, but 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020188  Chapter 10
not three. And some couldn’t be lent or resold at all. Consumers would be 
expected to determine what set of rules apply for each ebook, movie, or 
album they purchase. Avoiding these information costs is one of the chief 
reasons we have clear property rules.
We deserve better. There are two primary ways to improve on these sorts 
of systems. The first is to make them platform neutral. Regardless of who 
administers the technology, transfers should not be confined to a single 
provider’s ecosystem. If an Apple user wants to lend a digital movie to an 
Amazon customer, technology should not stand in their way. We could 
achieve neutrality by clearing the way for third-party technologies that 
have no economic reason to favor one platform over another. The second 
way to improve these technology-driven solutions is to provide owners 
with clear rules about what transfers are allowed. Those rules should be 
defined by publicly made law, not by private licenses. But even with those 
changes in place, these solutions rely fundamentally on DRM to police 
the behavior of owners. These technologies are meant to “keep consumers 
honest” by taking decisions out of their hands and letting software code 
make them instead. Even when it is designed to facilitate exhaustion, we 
find DRM troubling for the many reasons we’ve already outlined. If DRM 
was the only way to create a workable digital exhaustion regime, we might 
grudgingly accept it. But there’s another path forward.
Forward-and-delete DRM tries to ease fears about infringement by con-
trolling how many copies exist before and after a transfer. That approach 
to the problem, much like the ReDigi decision’s painstaking counting of 
copies, is built on twentieth-century thinking. It assumes that copies are 
valuable, long-lasting, and hard to come by. But today, because of the basic 
architecture of our information networks, copies—lawful and unlawful—
are everywhere. What should concern rights holders and policymakers isn’t 
who has a copy of a work, but who has the right to use and transfer it. Reli-
able evidence about who owns those rights would go a long way toward 
easing the transition to digital exhaustion.
In a sense, the problem facing lawmakers when it comes to transferring 
digital goods is one every property system has to confront. Namely, how 
do we verify ownership to prevent invalid transfers? For particularly valu-
able assets, we rely on elaborate and costly systems of documentation. Your 
house has a deed, and your car has a title. Both are registered in centralized 
public records. These records establish title. They provide legally meaning-
ful answers to the question of ownership, and they help potential purchas-
ers confirm that they are dealing with the right seller. We do something 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  189
similar for IP rights; copyrights, patents, and trademarks are recorded in 
searchable databases by the relevant authorities.
With small items of personal property, we typically rely on possession 
to establish ownership. If your phone is in your pocket or your watch is 
on your wrist, we assume it’s yours. This less formal system makes sense 
for two reasons. First, it would be far too expensive to keep exhaustive title 
records for every pair of socks or can of beans that gets sold. And second, 
most of the time only one person is in possession of a particular tangible 
object. The object and the ability to exploit its value are deeply intertwined. 
But neither of these established approaches works all that well for digital 
assets. Your mp3 collection isn’t valuable enough to warrant an official sys-
tem of recordation. And because digital files are trivial to reproduce, posses-
sion in itself tells us very little about legal entitlement.
Surprisingly, cryptocurrencies like bitcoin may help solve the problem 
of tracking rights in digital assets.50 Bitcoin is a payment system and corre-
sponding digital currency created in 2008. It is not governed by any central 
authority; there is no government, central bank, or financial institution 
standing behind the over $3 billion of bitcoin in the market. Instead, bit-
coin relies on its core underlying innovation—the block chain—to verify 
transactions. Fundamentally, the block chain is a record of transactions. It 
functions much like the title records at your local county clerk’s office or 
your own checkbook ledger—except the block chain keeps track of every 
single bitcoin transaction across the globe, updated every ten minutes, to 
provide a complete and reliable record of ownership. The block chain is not 
a miracle cure.51 But it may provide some insight into how to create a work-
able system of digital personal property.
What sets the block chain apart from other recordation systems is that 
it’s publicly maintained. Unlike your checkbook or title records at the DMV, 
there is no centralized authority that maintains the block chain. It’s the 
result of an ingeniously complex, cooperative effort. That means the block 
chain costs very little to maintain, but is highly resistant to manipulation. 
Trust is essential; if users can’t rely on the information it provides, a ledger 
like the block chain has no value.
While bitcoin remains a large-scale experiment in digital currency, the 
underlying technology is application-neutral. As Marc Andreessen, whose 
venture capital firm has invested $50 million in bitcoin-related compa-
nies, wrote in the New York Times: “Bitcoin gives us, for the first time, a 
way for one Internet user to transfer a unique piece of digital property to 
another Internet user, such that the transfer is guaranteed to be safe and 
secure, everyone knows that the transfer has taken place, and nobody can 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020190  Chapter 10
challenge the legitimacy of the transfer. The consequences of this break-
through are hard to overstate.”52
So how does the block chain achieve this seeming miracle? Let’s start by 
thinking about an individual transfer and see how it is verified and recorded. 
Today, the primary application for the block chain is tracking ownership of 
bitcoins, but ownership interests in any asset—digital or tangible—could be 
tracked in the same way. Imagine you are buying a used ebook on a market 
that implements block chain technology. First, you would want to be sure 
that the payment you send and the ebook you want to receive can’t be 
intercepted by a malicious third party. You can avoid that by using what’s 
called public key cryptography. This basic approach has been used since 
the 1970s and forms the basis for popular email encryption programs like 
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP).
Encryption protects you against third parties, but how do you know you 
can trust the seller? The seller may not actually own the asset that they 
have promised to sell. Or maybe they have already promised to sell it to 
someone else. This problem is familiar from the world of tangible property. 
It’s why you do a title search before buying a house. And it’s why eBay has 
a reputation system. But the problem is even more challenging for digital 
assets. Unlike the seller of a rare vinyl record or a suburban split-level, the 
owner of an ebook can just make a second copy with a stroke of the key-
board. How do we prevent them from trying to sell that single asset to two 
unknowing buyers? And if they do, how do we decide who is the rightful 
owner?
That’s where the public ledger comes in. As a comprehensive and up-
to-date record of transactions, it allows anyone to verify transfers of own-
ership and catch fraud before it happens.53 So when you go to buy your 
ebook, you—or more likely, some software on your device—would check 
whether the seller actually owns it. If they already sold it to someone else or 
never owned it in the first place, that would be reflected in the ledger, and 
the transaction would be canceled.
But if all goes well, you pay for the ebook, and your purchase is entered 
into the ledger where it will be bundled together with a number of other 
transactions that make up a “block.” Bitcoin, for example, bundles trans-
actions into a new block every ten minutes, but that time period can be 
adjusted as needed. The sequential addition of new blocks is what forms 
the block chain. Once a block is added to the chain, it becomes part of 
a complete record of transactions that track changes in the ownership of 
every asset in the system.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Ownership’s Uncertain Future  191
Safeguarding the accuracy of the block chain is obviously of major 
importance. Someone with the ability to add false information to the chain 
has the power to reassign ownership of digital assets. Normally, we manage 
this risk by centralizing control in the hands of some trusted official—the 
county clerk or the Patent and Trademark Office. But the block chain has 
no central authority. Instead, the system is trustworthy because adding a 
block requires a significant investment of resources. That fact doesn’t com-
pletely prevent false information making its way into the block chain. But 
it does provide a high enough degree of reliability for users to treat the 
block chain as proof of title.
Blocks are added to the chain through a process called mining. Miners 
use computers—in many cases, machines built specifically for the task—to 
solve a block. Without overwhelming you with technical detail, solving a 
block involves a sophisticated guessing game. And the more miners there 
are, the harder it is to guess the right answer. Whoever wins this math-
ematical lottery gets to add the block to the chain and receives some mod-
est financial reward. With tens of thousands of miners competing to verify 
transactions and add them to the block chain, a would-be crook would 
need to consistently guess correctly faster than the rest of the mining com-
munity, a task that would take a nearly impossible degree of computing 
power. And the larger the network of miners grows, the more secure and 
valuable the block chain ledger becomes.
Relying on the block chain technology pioneered by bitcoin, we can 
envision a marketplace for digital assets. In that marketplace, consumers 
could buy, sell, lend, and trade the ebooks, music, movies, applications, and 
games they buy—and even virtual objects they discover or craft, like the 
Jade Rabbit, a powerful weapon in the video game Destiny.54 Those transac-
tions would be secure and verifiable, guarding against cheating that could 
harm both consumers and IP rights holders. The public ledger promises 
the technological infrastructure to help us transition to what legal scholar 
Joshua Fairfield calls “bitproperty”—property interests that are decoupled 
from any tangible object.55
Conclusion
Everyday  objects  are  being  replaced  or  supplemented  by  information. 
The media we consume is stored in the cloud, not in our hands. Our cars, 
watches, and clothes—though still physical—incorporate a layer of code 
that both increases and constrains their functionality. A digital economy 
structured around interconnected devices and data holds immense promise. 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020192  Chapter 10
But it also entails risks. Perhaps most troublingly, this new economy has 
the power to redefine or even eliminate the notion of personal property. 
If we aren’t careful, ownership will become a thing of the past. The loss 
of ownership puts us all at risk of exploitation. It imposes significant but 
broadly dispersed costs on society. And it takes decisions about how to live 
our lives out of our hands and entrusts those choices to a handful of private 
companies.
Technology alone, no matter how groundbreaking, can’t fix the own-
ership problem. But in conjunction with meaningful legal reform, new 
innovations can preserve the notion of personal property in this emerg-
ing economy. Without legal change, those same technologies become just 
another tool for rights holders to enforce restrictions on our behavior. 
Code can reinforce property rights; it can make them easier to transfer and 
cheaper to track. But it can’t create them. Ultimately, property rights are a 
product of law. Calling an interest a property right—whether it’s a neigh-
bor’s interest in their home, a copyright holder’s interest in their expres-
sion, or your interest in the products you buy—is a statement about the 
degree to which the law will protect that interest in the face of competing 
claims.56
The label “property” carries a great deal of rhetorical force. That’s why 
patent and copyright holders have adopted the language of property, and 
why they have seen such success in both the courts and Congress in their 
efforts to strengthen, expand, and extend those rights. But those efforts 
themselves reveal something crucial about property as an institution. What 
counts as property, the specific rules and exceptions, and the way we resolve 
conflict between property owners, are things that change over time. They 
are decisions that we—through the legislative and judicial processes—make 
in response to changing conditions and values. Once lawmakers realize that 
both IP rights holders and consumers can lay equal claim to the property 
mantle, they are better positioned to balance their competing, and in some 
ways complementary, interests.
We think meaningful personal property rights in digital assets will ben-
efit consumers, creators, and the market as a whole. Consumers get stable 
and predictable access, greater privacy protections, and the freedom to 
make economically and socially valuable uses of the products they pur-
chase. That added value provides something essential from the perspective 
of creators—a good reason for people to spend their money. People want 
the freedom to lend, resell, and give away the things they own, and they 
are willing to spend more to get it. And because ownership reduces infor-
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273333/9780262335959_ccd.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes
1  Introduction
1. Brad Stone, “Amazon Erases Orwell Books from Kindle,” New York Times, July 
17,  2009,  http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon 
.html, accessed June 14, 2015.
2. If you borrowed a hard copy of this book from a friend or the local library, you 
are benefitting from their property right to lend the book. We discuss libraries in 
depth in chapter 6.
3. Paul Bentley, “How a Third of Bestselling Ebooks Cost More Than the Same Title 
in Hardback,” Daily Mail (London), September 30, 2012, http://www.dailymail.co
.uk/sciencetech/article-2211022/How-bestselling-ebooks-cost-MORE-title-hardback 
.html, accessed June 14, 2015.
4. Mark King, “Amazon Wipes Customer’s Kindle and Deletes Account with No 
Explanation,”  Guardian  (UK),  October  22,  2012,  http://www.theguardian.com/
money/2012/oct/22/amazon-wipes-customers-kindle-deletes-account, accessed June 
14, 2015.
5. Peter Cohen and Jeff Livingston, “More Than Half of U.S. Public Schools Don’t 
Have  Adequate  Wireless  Access,”  Atlantic,  November  13,  2013,  http://www
.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2013/11/more-than-half-of-us-public-schools 
-dont-have-adequate-wireless-access/281410/, accessed June 14, 2015
6. Nate Hoffelder, “Scholastic to Close Storia eBookstore; Customers Could Lose 
Access to Their eBook Purchases,” The Digital Reader (blog), July 27, 2014, http://
the-digital-reader.com/2014/07/27/scholastic-close-storia-ebookstore-customers 
-will-lose-access-ebook-purchases/#.U_fFdvSE-a5, accessed June 14, 2015.
7. “Kindle Store Terms of Use,” Amazon Digital Services, Inc., last modified Septem-
ber  6,  2012,  http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId 
=201014950, accessed June 14, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020196  Notes
8. Ibid.
9. “Conditions of Use,” Amazon Services LLC, last modified December 5, 2012, 
http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/?nodeId=508088, 
accessed June 14, 2015.
10. See, e.g., Ron Wyden, “Regulatory Hardball about Software,” Wall Street Journal, 
October 13, 2015, http://www.wsj.com/articles/regulatory-hardball-about-software 
-1444776652, accessed November 27, 2015.
11. Julie Bosman, “Publisher Limits Shelf Life for Library E-Books,” New York Times, 
March  14,  2011,  http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/15/business/media/15libraries 
.html,  accessed  June  14,  2015;  Jeremy  Greenfield,  “What  Is  Going  on  with  
Library  E-Book  Lending?”  Forbes,  June  22,  2012,  http://www.forbes.com/sites/
jeremygreenfield/2012/06/22/what-is-going-on-with-library-e-book-lending/, 
accessed June 14, 2015.
12. Michael Kelley, “Random House Says Libraries Own Their Ebooks,” LJ Insider 
(blog),  Library  Journal,  October  18,  2012,  http://lj.libraryjournal.com/2012/10/
opinion/random-house-says-libraries-own-their-ebooks-lj-insider, accessed June 14, 
2015.; Peter Brantley, “Random House Did Not Mean Own, Exactly,” PWxyz (blog), 
Publisher’s Weekly, October 23, 2012, https://web.archive.org/web/20150626112010/
http://blogs.publishersweekly.com/blogs/PWxyz/2012/10/23/just-another-word/ 
(site discontinued), accessed June 14, 2015.
13. Matt Buchanan, “Five Stores That Hosed Customers with DRM,” Gizmodo (blog), 
April 28, 2008, http://gizmodo.com/384741/five-stores-that-hosed-customers-with 
-drm, accessed June 14, 2015; Jon Healey, “Yahoo Pulls An MSN Music (Only 
Faster),” Bit Player (blog), Los Angeles Times, July 23, 2008, http://opinion.latimes
.com/bitplayer/2008/07/yahoo-pulls-and.html,  accessed  June  14,  2015.  Walmart 
later reversed course: Antone Gonsalves, “Wal-Mart Reverses Decision to Shutdown  
Digital  Music  DRM  Servers,”  InformationWeek,  October  10,  2008,  http://www
.informationweek.com/wal-mart-reverses-decision-to-shutdown-digital-music-drm 
-servers-/d/d-id/1072848, accessed June 14, 2015.
14. Julie Jacobson, “Perils of DRM: What Happens to Your Digital Content if the 
Provider Goes Out of Business?” CEPro, June 5, 2009, http://www.cepro.com/article/
print/what_happens_to_your_digital_content_if_the_provider_goes_out_of 
_business/, accessed June 14, 2015.
15. Julie E. Cohen, “The Right to Read Anonymously: A Closer Look at Copyright 
Management in Cyberspace,” Connecticut Law Review 28 (Summer 1996): 981–1039, 
982; R. Anthony Reese, “The First Sale Doctrine in the Age of Digital Networks,” 
Boston College Law Review 44 (March 2003): 577–652, at 584.
16. Henry Miller’s novel was banned upon its initial release in 1934. The book was 
finally held not to be obscene by the Supreme Court three decades later in Grove 
Press v. Gerstein, 378 U.S. 577 (1964).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  197
17. The album by rap group 2 Live Crew was declared obscene months after its 
release and after 1.7 million copies had been sold. Skyywalker Records, Inc. v. 
Navarro, 739 F. Supp. 578, 582 (S.D. Fla. 1990), rev’d sub nom. Luke Records, Inc. v. 
Navarro, 960 F.2d 134 (11th Cir. 1992). That determination was later reversed on 
appeal.
18. Nearly two decades after the release of this Academy Award-winning film, it was 
deemed obscene by a judge in Oklahoma City who demanded copies be confiscated 
by local authorities. That decision too was eventually overturned. See Camfield v. 
City of Okla. City, 248 F.3d 1214, 1217 (10th Cir. 2001).
19. Iain Thompson, “Adobe Spies on Readers: EVERY DRM Page Turn Leaked  
to Base over SSL,” Register (London), October 23, 2014, http://www.theregister
.co.uk/2014/10/23/adobe_updates_digital_editions_encryption/,  accessed  June  15, 
2015.
20. Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. Surveil-
lance State (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2014).
21. Throughout this book, we have opted to use the gender-neutral singular “they” 
wherever possible. See Jeff Guo, “Sorry, grammar nerds. The singular ‘they’ has been 
declared  Word  of  the  Year,”  Washington  Post,  January  8,  2016,  https://www
.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/01/08/donald-trump-may-win-this 
-years-word-of-the-year/, accessed March 16, 2016.
22. R. H. Coase, “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics 3 (Octo-
ber 1960): 1–44, at 15–28.
23. Thomas W. Merrill and Henry E. Smith, “Optimal Standardization in the Law of 
Property: The Numerus Clausus Principle,” Yale Law Journal 110 (October 2000): 
1–70, at 40–42.
24. Arthur Pigou, The Economics of Welfare (1920; repr., New York: Palgrave Macmil-
lan, 2013), 184–185.
25. For better or worse the 2014 film, The Interview, was initially withheld from dis-
tribution due to fears over its criticism of North Korea. Drew Harwell and Ellen 
Nakashima, “Hackers’ Threats Prompt Sony Pictures to Shelve Christmas Release of 
‘The Interview,’” Washington Post, December 17, 2014, https://www.washingtonpost.
com/business/economy/top-movie-theater-chains-cancel-premiere-showings-of-the-
interview/2014/12/17/dd1bdb2a-8608-11e4-9534-f79a23c40e6c_story.html, 
accessed June 15, 2015. Disney maintains a “vault” of films that are unavailable for 
home viewing, in part as a means of introducing scarcity and driving demand, but 
also in part to ensure that films like 1946’s Song of the South remain unseen if not 
forgotten. Jason Sperb, Disney’s Most Notorious Film: Race, Convergence, and the Hidden 
Histories of Song of the South (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2012).
26. Eric von Hippel, Democratizing Innovation (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020198  Notes
27. Sony Corp. of Am. v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 446 n.27 (1984).
28. See 17 U.S.C. § 504(c) (2012).
29. The Pirate Bay, for those unfamiliar, is a popular site that allows users to con-
tribute and locate torrent files that facilitate the often unauthorized distribution of 
copyrighted material.
2  Property and the Exhaustion Principle
1. Brad Dashoff and John Antonacci, “Understanding Real Property Interests and 
Deeds,” ABA GPSolo Law Trends & News 7, no. 4 (Summer 2011), http://www
.americanbar.org/newsletter/publications/law_trends_news_practice_area_e 
_newsletter_home/2011_summer/real_property_interests_deeds.html, accessed June 
15, 2015.
2. For a more detailed exposition of these devices, see Gerald Korngold, Private Land 
Use Arrangements: Easements, Real Covenants, and Equitable Servitudes (Huntington, 
NY: Juris Publishing, 2004), 287.
3. The courts have imposed some important limitations on the power of real prop-
erty owners to saddle future generations with restrictions on the use of that prop-
erty. Racially restrictive covenants, which prohibited the sale of real estate to 
nonwhites, were deemed unconstitutional in Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1 (1948).
4. Christina Mulligan, “A Numerus Clausus Principle for Intellectual Property,” Ten-
nessee Law Review 80 (Winter 2013): 235–290, at 251–252.
5. Courts have historically proven hostile to servitudes on chattels due to their ten-
dency to provide insufficient notice, restrain alienation, limit future unforeseen 
usability, and impose high information costs on subsequent purchasers. See Zecha-
riah Chafee Jr., “The Music Goes Round and Round: Equitable Servitudes and Chat-
tels,” Harvard Law Review 69, no. 7 (May 1956): 1250–1264, at 1261; Molly Shaffer 
Van Houweling, “The New Servitudes,” Georgetown Law Journal 96 (2008): 885–950, 
at 897–898.
6. See, e.g., De Mattos v. Gibson (1858) 4 De G&J 276 (Eng.); Taddy & Co. v. Steri-
ous & Co. (1904) 1 Ch. 354 (Eng.); John D. Park & Sons Co. v. Hartman, 153 F. 24, 
39 (6th Cir. 1907); Miles Med. Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co., 220 U.S. 373 (1911); 
Van Houweling, “The New Servitudes.” But see Glen O. Robinson, “Personal Prop-
erty Servitudes,” University of Chicago Law Review 71 (Fall 2004): 1449–1523 (arguing 
in favor of servitudes on personal property).
7. Christina Mulligan, “Personal Property Servitudes on the Internet of Things,” 
Georgia Law Review (forthcoming).
8. John D. Park & Sons Co. v. Hartman, 153 F. 24, 39 (6th Cir. 1907).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  199
9. J. K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows (New York: Arthur A. Levine 
Books, 2007), 417–418.
10. Exhaustion also plays a role in trademark law, where it permits the resale of 
authentic goods without the trademark holder’s permission. See generally Yvette Joy 
Liebesman and Benjamin Wilson, “The Mark of a Resold Good,” George Mason Law 
Review 20 (Fall 2012): 157–205.
11. See Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991).
12. 17 U.S.C. § 102(a) (2012).
13. Ibid., § 106.
14. See 35 U.S.C. § 154(a)(2) (2012); 17 U.S.C. § 302(a) (2012).
15. Thomas Jefferson to Isaac McPherson, 13 August 1813, in The Writings of Thomas 
Jefferson, ed. Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert Ellery Bergh (Washington, DC: Thomas 
Jefferson Memorial Association, 1905), 334.
16. Joshua A.T. Fairfield, “Virtual Property,” Boston University Law Review 85, no. 4 
(October 2005): 1047–1102.
17. William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, ed. John L. Wendell, 
vol. 2 (New York: Harper & Bros., 1857), 1.
18. See Albert W. Alschuler, “Rediscovering Blackstone,” University of Pennsylvania 
Law Review 145 (November 1996): 30–32.
19. John Locke, “Of Property,” chap. 5 in Second Treatise of Government, ed. Jona-
than Bennett (2010), http://www.earlymoderntexts.com/assets/pdfs/locke1689a_1 
.pdf, accessed June 16, 2015.
20. Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, trans. T. M. Knox (London: Oxford University Press, 
1820).
21. Joseph Campbell, The Hero with a Thousand Faces (New York: Pantheon Books, 
1949).
22. The Copyright Act exempts certain public performances of audiovisual works 
from liability so long as, among other things, the diagonal screen size is no greater 
than fifty-five inches. Seriously. 17 U.S.C. § 110(5)(B) (2012).
23. Unlike the term “publicly” as used on the public performance and display 
rights, the phrase “to the public” as used in the distribution right is undefined in the 
Copyright Act. Few cases have considered the implications of that phrase.
24. Thad Moore, “Here’s Why Atari Fans Just Spent $100,000 on Video Games from 
a Dump,” Washington Post, September 4, 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
news/the-switch/wp/2015/09/04/heres-why-atari-fans-just-spent-100000-on-video 
-games-from-a-dump, accessed November 25, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020200  Notes
25. Ibid., § 109(c), 90 Stat. at 2549 (current version at 17 U.S.C. § 109[c] [2012]).
26. Ibid., at § 117, 90 Stat. at 2565 (current version at 17 U.S.C. § 117 [2012]).
27. Clemens v. Estes, 22 F. 899 (D. Mass. 1885).
28. Harrison v. Maynard, Merrill & Co., 61 F. 689 (2d Cir. 1894).
29. Doan v. Am. Book Co., 105 F. 772 (7th Cir. 1901).
30. Kipling v. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 120 F. 631 (2d Cir. 1903).
31. Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339 (1908).
32. 1909 Copyright Act: An Act to Amend and Consolidate the Acts Respecting 
Copyright, Pub. L. No. 60-349, ch. 320, § 41, 35 Stat. 1075, 1084 (1909).
33. Copyright Act of 1976, Pub. L. No. 94-553, § 109, 90 Stat. 2541, 2548–49 (1976) 
(current version at 17 U.S.C. § 109 [2012]).
34. Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351 (2013).
35. There are half measures between the full international exhaustion regime the 
Court adopted in Kirtsaeng and the place-of-manufacture rule endorsed by Wiley. 
Some countries have adopted regional exhaustion where a sale in one country 
exhausts rights in a defined number of neighboring territories, but not the world at 
large. Ariel Katz, “The First Sale Doctrine and the Economics of Post-Sale Restraints,” 
Brigham Young University Law Review 2014, no. 1 (2014): 57–142, at 75. Another 
option suggested in Justice Kagan’s concurring opinion in Kirtsaeng would preclude 
unauthorized importation of a lawfully sold copy, but once it reached the United 
States would recognize the first sale doctrine. Kirtsaeng, 133 S. Ct. at 1372–1373 
(Kagan, J., concurring).
36. Katz, “The First Sale Doctrine,” 82.
37. Leah Shaver, “Copyright and Inequality,” Washington University Law Review 92 
(2014): 132 (“When asked why they do not read more often, respondents over-
whelmingly cite the affordability and availability of books as the primary barriers. 
The most common answers include: ‘Books are expensive’ (45 percent), ‘Books are 
so expensive that you cannot afford to buy them’ (33 percent).”).
38. Shamnad Basheer et al., “Exhausting Copyrights and Promoting Access to Edu-
cation: An Empirical Take,” Journal of Intellectual Property Rights 17 (2012): 335–344, 
at 340.
39. Carolyn Bigda, “Money-saving Tips for College Students,” Chicago Tribune, 
August  11,  2015,  http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/yourmoney/sc-cons 
-0813-started-20150810-column.html, accessed November 25, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  201
40. Ben Popken, “College Textbook Prices Have Risen 1,041 Percent Since 1977,” 
NBC  News,  August  6,  2015,  http://www.nbcnews.com/feature/freshman-year/
college-textbook-prices-have-risen-812-percent-1978-n399926,  accessed  November 
25, 2015.
41. Jonathan  Band  and  Jonathan  Gerafi,  Profitability  of  Copyright-Intensive 
Industries (Washington, DC: infojustice.org, 2013), PDF report, http://infojustice
.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Profitability-of-Copyright-Industries.pdf, 
accessed July 6, 2015.
42. Ibid.; Heather Morrison, “Chapter Two: Scholarly Communication in Crisis,” in 
“Freedom  for  Scholarship  in  the  Internet  Age”  (doctoral  dissertation,  Simon  
Fraser  University,  2011),  https://web.archive.org/web/20150828020037/http://
pages.cmns.sfu.ca/heather-morrison/chapter-two-scholarly-communication-in 
-crisis/ (site discontinued), accessed July 6, 2015; see also “Of Goats and Headaches,” 
Economist,  May  26,  2011,  http://www.economist.com/node/18744177/,  accessed 
July 6, 2015 (noting Elsevier’s 36 percent profit margins).
43. Mark J. Perry, “The Public Thinks the Average Company Makes a 36% Profit 
Margin, Which Is about 5X Too High,” AEIdeas, April 2, 2015, https://www.aei.org/
publication/the-public-thinks-the-average-company-makes-a-36-profit-margin 
-which-is-about-5x-too-high, accessed July 6, 2015.
44. It’s worth noting that the college textbook market is particularly susceptible to 
insensitivity to rising prices since those who make decisions about which books are 
required in a course, namely professors, don’t pay for them.
45. Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. Aiken, 422 U.S. 151 (1975).
46. Fred R. Byers, “Care and Handling of CDs and DVDs—A Guide for Librarians 
and Archivists” (Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
2003), http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/894.05/docs/CDandDVDCareandHandlingGuide.
pdf,  accessed  July  6,  2015;  “Preserving  CDs  and  DVDs,”  National  Archives  of  
Australia,  http://www.naa.gov.au/records-management/agency/preserve/physical 
-preservation/CDs-and-DVDs.aspx, accessed November 15, 2015.
47. Chuck Philips, “Compact Disc War Headed for the Court,” Los Angeles Times, 
July  31,  1993,  http://articles.latimes.com/1993-07-31/entertainment/ca-18861_1 
_compact-discs, accessed November 15, 2015.
48. Ibid.
49. James Lardner, Fast Forward: Hollywood, the Japanese and the VCR Wars (New 
York: W. W. Norton, 1987), 179.
50. Joshua M. Greenberg, From Betamax to Blockbuster: Video Stores and the Invention 
of Movies on Video (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010), 119.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020202  Notes
51. “Terms of Use,” Beachbody, LLC, last modified July 18, 2014, https://www 
.beachbody.com/product/about_us/terms_of_use.do, accessed July 6, 2015.
52. See 17 U.S.C. § 109(b) (2012).
53. Ellen Forman, “Nintendo Zaps Blockbuster Reproduction of Game Instructions 
Spurs Copyright Lawsuit,” Sun Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale), August 13, 1989, http://
articles.sun-sentinel.com/1989-08-13/business/8902250572_1_nintendo 
-blockbuster-video-games, accessed July 6, 2015; Henry Gilbert, “Lawsuits That 
Altered the Course of Gaming History,” GamesRadar, February 4, 2014, http://www
.gamesradar.com/lawsuits-changed-gaming/, accessed July 6, 2015.
54. Robert Purchese, “Lionhead: Pre-owned Worse Than Piracy,” Eurogamer, May 17, 
2011,  http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2011-05-17-lionhead-pre-owned-worse-
than-pc-piracy, accessed July 6, 2015.
55. John Gaudiosi, “GameStop President Tony Bartel Talks Xbox One, PlayStation 
4, Used Games and Pre-Orders,” Forbes, May 21, 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/
johngaudiosi/2013/05/21/gamestop-president-tony-bartel-talks-xbox-one-
playstation-4-used-games-and-pre-orders/, accessed July 6, 2015.
56. Hidehiro Inooka, “Electronic Content Processing System, Electronic Content 
Processing Method, Package of Electronic Content, and Use Permission Apparatus,” 
US Patent 9,183,358, filed September 12, 2012, issued November 10, 2015, http://
www.google.com/patents/US20130007892, accessed November 15, 2015.
57. Timothy Geigner, “Microsoft Capitulates, Removes Online DRM from Xbox 
One,”  Techdirt,  June  19,  2013,  https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20130619/
13581923535/microsoft-capitulates-removes-online-drm-xbox-one.shtml,  accessed 
July 6, 2015.
58. Wesley Yin-Poole, “Fallout: New Vegas Dev Hopes Digital Distribution ‘Stabs 
Used Game Market in the Heart,’” Eurogamer, December 13, 2011, http://www
.eurogamer.net/articles/2011-12-13-fallout-new-vegas-dev-hopes-digital 
-distribution-stabs-used-game-market-in-the-heart, accessed July 6, 2015.
59. See Daniel Gross, “Does a Free Download Equal a Lost Sale,” New York Times, 
November  21,  2004,  http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/21/business/yourmoney/
does-a-free-download-equal-a-lost-sale.html, accessed July 6, 2015.
60. Jordan Kahn, “Eddy Cue: Apple Passed 35 Billions Songs Sold on iTunes Last 
Week, 40 Million iTunes Radio Listeners,” 9to5Mac, May 28, 2014, http://9to5mac.
com/2014/05/28/eddy-cue-apple-passed-35-billions-songs-sold-on-itunes-last-week-
40-million-itunes-radio-listeners/, accessed March 15, 2016.
61. Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Sony Corp. of Am., 480 F. Supp. 429, 467 (C.D. 
Cal. 1979).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  203
3  Copies, Clouds, and Streams
1. In China, books were printed as early as the late sixth century. And around 1050, 
Pi Sheng developed movable type, hundreds of years before Gutenberg. John Scales 
Avery, Information Theory and Evolution (Singapore: World Scientific Publishing, 
2012), 138–139.
2. For book publishers, the desire to control the press was rooted in economic con-
cerns. Without competition, they could make a tidy sum. But for governments, 
control over the printing press was a powerful tool for suppressing criticism. Eliza-
beth L. Eisenstein, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change (Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1980).
3. For more on the history of Venetian and English printing privileges, see Maurizio 
Borghi, “A Venetian Experiment on Perpetual Copyright,” in Privilege and Property: 
Essays on the History of Copyright, ed. Ronan Deazley, Martin Kretschmer, and Lionel 
Bentley (Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers, 2010), 137–155; Mark Rose, Authors 
and Owners: The Invention of Copyright (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1995).
4. Rose, Authors and Owners, 14.
5. Prior to the Copyright Act of 1909, authors could generally control public perfor-
mances of unpublished works. See Ferris v. Frohman, 223 U.S. 424 (1912) (applying 
the Copyright Act of 1891).
6. Pope v. Curl, 2 Atk. 342, 26 Eng. Rep. 608 (1741).
7. Stephens v. Cady, 55 U.S. 528 (1853).
8. See, e.g., Parton v. Prang, 18 F. Cas. 1273 (C.C.D. Mass. 1872) (No. 10,784); Push-
man v. New York Graphic Society, 39 N.E.2d 249 (N.Y. 1942).
9. Copyright Act of 1976, at § 202, 90 Stat. at 2568–69 (current version at 17 U.S.C. 
§ 202 [2012]).
10. ”iTunes  Music,”  Apple,  Inc.,  http://www.apple.com/itunes/music/,  accessed 
March 13, 2016 (noting a library of forty-three million songs); Jordan Kahn, “Eddy 
Cue: Apple Passed 35 Billion Songs Sold on iTunes Last Week, 40 Million iTunes 
Radio Listeners,” 9to5Mac, May 28, 2014, http://9to5mac.com/2014/05/28/eddy-cue
-apple-passed-35-billions-songs-sold-on-itunes-last-week-40-million-itunes-radio 
-listeners/, accessed March 13, 2016; “iTunes Store Top Music Retailer in the US,” 
Apple Press Info, April 3, 2008, https://www.apple.com/pr/library/2008/04/03iTunes 
-Store-Top-Music-Retailer-in-the-US.html,  accessed  March  13,  2016  (noting  that 
iTunes “became the largest retailer in the US based on the amount of music sold 
during January and February 2008”).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020204  Notes
11. Jim Milliot, “BEA 2013: The E-book Boom Years,” Publisher’s Weekly, May 29, 
2013,  http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/bea/article/ 
57390-bea-2013-the-e-book-boom-years.html, ,  aacccceesssseedd  JJuunnee  1155,,  22001155;;  MMaarriissaa  BBlluuee--
stone, “U.S. Publishing Industry’s Annual Survey Reveals $28 Billion in Revenue in 
2014,”  Publishers.org,  June  10,  2015,  http://publishers.org/news/us-publishing
-industry’s-annual-survey-reveals-28-billion-revenue-2014, accessed June 15, 2015.
12. Alexandra Alter, “The Plot Twist: E-Book Sales Slip, and Print Is Far from Dead,” 
New  York  Times,  September  22,  2015,  http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23/
business/media/the-plot-twist-e-book-sales-slip-and-print-is-far-from-dead.html, 
accessed November 18, 2015.
13. Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc., 934 F. Supp. 2d 640 (S.D.N.Y. 2013).
14. The Supreme Court of Canada came to a different conclusion in a case involving 
the transfer of images from posters to canvases without the copyright holder’s con-
sent. Théberge v. Galerie d’Art du Petit Champlain Inc., 2002 SCC 34 [2002], 2 S.C.R. 
336 (Can.). The Court determined that image was “was not reproduced” but “trans-
ferred from one display to another” (338).
15. See Computer Software Copyright Act of 1980, Pub. L. No. 96-517, 94 Stat. 3015, 
3028–29 (1980) (current version at 17 U.S.C. § 117 [2012]).
16. “Term and Conditions,” Apple, Inc., last modified October 21, 2015, http://
www.apple.com/legal/internet-services/itunes/us/terms.html,  accessed  November 
18, 2015.
17. Or not. See United States v. Wise, 550 F.2d 1180 (9th Cir. 1977).
18. 134 S. Ct. 2498, 2508 (2014).
19. See White-Smith Music Publ’g. Co. v. Apollo Co., 209 U.S. 1 (1908).
20. Cartoon Network LP, LLLP v. CSC Holdings, Inc., 536 F.3d 121 (2d Cir. 2008).
21. MAI Sys. Corp. v. Peak Computer, Inc., 991 F.2d 511, 519 (9th Cir. 1993).
22. Todd Spangler, “Netflix Tops 57 Million Subscribers in Q4 as U.S. Growth 
Slows,” Variety, January 20, 2015, http://variety.com/2015/digital/news/netflix-tops
-57-million-subscribers-in-q4-as-u-s-growth-slows-1201409712/,  accessed  June  15, 
2015; “Global Internet Phenomena Report,” Sandvine, Inc., https://www.sandvine 
.com/trends/global-internet-phenomena/, accessed June 15, 2015.
23. “20 Million Reasons to Say Thanks,” Spotify News, June 10, 2015, https://news.
spotify.com/us/2015/06/10/20-million-reasons-to-say-thanks/,  accessed  June  15, 
2015.
24. Ibid.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  205
25. Brent  Lang,  “Digital  Home  Entertainment  to  Exceed  Physical  by  2016,  
Study Finds,” Variety, June 3, 2014, http://variety.com/2014/digital/news/digital
-home-entertainment-to-exceed-physical-by-2016-study-finds-1201207708/, 
accessed November 18, 2015.
26. Ethan Smith, “Music Downloads Plummet in U.S., but Sales of Vinyl Records 
and Streaming Surge,” Wall Street Journal, January 1, 2015, http://www.wsj.com/
articles/music-downloads-plummet-in-u-s-but-sales-of-vinyl-records-and-streaming 
-surge-1420092579, accessed June 15, 2015.
27. “Introducing Apple Music—All the Ways You Love Music. All in One Place,” 
Apple  Press  Info,  June  8,  2015,  https://www.apple.com/pr/library/2015/06/ 
08Introducing-Apple-Music-All-The-Ways-You-Love-Music-All-in-One-Place-.html, 
accessed November 18, 2015.
28. Michael Liedtke, “Gaps in Netflix’s Online Library Likely to Persist,” Yahoo 
News,  April  9,  2012,  http://news.yahoo.com/gaps-netflixs-online-library-likely-
persist-200620994.html; “Information,” Spotify Ltd., https://press.spotify.com/us/
information/, accessed June 15, 2015; Piotr Kowalczyk, “Kindle Unlimited Ebook 
Subscription—9 Things to Know,” Ebook Friendly, last modified October 27, 2015, 
http://ebookfriendly.com/kindle-unlimited-ebook-subscription/, ,   aacccceesssseedd   NNoovveemm--
ber 18, 2015.
29. Ken Auletta, “Outside the Box,” New Yorker, February 3, 2014, http://www
.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/02/03/outside-the-box-2, accessed June 15, 2015.
30. When film distributor The Weinstein Company signed an exclusive distribution 
agreement with Blockbuster, Netflix relied on retail purchases and the first sale doc-
trine to make those titles available to its customers. See Statement of Reed Hastings, 
Netflix CEO, “Netflix, Inc. Q3 2009 Earnings Call,” October 22, 2009, transcript, 
http://seekingalpha.com/article/168407-netflix-inc-q3-2009-earnings-call-transcript 
(noting that because “retail is so big and diffused,” studios have been unable to pre-
vent retail acquisition and that because of “liquidity in the supply chain,” the pur-
chase of used retail copies saved Netflix money).
31. “Spotify Explained: How Does Spotify Make Money?” Spotify Ltd., http://www.
spotifyartists.com/spotify-explained/#how-does-spotify-make-money, accessed June 
15, 2015.
32. These other sources of income, particularly live performance, are of increasing 
importance. Swift’s Red tour, which wrapped up in 2014, grossed $150 million, more 
than the next highest-grossing tours from Beyonce, Jay-Z, and Justin Timberlake 
combined.
33. Taylor Swift, “For Taylor Swift, the Future of Music Is a Love Story,” Wall Street 
Journal,  July  7,  2014,  http://www.wsj.com/articles/for-taylor-swift-the-future-of
-music-is-a-love-story-1404763219, accessed June 15, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020206  Notes
34. Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, “Experimental Tests 
of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem,” Journal of Political Economy 98, 
no. 6 (1990): 1325–1348.
35. Carey K. Morewedge et al., “Bad Riddance or Good Rubbish? Ownership and 
Not Loss Aversion Causes the Endowment Effect,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 
45, no. 4 (July 2009): 947–951.
36. Yannick Ferreira De Sousa and Alistair Munro, “Truck, Barter, and Exchange 
versus the Endowment Effect: Virtual Field Experiments in an Online Game Envi-
ronment,” Journal of Economic Psychology 33, no. 3 (June 2012): 482–493. Although 
this experiment found that the endowment effect was reduced among experienced 
players of an online role-playing game, that finding is consistent with experiments 
in the offline world.
37. Keith  Caufield,  “Vinyl  Album  Sales  Hit  Historic  High  in  2014,  Again,”  
Billboard,  December  31,  2014,  http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/
chart-beat/6422442/vinyl-album-sales-hit-historic-high-2014,  accessed  June  15, 
2015.
38. Joshua P. Friedlander, News and Notes on 2015 Mid-Year RIAA Shipment and 
Revenue  Statistics  (Washington,  DC:  RIAA,  2015),  PDF  report,  https://www.riaa
.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/2015_RIAAMidYear_ShipmentData.pdf, 
accessed November 18, 2015.
39. Jon Fingas, “‘The Simpsons’ Seasons Won’t Be Available on Disc from Now On,” 
Engadget,  April  12,  2015,  http://www.engadget.com/2015/04/12/the-simpsons-
drops-disc-releases/, accessed November 18, 2015.
40. Kevin Smith, “Planning for Musical Obsolescence,” Scholarly Communications @ 
Duke (blog), Duke University Libraries, July 28, 2014, http://blogs.library.duke.edu/
scholcomm/2014/07/28/planning-for-musical-obsolescence/,  accessed  June  15, 
2015.
41. Cory  Doctorow,  “Oxford  English  Dictionary—the  Future,”  Guardian  (UK), 
August  23,  2013,  http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/aug/23/oxford 
-english-dictionary-future-digitally, accessed June 15, 2015.
42. Stephen Shankland, “Adobe Launches Creative Cloud Subscription Service,” 
CNET,  May  11,  2012,  http://www.cnet.com/news/adobe-launches-creative-cloud
-subscription-service/, accessed June 15, 2015.
43. Jamie Condliffe, “Microsoft Still Sells Its OS in Boxes—This Is How Windows 10 
Will Look,” Gizmodo (blog), July 13, 2015, http://gizmodo.com/microsoft-still-sells
-its-os-in-boxes-this-is-how-windo-1717434336, accessed November 18, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  207
4  Ownership and the Fine Print
1. See “Licensed Application End User License Agreement,” Apple, Inc., http://www 
.apple.com/legal/internet-services/itunes/appstore/dev/stdeula/,  accessed  June  15, 
2015; “iTunes Terms and Conditions,” Apple Inc., last modified June 30, 2015, 
http://www.apple.com/legal/internet-services/itunes/us/terms.html, accessed July 7, 
2015.
2. Tom Gardner, “To Read, Or Not to Read ... the Terms and Conditions,” Daily Mail 
(London),  March  22,  2012,  http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2118688/
PayPal-agreement-longer-Hamlet-iTunes-beats-Macbeth.html, accessed July 7, 2015.
3. Bob Dorman, “Adobe Demands 7,000 Years a Day from Humankind,” Register, 
December 4, 2012, http://www.theregister.co.uk/2012/12/04/feature_tech_licences_
are_daft, accessed July 7, 2015.
4. Alex Hern, “I Read All the Small Print on the Internet and It Made Me Want to 
Die,” Guardian (UK), June 15, 2015, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/
jun/15/i-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet, accessed July 7, 2015.
5. Douglas E. Phillips, The Software License Unveiled: How Legislation by License Con-
trols Software Access (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 79.
6. Yannis Bakos, Florencia Marotta-Wurgler, and David R. Trossen, “Does Anyone 
Read the Fine Print? Consumer Attention to Standard Form Contracts,” New York 
University Law and Economics Working Papers, Paper 195, New York University 
School  of  Law,  New  York,  2014,  22,  http://lsr.nellco.org/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=1199&context=nyu_lewp, accessed July 7, 2015.
7. Mike Masnick, “Supreme Court Chief Justice Admits He Doesn’t Read Online 
EULAs or Other ‘Fine Print,’” Techdirt, October 22, 2010, https://www.techdirt.com/
articles/20101021/02145811519.shtml, accessed July 7, 2015.
8. Mike Masnick, “Proof That (Almost) No One Reads End User License Agree-
ments,”  Techdirt,  February  23,  2005,  https://www.techdirt.com/
articles/20050223/1745244.shtml, accessed July 7, 2015.
9. George A. Akerlof, “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market 
Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, no. 3 (August 1970): 488–500, http://
www.jstor.org/stable/1879431, accessed July 7, 2015.
10. Services like Carfax have addressed this problem by making information about 
specific vehicles more readily available. Steven Mufson and Michael A. Fletcher, 
“Carfax Figures Indicate an ‘Alarming Number’ of Recalled Cars Are Sold without 
Being Fixed,” Washington Post, April 4, 2014, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
business/economy/carfax-figures-indicate-an-alarming-number-of-recalled-cars-are 
-sold-without-being-fixed/2014/04/03/093e9464-bb47-11e3-9c3c-311301e2167d 
_story.html, accessed March 13, 2016.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020208  Notes
11. Marshall Kirkpatrick, “Does Google Have Rights to Everything You Send through 
Chrome?”  Readwrite,  September  3,  2008,  http://readwrite.com/2008/09/03/does
_google_have_rights_to_all, accessed July 7, 2015.
12. Nate Anderson, “Google on Chrome EULA Controversy: Our Bad, We’ll Change 
It,” Ars Technica, September 3, 2008, http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2008/09/
google-on-chrome-eula-controversy-our-bad-well-change-it/, accessed July 7, 2015.
13. Nancy  S.  Kim,  Wrap  Contracts:  Foundations  and  Ramifications  (Oxford,  UK: 
Oxford University Press, 2013), 60.
14. Ibid.
15. Matthew Humphries, “Retail Copies of Office 2013 Are Tied to a Single Com-
puter  Forever,”  Geek.com,  February  13,  2013,  http://www.geek.com/news/retail 
-copies-of-office-2013-are-tied-to-a-single-computer-forever-1539563/, accessed July 
7, 2015.
16. For an example of terms that limit liability, see “SoundCloud Terms of Use,” 
SoundCloud Limited, last modified March 12, 2013, https://soundcloud.com/terms 
-of-use, ,  aacccceesssseedd  JJuullyy  77,,  22001155..  FFoorr  aann  eexxaammppllee  ooff  tteerrmmss  tthhaatt  ccoonnttaaiinn  ccllaauusseess  mmaannddaatt--
ing arbitration and barring class actions, see “Dropbox Terms of Service,” Dropbox, 
Inc., last modified January 22, 2015, https://www.dropbox.com/terms2014, accessed 
July 7, 2015. See also Jessica Silver-Greenberg and Robert Gebeloff, “Arbitration 
Everywhere, Stacking the Deck of Justice,” New York Times, October 31, 2015, http://
www.nytimes.com/2015/11/01/business/dealbook/arbitration-everywhere-stacking 
-the-deck-of-justice.html, accessed November 29, 2015.
17. Kim, Wrap Contracts, 66–67.
18. “Licensed Application EULA,” Apple Inc. Apple’s iTunes Store is somewhat less 
clear in how it characterizes transactions with consumers. After describing those 
transactions as “purchases” and noting that “all sales ... are final,” Apple insists that 
consumers agree not to “rent, lease, loan, sell, [or] distribute” their purchases. 
“Terms and Conditions,” Apple Inc., last modified October 21, 2015, http://www 
.apple.com/legal/internet-services/itunes/us/terms.html,  accessed  November  29, 
2015.
19. “Microsoft Software License Agreement: Microsoft Office 2013 Desktop Applica-
tion  Software”  Microsoft  Corp.,  https://products.office.com/en-us/microsoft 
-software-license-agreement, accessed June 16, 2015.
20. “Kindle Store Terms of Use,” Amazon Digital Services, Inc., last modified Sep-
tember  6,  2012,  http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId 
=201014950, accessed June 14, 2015; see Masnick, “Proof.”
21. “SEN Terms of Service,” Sony Network Entertainment Europe Ltd., last modified 
November  2013,  https://www.playstationnetwork.com/en-gb/terms-of-service/, 
accessed June 15, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  209
22. F.B.T. Prods. v. Aftermath Records, 621 F.3d 958 (9th Cir. 2010); Eriq Gardner, 
“Universal Music Settling Big Class Action Lawsuit over Digital Royalties,” Hollywood 
Reporter,  March  19,  2015,  http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/universal-
music-settling-big-class-783096, accessed June 14, 2015.
23. Watts  S.  Humphrey,  “Software  Unbundling:  A  Personal  Perspective,”  IEEE 
Annals  of  the  History  of  Computing  34,  no.  1  (2002):  59–63,  at  60, 
doi:10.1109/85.988582.
24. The Copyright Act did not embrace software until the Computer Software Copy-
right Act of 1980, 94 Stat. at 3028–29. The Supreme Court first opened the door to 
software patents in 1981. See Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U.S. 175 (1981). But the explo-
sion of software patenting didn’t occur until the Federal Circuit’s 1998 decision in 
State St. Bank and Trust Co. v. Signature Fin. Grp., Inc., 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
25. Video  games  are  one  important  exception.  See  Computer  Software  Rental 
Amendment Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-650, sec. 802, § 109(b), 104 Stat. 5089, 
5134–35 (1990) (current version at 17 U.S.C. 109[b] [2012]).
26. For further commentary on how courts have treated copies placed in computer 
memory, see Aaron Perzanowski, “Fixing RAM Copies,” Northwestern University Law 
Review 104, no. 3 (Summer 2010): 1067–1108, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers
.cfm?abstract_id=1441685, accessed June 14, 2015.
27. Doesn’t even have resale value without transfer of right to copy.
28. 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1) (2012).
29. Ibid., § 117(c).
30. Ibid., § 117(a)(2).
31. Ibid., § 117(b). Adaptation copies can only be transferred with the permission of 
the copyright holder.
32. Phillips, The Software License Unveiled, xii–xiii.
33. See generally Margaret Jane Radin, Boilerplate: The Fine Print, Vanishing Rights, 
and the Rule of Law (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013).
34. See, e.g., Vault Corp. v. Quaid Software, Ltd., 847 F.2d 255 (5th Cir. 1988); Step-
Saver Data Sys. v. Wyse Tech., 939 F.2d 91 (3d Cir. 1991).
35. Mark Lemley, “Terms of Use,” Minnesota Law Review 91 (December 2006): 459–
483, at 465; Kim, Wrap Contracts, 128.
36. Melvin Aron Eisenberg, “The Limits of Cognition and the Limits of Contract,” 
Stanford Law Review 47 (January 1995): 211–259, at 243–244.
37. ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d 1447, 1454 (7th Cir. 1996).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020210  Notes
38. Ibid., 1452.
39. Chris Newman, “A License Is Not a ‘Contract Not to Sue’: Disentangling Prop-
erty and Contract in the Law of Copyright Licenses,” Iowa Law Review 98 (March 
2013): 1103–1160, at 1141.
40. Eben Moglen, “Enforcing the GNU GPL,” GNU.org, September 10, 2001, http://
www.gnu.org/philosophy/enforcing-gpl.html, accessed July 7, 2015.
41. See 17 U.S.C. § 107 (2012).
42. Jeremy Gordon, “RZA Says Wu-Tang Clan Offered $5 Million for New Album 
That’s Only Available as One Copy,” Pitchfork, April 2, 2014, http://pitchfork.com/
news/54627-rza-says-wu-tang-clan-offered-5-million-for-new-album-thats-only 
-available-as-one-copy/, accessed July 7, 2015.
43. Brian W. Carver, “Why License Agreements Do Not Control Copy Ownership: 
First Sales and Essential Copies,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 25 (2010): 1887–
1954, at 1899.
44. See U.C.C. § 2-401 (2002). Any reservation of title in goods shipped or delivered 
to a buyer is treated as reservation of a security interest. Reservation of full title is 
simply not permitted under the U.C.C. when goods are permanently transferred to a 
buyer. And upon full payment, the buyer is deemed to hold title to goods.
45. For an example of how the Ninth Circuit has utilized objective facts in deter-
mining the presence or absence of a first sale, see United States v. Wise, 550 F.2d 
1180 (9th Cir. 1977).
46. See Unordered Merchandise Act, 39 U.S.C. § 3009(b) (2012). Unordered mer-
chandise “may be treated as a gift by the recipient, who shall have the right to 
retain, use, discard, or dispose of it in any manner he sees fit without any obligation 
whatsoever to the sender.”
47. The Vernor test is also inconsistent with the result in Augusto. Applied to the 
promotional CDs, each prong of the Vernor test is satisfied: (1) UMG characterized 
the transaction as a license; (2) it prohibited recipients from transferring the discs to 
others; and (3) it confined them to personal noncommercial use of the discs.
48. See, e.g., DSC Commc’ns Corp. v. DGI Techs., 81 F.3d 597 (5th Cir. 1996); 
Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005).
49. See Anna Bernasek and D. T. Mongan, All You Can Pay (New York: Nation Books, 
2015).
50. David P. Conway, Google Inc., assignee, Dynamic Pricing of Electronic Content. 
U.S. Patent 8,260,657, filed September 30, 2011, and issued September 4, 2012.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  211
51. Mark Sullivan, “Facebook Patents Technology to Help Lenders Discriminate 
against Borrowers Based on Social Connections,” Venture Beat, August 4, 2015, 
http://venturebeat.com/2015/08/04/facebook-patents-technology-to-help-lenders 
-discriminate-against-borrowers-based-on-social-connections,  accessed  November 
29, 2015.
52. Andrea Freeman, “Payback: A Structural Solution to the Credit Card Problem,” 
Arizona Law Review 55 (Spring 2013): 151–199, at 156.
53. From Poverty, Opportunity (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Metropolitan 
Poverty  Program,  2006),  http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2006/07/
poverty-fellowes, accessed July 7, 2015.
54. Julia Angwin, “The Tiger Mom Tax: Asians Are Nearly Twice as Likely to Get a 
Higher Price from Princeton Review,” ProPublica, September 1, 2015, http://www
.propublica.org/article/asians-nearly-twice-as-likely-to-get-higher-price-from 
-princeton-review, accessed November 19, 2015.
55. Big Data: Seizing Opportunities, Preserving Values (Washington, DC: Executive 
Office of the President, 2014), 46, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/
docs/big_data_privacy_report_5.1.14_final_print.pdf, accessed July 7, 2015.
56. Louis Phlips, The Economics of Price Discrimination (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1983), 18.
57. Joseph Turow, Lauren Feldman, and Kimberly Meltzer, Open to Exploitation: 
America’s  Shoppers  Online  and  Offline  (Philadelphia:  University  of  Pennsylvania 
Annenberg  Public  Policy  Center,  2005),  http://repository.upenn.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1035&context=asc_papers, accessed July 7, 2015.
58. See Wendy Gordon, “Intellectual Property as Price Discrimination: Implications 
for Contract,” Chicago-Kent Law Review 73 (1998): 1367–1390, at 1383–1390 (noting 
that secondary markets are often much better at price discrimination than single 
monopolistic ones).
59. Kate Abnett, “Will Mass Customization Work for Fashion?” Business of Fashion, 
September  3,  2015,  http://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/intelligence/mass 
-customisation-fashion-nike-converse-burberry, accessed November 29, 2015.
60. List of Crest Toothpaste Products, http://crest.com/en-us/products/toothpaste, 
accessed November 29, 2015.
61. See Barry Schwartz, The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less (New York: Harper-
Collins, 2003); Sheena S. Iyengar and Mark R. Lepper, “When Choice Is Demotivat-
ing: Can One Desire Too Much of a Good Thing?” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 79 (2000): 995–1006.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020212  Notes
5  The “Buy Now” Lie
1. See Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051–1141n (2013).
2. Ibid., § 43, 15 U.S.C. § 1125; Federal Trade Commission Act § 5, 15 U.S.C. § 45 
(2013).
3. “iTunes Store Terms and Conditions,” Apple, Inc., last modified June 30, 2015, 
http://www.apple.com/legal/internet-services/itunes/us/terms.html#SERVICE, 
accessed August 21, 2015.
4. “Kindle Store Terms of Use,” Amazon Digital Services, Inc., last modified Septem-
ber  6,  2012,  http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId 
=201014950, accessed June 14, 2015.
5. “Amazon Music Terms of Use,” Amazon Digital Services, Inc., last modified  
June  11,  2014,  http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId 
=201380010, accessed August 21, 2015.
6. Laura Hudson, “For the First Time, You Can Actually Own the Digital Comics 
You  Buy,”  Wired,  July  2,  2013,  http://www.wired.com/2013/07/drm-free-comics
-download-image/, accessed August 21, 2015.
7. Ibid.
8. “Terms and Conditions,” Image Comics, https://imagecomics.com/about/terms 
-and-conditions, accessed August 21, 2015.
9. “Digital  Ownership,”  HeinOnline,  http://home.heinonline.org/services/
ownership/, accessed August 21, 2015.
10. Michael Kelley, “Random House Says Libraries Own Their Ebooks,” LJ Insider 
(blog),  Library  Journal,  October  18,  2012,  http://lj.libraryjournal.com/2012/10/
opinion/random-house-says-libraries-own-their-ebooks-lj-insider,  accessed  August 
21, 2015.
11. Peter Brantley, “Random House Did Not Mean Own, Exactly,” PWxyz (blog), 
Publisher’s Weekly, October 23, 2012, https://web.archive.org/web/20150626112010/
http://blogs.publishersweekly.com/blogs/PWxyz/2012/10/23/just-another-word/ 
(site discontinued), accessed August 21, 2015.
12. “The shop.oreilly.com Ebook Advantage,” O’Reilly Media, Inc., n.d., http://
shop.oreilly.com/category/ebooks.do, accessed August 21, 2015.
13. “Ebook Usage, Devices, and Formats,” O’Reilly Media, Inc., n.d., http://shop.
oreilly.com/category/customer-service/ebooks.do, accessed August 21, 2015.
14. In addition, states have adopted their own consumer protection laws prohibit-
ing deceptive trade practices such as false or misleading advertisements. And most 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  213
outlaw unfair acts or practices. See, e.g., California Business & Professions Code § 
17200.
15. Lanham Act § 43(a). Courts interpreted section 43(a) as creating a sui generis 
tort of false advertising. Although not all courts were quick to reach that conclusion, 
they eventually reached something approaching consensus. With the Trademark 
Law Revision Act of 1988, Congress codified the prevailing judicial reading, dividing 
section 43(a) into two subsections. The first establishes liability for the infringement 
of unregistered marks and trade dress. The second creates claims for false advertising 
and product disparagement. See Trademark Law Revision Act of 1988, Pub. L. No. 
100-667, § 132, 102 Stat. 3935, 3946 (1988) (current version at 15 U.S.C. § 1125[a] 
[2013]).
16. Federal Trade Commission Act § 5(a)(1), 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1) (2013).
17. Bruce Schneier, “Do You Know Where Your Data Are?” Wall Street Journal, April 
28,  2009,  http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB123997522418329223,  accessed  August 
21, 2015.
18. Lanham Act §43(a).
19. See Lexmark Int’l, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 134 S. Ct. 1377 
(2014).
20. In one recent example, the court dismissed a false advertising claim brought on 
behalf of consumers, who alleged that they purchased crab cakes labeled as “Made 
in the USA” that were actually manufactured with nondomestic crabmeat. See Made 
in the USA Found. v. Phillips Foods, Inc., 365 F.3d 278 (4th Cir. 2004).
21. See Colligan v. Activities Club of N.Y., Ltd., 442 F.2d 686, 693 (2d Cir. 1971); 
Coca-Cola Co. v. Procter & Gamble Co., 822 F.2d 28, 31 (6th Cir. 1987) (“Competi-
tors have the greatest interest in stopping misleading advertising, and ... section 
43(a) allows those parties with the greatest interest in enforcement, and in many 
situations with the greatest resources to devote to a lawsuit, to enforce the statute 
rigorously”); Alpo Petfoods, Inc. v. Ralston Purina Co., 720 F. Supp. 194, 212 (D.D.C. 
1989), aff’d in part, rev’d in part, 913 F.2d 958 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (“While the Act is not 
directly available to consumers, it is nevertheless designed to protect consumers, by 
giving the cause of action to competitors who are prepared to vindicate the injury 
caused to consumers.”).
22. See AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion, 563 U.S. 333, 343 (2011); Am. Exp. Co. 
v. Italian Colors Rest., 133 S. Ct. 2304, 2309 (2013).
23. See Federal Trade Commission Act § 5(b).
24. Ibid.
25. Johnson & Johnson v. Smithkline Beecham Corp., 960 F.2d 294, 298 (2d Cir. 
1992) (plaintiff must show that “a statistically significant part of the commercial 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020214  Notes
audience holds the false belief allegedly communicated by the challenged advertise-
ment”).
26. McNeilab, Inc. v. Am. Home Prods. Corp., 675 F. Supp. 819, 825 (S.D.N.Y. 1987).
27. POM Wonderful, LLC v. FTC, 777 F.3d 478, 490 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (“The Commis-
sion ... considers whether ‘at least a significant minority of reasonable consumers’ 
would ‘likely’ interpret the ad to assert the claim”) (quoting In re Telebrands Corp., 
140 F.T.C. 278, 291 [2005]).
28. William H. Morris Co. v. Group W, Inc., 66 F.3d 255, 258 (9th Cir. 1995) (3 
percent is not proof that a “significant portion” were deceived); Johnson & Johnson-
Merck Consumer Pharms. Co. v. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Pharms., 19 F.3d 125 (3d Cir. 
1994) (survey showing 7.5 percent were deceived or misled was not sufficient).
29. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. FTC, 481 F.2d 246, 249 (6th Cir. 1973) (finding 
“it hard to overturn the deception findings of the Commission if the ad thus misled 
15 percent (or 10 percent) of the buying public”); Novartis Consumer Health, Inc. v. 
Johnson & Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharms. Co., 290 F.3d 578, 594 (3d Cir. 2002) 
(survey showing 15 percent of respondents were misled is sufficient to prove a likeli-
hood of deception among a “substantial portion” of the intended audience); Tele-
brands Corp. v. Media Grp., Inc., 45 U.S.P.Q.2d (BNA) 1342, 1348, 1997 WL 790576, 
*21–22 (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 23, 1997) (survey showing that 20 percent of the viewers took 
away the false message is sufficient).
30. James C. Miller, chairman of the FTC, to John D. Dingell, chairman, H.R. 
Comm. on Energy and Commerce, October 14, 1983, cited in In re Cliffdale Assocs., 
Inc., 103 F.T.C. 110, 175 (1984) (“To be considered reasonable, the interpretation or 
reaction does not have to be the only one. When a seller’s representation conveys 
more than one meaning to reasonable consumers, one of which is false, the seller is 
liable for the misleading interpretation.”).
31. Charles of the Ritz Distribs. Corp. v. FTC, 143 F.2d 676, 679 (2d Cir. 1944) 
(quoting Florence Mfg. Co. v. J. C. Dowd & Co., 178 F. 73, 75 [2d Cir. 1910]).
32. James C. Miller to John D. Dingell, October 14, 1983: “A ‘material’ misrepresen-
tation or practice is one which is likely to affect a consumer’s choice of or conduct 
regarding a product.”
33. See James B. Astrachan et al., “An Overview of the Tools Available to the Federal 
Trade Commission,” in The Law of Advertising, vol. 5, § 18.01 (Newark, NJ: Matthew 
Bender, 2015).
34. Aaron Perzanowski and Chris Hoofnagle, “What We Buy When We Buy Now,” 
forthcoming University of Pennsylvania Law Review, on file with authors.
35. The sample was also roughly in line with the U.S. population in terms of race 
and geographic distribution.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  215
36. Those terms provided in relevant part:
Upon your download of MediaShop Content and payment of any applicable fees (including ap-
plicable taxes), the Content Provider grants you a non-exclusive right to view, use, and display 
such MediaShop Content an unlimited number of times, solely on the MediaShop or a Reading 
Application or as otherwise permitted as part of the Service, solely on the number of Supported 
Devices specified in the MediaShop Store, and solely for your personal, non-commercial use. 
MediaShop Content is licensed, not sold, to you by the Content Provider. The Content Provider 
may include additional terms for use within its MediaShop Content. ...
Unless specifically indicated otherwise, you may not sell, rent, lease, distribute, broadcast, 
sublicense, or otherwise assign any rights to the MediaShop Content or any portion of it to any 
third party, and you may not remove or modify any proprietary notices or labels on the Medi-
aShop Content. In addition, you may not bypass, modify, defeat, or circumvent security features 
that protect the MediaShop Content. ...
Termination. Your rights under this Agreement will automatically terminate if you fail to 
comply with any term of this Agreement. In case of such termination, you must cease all use 
of the MediaShop Store and the MediaShop Content, and MediaShop may immediately revoke 
your access to the MediaShop Store and the MediaShop Content without refund of any fees. 
MediaShop’s failure to insist upon or enforce your strict compliance with this Agreement will 
not constitute a waiver of any of its rights.
37. Yannis Bakos, Florencia Marotta-Wurgler, and David R. Trossen, “Does Anyone 
Read the Fine Print? Consumer Attention to Standard Form Contracts,” New York 
University Law and Economics Working Papers, Paper 195, New York University 
School of Law, New York, 2014, 22, http://lsr.nellco.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article 
=1199&context=nyu_lewp, accessed July 7, 2015 (finding that only one or two out 
of every thousand retail software shoppers access license agreements).
38. Ben Sheffner of the Motion Picture Association of America has claimed, “If you 
ask people when you go to a site to buy a movie or a book or a song, I think they 
pretty much understand that you’re not actually buying the copyright. What you 
are doing is you’re purchasing or buying a license which permits you to do certain 
things.” And Catherine Bridge of Disney has stated, “I’m not sure that the consum-
ers have the expectation that when they hit the buy button for some music that 
they’re thinking about how they’re going to resell it.” See Department of Commerce 
Internet Policy Task Force, White Paper on Remixes, First Sale, and Statutory Dam-
ages, 56–57n35, January 2016, http://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
copyrightwhitepaper.pdf, accessed April 10, 2016.
39. Tim Cushing, “Barnes & Noble Decides That Purchased Ebooks Are Only Yours 
Until Your Credit Card Expires,” Techdirt, November 27, 2012, https://www.techdirt
.com/articles/20121126/18084721154/barnes-noble-decides-that-purchased-ebooks 
-are-only-yours-until-your-credit-card-expires.shtml, accessed August 21, 2015.
40. Consider the following language from the Kindle Store’s Terms of Use:
Risk of Loss. Risk of loss for Kindle Content transfers when you download or access the Kindle 
Content.
Termination. Your rights under this Agreement will automatically terminate if you fail to 
comply with any term of this Agreement. In case of such termination, you must cease all use of 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020216  Notes
the Kindle Store and the Kindle Content, and Amazon may immediately revoke your access to 
the Kindle Store and the Kindle Content without refund of any fees. Amazon’s failure to insist 
upon or enforce your strict compliance with this Agreement will not constitute a waiver of any 
of its rights. (“Kindle Store Terms of Use,” Amazon Digital Services, Inc.)
41. Not some older devices. And terms are still limited to “Supported Devices.” 
“Supported Device” means a mobile, computer, or other supported electronic device 
other than a Kindle on which you are authorized to operate a “Reading Applica-
tion.”
42. Kelly Clay, “Amazon Confirms It Makes No Profit on Kindles,” Forbes, October 
12,  2012,  http://www.forbes.com/sites/kellyclay/2012/10/12/amazon-confirms-it-
makes-no-profit-on-kindles/, accessed August 21, 2015; Steve Kovach, “Amazon Will 
Lose Millions Selling the Kindle Fire, But That’s the Point,” Business Insider, Septem-
ber  30,  2011,  http://www.businessinsider.com/kindle-fire-profit-margins-2011-9, 
accessed August 21, 2015.
43. Oscar Williams-Grut, “Apple’s iPhone: The Most Profitable Product in History,” 
Independent (UK), January 29, 2015, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/
analysis-and-features/apples-iphone-the-most-profitable-product-in-
history-10009741.html, accessed August 21, 2015; Daisuke Wakabayashi, “Apple’s 
Market Cap Loses $60 Billion After iPhone Sales Disappoint,” Wall Street Journal, 
July 22, 2015, http://www.wsj.com/articles/apple-earnings-boosted-by-iphone-sales 
-1437510647, accessed August 21, 2015.
44. “iCloud:  Family  Sharing,”  Apple,  Inc.,  http://www.apple.com/icloud/family 
-sharing/, ,  aacccceesssseedd  AAuugguusstt  2255,,  22001155;;  sseeee  aallssoo  ““SStteeaamm  FFaammiillyy  SShhaarriinngg,,””  VVaallvvee  CCoorrppoo--
ration, http://store.steampowered.com/promotion/familysharing, accessed August 
25, 2015.
45. Geoffrey  A.  Fowler,  “Facebook  Heir?  Time  to  Choose  Who  Manages  Your 
Account When You Die,” Wall Street Journal, February 12, 2015, http://www.wsj
.com/articles/facebook-heir-time-to-choose-who-manages-your-account-when-you 
-die-1423738802, accessed August 25, 2015.
46. See Fiduciary Access to Digital Assets and Digital Accounts Act, 79 Del. Laws 416 
(2014),  http://www.legis.delaware.gov/LIS/lis147.nsf/vwLegislation/HB%20
345/$file/legis.html, accessed August 25, 2015; Uniform Fiduciary Access to Digital 
Assets  Act  (Nat’l  Conf.  of  Comm’rs  on  Unif.  State  Laws  2014),  http://www 
.uniformlaws.org/shared/docs/Fiduciary%20Access%20to%20Digital%20Assets/ 
2014_UFADAA_Final.pdf, accessed August 25, 2015.
47. Fiduciary Access to Digital Assets and Digital Accounts Act §§ 5004–5005.
48. Ibid., § 5004.
49. That case is even stronger when gender is taken into account. As is often  
the case with online surveys, women were overrepresented. And since men were 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  217
significantly more confused about their resale rights—the same 10 percent for books, 
but 13.5 percent for music and 25 percent for movies—a more representative gender 
distribution would have likely shown greater overall deception.
50. Since most readers don’t rely on any device other than their eyes or a pair of 
glasses when reading a hardcover book, the survey asked respondents whether they 
would prefer a book they can read at the location of their choice. This is an imper-
fect substitute for the device-of-choice inquiry, but it yielded nearly indistinguish-
able results.
51. The study reduced the impact of outliers by capping the maximum response for 
each right at $20.
52. Steven Tweedie, “Apple Made a Small but Significant Change to ‘Free’ Apps in 
the App Store,” Business Insider, November 20, 2014, http://www.businessinsider.
com/apple-changes-free-apps-to-get-in-app-store-2014-11, accessed August 25, 2015.
53. See Nathaniel Good, Jens Grossklags, David Thaw, Aaron Perzanowski, Deirdre 
Mulligan, and Joseph Konstan, “User Choices and Regret: Understanding Users’ 
Decision Process about Consensually Acquired Spyware,” I/S: A Journal of Law and 
Policy 2, no. 2 (2006): 283–344; Joel R. Reidenberg, Travis Breaux, Lorrie Faith 
Cranor, Brian French, Amanda Grannis et. al., “Disagreeable Privacy Policies: Mis-
matches Between Meaning and Users’ Understanding,” Berkeley Technology Law Jour-
nal 30 (2015): 39–87, at 48; Lorrie Faith Cranor, “Necessary but Not Sufficient: 
Standardized Mechanisms for Privacy Notice and Choice,” Journal of Telecommunica-
tions & High Technology Law 10, (2012): 273–307, at 293; Marie C. Pollio, “The Inad-
equacy of HIPAA’s Privacy Rule: The Plain Language Notice of Privacy Practices and 
Patient Understanding,” N.Y.U. Annual Survey of American Law 60, (2004): 579–
620, at 615; Katy K. Liu, “Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act Regulations: 
Disclosure, Opt-Out Rights, Medical Information Usage, and Consumer Information 
Disposal,” I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy 2, (2006): 715–735, at 720.
6  The Promise and Perils of Digital Libraries
1. Others contend the first major public library was the Boston Public Library, 
founded in 1852 through a large donation from Joshua Bates, because it was the first 
to make all of its books “free to all” Boston citizens. See John Palfrey, BiblioTech: 
Why Libraries Matter More Than Ever in the Age of Google (New York: Basic Books, 
2015), 1.
2. See, e.g., N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 4509 (Consol. 2015) (“Library records, which contain 
names or other personally identifying details regarding the users of public, free asso-
ciation, school, college and university libraries and library systems of this state, 
including but not limited to records related to the circulation of library materials, 
computer  database  searches,  interlibrary  loan  transactions,  reference  queries, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020218  Notes
requests for photocopies of library materials, title reserve requests, or the use of 
audio-visual materials, films or records, shall be confidential and shall not be dis-
closed except that such records may be disclosed to the extent necessary for the 
proper operation of such library and shall be disclosed upon request or consent of 
the user or pursuant to subpoena, court order or where otherwise required by  
statute.”); “Code of Ethics of the American Library Association,” last amended Janu-
ary  22,  2008,  http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics, 
accessed August 6, 2015; “Privacy: An Interpretation of the Library Bill of Rights,” 
American Library Association, adopted June 19, 2002, http://www.ala.org/Template 
.cfm?Section=interpretations&Template=/ContentManagement/ContentDisplay 
.cfm&ContentID=132904, accessed August 6, 2015. See also Adam L. Penenberg, 
“Don’t  Mess  with  Librarians,”  Wired,  September  15,  2004,  http://www.wired
.com/2004/09/dont-mess-with-librarians/, accessed August 6, 2015.
3. Neil  Richards,  Intellectual  Privacy:  Rethinking  Civil  Liberties  in  the  Digital  Age 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2015). See also “DRAFT—Library Privacy Guide-
lines for E-book Lending and Digital Content Vendors,” American Library Associa-
tion,  last  modified  June  16,  2015,  http://connect.ala.org/node/241070#sthash 
.OUjmCDa7.dpuf, ,  aacccceesssseedd  AAuugguusstt  66,,  22001155::  ““PPrrootteeccttiinngg  uusseerr  pprriivvaaccyy  aanndd  ccoonnffiiddeennttii--
ality has long been an integral part of the intellectual freedom mission of libraries.”
4. Boston Public Library’s McKim Building bears the inscription “FREE-TO-ALL” 
above its main entrance—an expression of one of the longstanding values of the 
BPL system. For a photograph of the inscription, see http://maps.bpl.org/sites/
default/files/images/about_ph_6.jpg?1361904290, accessed August 6, 2015.
5. David O’Brien, Urs Gasser, and John G. Palfrey Jr., “E-Books in Libraries: A Brief-
ing Document Developed in Preparation for a Workshop on E-Lending in Libraries,” 
Berkman Center Research Publication No. 2012-15, Berkman Center for Internet & 
Society, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 2012, https://cyber.law.harvard.edu/
publications/2012/ebooks_in_libraries, accessed August 6, 2015.
6. Ted Striphas, The Late Age of Print: Everyday Book Culture from Consumerism to Con-
trol (New York: Columbia University Press, 2009), 35.
7. K. T. Bradford, “Paper Rules: Why Borrowing an E-book from Your Library Is So 
Difficult,”  Digital  Trends,  June  15,  2013,  http://www.digitaltrends.com/
mobile/e-book-library-lending-broken-difficult/, accessed August 6, 2015; Simon & 
Schuster CEO Carolyn Reidy revealed some of the thought process behind the pub-
lisher’s new library ebook pilot program: “If you could get every book you wanted 
free, why would you ever buy another one?”; Jay Greene, “Penguin Halts Libraries’ 
E-book Lending, Citing Security Fears,” CNET, November 22, 2011, updated Novem-
ber  23,  2011,  http://www.cnet.com/news/penguin-halts-libraries-e-book-lending 
-citing-security-fears/, ,  aacccceesssseedd  AAuugguusstt  66,,  22001155;;  ““NNeeww  ZZeeaallaanndd  PPuubblliisshheerr  FFeeaarrss  LLiibbrraarr--
ies,” Annoyed Librarian (blog), Library Journal, May 18, 2009, http://lj.libraryjournal
.com/blogs/annoyedlibrarian/2009/05/18/new-zealand-publisher-fears-libraries/, 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  219
accessed August 6, 2015; Ken Chad, “‘Frictionless’ Ebook Lending from Public 
Libraries,”  Shelf  Free  (blog),  July  26,  2013,  http://shelffree.org.uk/2013/07/26/
frictionless-ebook-lending-from-public-libraries/, accessed August 6, 2015; David R. 
O’Brien, Urs Gasser, and John Palfrey, E-Books in Libraries (Cambridge, MA: The 
Berkman  Center  for  Internet  &  Society  at  Harvard  University,  2012),  PDF  
briefing  document,  22,  http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/sites/cyber.law.harvard.edu/
files/E-Books%20in%20Libraries%20(O’Brien,%20Gasser,%20Palfrey)-1.pdf, 
accessed August 6, 2015.
8. Kathy Rosa, Research and Statistics on Libraries and Librarianship in 2013 (Chicago: 
American Library Association, 2014), PDF report, http://www.ala.org/research/sites/
ala.org.research/files/content/librarystats/LBTA-research2014.pdf,  accessed  August 
6, 2015.
9. “E-books, U.S. Public Libraries 2012,” American Library Association, http://www 
.ala.org/research/plftas/2011_2012/ebooksmap, accessed August 6, 2015.
10. Eckhard Kummrow, “PwC Prognosis: 11% Sales Volume of eBooks in Germany 
by 2018; 52% in the USA,” Librarian in Residence (blog), November 25, 2014, http://
blog.goethe.de/librarian/index.php?archives/540-English.html, accessed August 6, 
2015. But see Frank Catalano, “Paper Is Back: Why ‘Real’ Books Are on the Rebound,” 
GeekWire, January 18, 2015, http://www.geekwire.com/2015/paper-back-real-books
-rebound/, accessed March 15, 2016.
11. “Children’s eBook Sales Surge in 2014 in Public Libraries and Schools through 
Overdrive,” OverDrive Blogs (blog), January 13, 2015, http://blogs.overdrive.com/
library/2015/01/13/childrens-ebook-sales-surge-in-2014-in-public-libraries-and 
-schools-through-overdrive/, accessed August 6, 2015.
12. Ibid.
13. Alexandra Alter, “The Plot Twist: E-Book Sales Slip, and Print Is Far from Dead,” 
New  York  Times,  September  22,  2015,  http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23/
business/media/the-plot-twist-e-book-sales-slip-and-print-is-far-from-dead.html, 
accessed November 20, 2015.
14. Note that ReDigi and others have tried to address this concern by migrating 
copies from one device to another instead of copying them in a classic sense. 
Because only one version of the file exists at any given moment, their techniques are 
far more analogous to moving a copy or restoring/repairing a copy than reproducing 
one.
15. See R. Anthony Reese, “The First Sale Doctrine in the Era of Digital Networks,” 
University of Texas Law, Public Law Research Paper No. 57; and University of Texas 
Law, Law and Economics Research Paper No. 004, Austin, TX, 2003, http://papers 
.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=463620, accessed August 6, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020220  Notes
16. DMCA  Section  104  Report  (Washington,  DC:  U.S.  Copyright  Office,  2001), 
PDF  report,  88,  http://www.copyright.gov/reports/studies/dmca/sec-104-report 
-vol-1.pdf, accessed August 6, 2015.
17. One study estimated that from 1994 to 2005, library use of license agreement 
rose 600 percent. See Sharon Farb, “Libraries, Licensing, and the Challenge of Stew-
ardship,” First Monday 11, no. 7 (2006), doi: 10.5210/fm.v11i7.1364.
18. Amy Calhoun and James English, “Library Simplified” (presentation delivered at 
ALA  2015,  San  Francisco,  CA,  June  27,  2015),  http://www.slideshare.net/
jamesenglish/library-simplified-ala, accessed November 20, 2015.
19. Ava Seave, “Are Digital Libraries a ‘Winner-Takes-All’ Market? OverDrive Hopes 
So,” Forbes, November 18, 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/avaseave/2013/11/18/
are-digital-libraries-a-winner-takes-all-market-overdrive-hopes-so/,  accessed  August 
6, 2015.
20. While there hasn’t been a documented case of a library patron having their 
ebook access cut off, similar situations have arisen for Amazon ebook purchasers. 
See,  e.g.,  Mark  King,  “Amazon  Wipes  Customer’s  Kindle  and  Deletes  Account  
with No Explanation,” Guardian (UK), October 22, 2012, http://www.theguardian
.com/money/2012/oct/22/amazon-wipes-customers-kindle-deletes-account, 
accessed August 6, 2015.
21. Josh Hadro, “HarperCollins Puts 26 Loan Cap on Ebook Circulations,” Library 
Journal, February 25, 2011, http://lj.libraryjournal.com/2011/02/technology/ebooks/
harpercollins-puts-26-loan-cap-on-ebook-circulations/, accessed August 6, 2015. In 
response, one library then posted video of one of its analog HC copies after twenty-
six lends to show that it was in near-perfect condition. Cory Doctorow, “How  
a HarperCollins Library Book Looks after 26 Checkouts (Pretty Good!),” Boing 
Boing, March 3, 2011, http://boingboing.net/2011/03/03/how-a-harpercollins.html, 
accessed August 6, 2015.
22. Michael Kelley, “One Year Later, HarperCollins Sticking to 26-Loan Cap, and 
Some Librarians Rethink Opposition,” Digital Shift, February 17, 2012, http://www
.thedigitalshift.com/2012/02/ebooks/one-year-later-harpercollins-sticking-to-26 
-loan-cap-and-some-librarians-rethink-opposition/, accessed August 6, 2015.
23. Kevin Smith, Planning for Musical Obsolescence, Scholarly Communications @ 
Duke (blog), July 28, 2014, http://blogs.library.duke.edu/scholcomm/2014/07/28/
planning-for-musical-obsolescence/,  accessed  August  6,  2015.  See  also  “Sound 
Recording Collecting in Crisis: Home,” University of Washington Libraries, last 
modified February 24, 2016, http://guides.lib.uw.edu/research/imls2014, accessed 
March 12, 2016.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  221
24. Michael Kozlowski, “Penguin Random House Announces New e-Book Terms for 
Libraries,” Good E-Reader (blog), December 6, 2015, http://goodereader.com/blog/e
-book-news/penguin-random-house-announces-new-e-book-terms-for-libraries, 
accessed March 15, 2016.
25. Jennifer M. Urban, “How Fair Use Can Help Solve the Orphan Works Problem,” 
Berkeley Technology Law Journal 27 (2012): 1379–1429, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2089526, accessed August 6, 2015.
26. Amy Kirchhoff, “eBooks: The Preservation Challenge,” Against the Grain 23, no. 
4 (2011): 32, http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5935&context 
=atg, accessed August 6, 2015.
27. See Letter from Mary Koelbel Engle, Associate Director, Division of Advertising 
Practices, Bureau of Consumer Protection, Federal Trade Commission to M. Sean 
Royall, Esq., “Re: Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., FTC File No. 092-3003,” June 23, 2010, 
https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/closing_letters/wal-mart-stores 
-inc./100623walmartletter.pdf, accessed August 6, 2015.
28. David Gary, “Saving the Scream Queens,” Atlantic, August 21, 2015, http://
www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2015/08/saving-the-scream-queens/ 
401141/, accessed March 15, 2016.
29. Ibid.
30. See  “Banned  Books  That  Shaped  America,”  Banned  Books  Week,  http:// 
www.bannedbooksweek.org/censorship/bannedbooksthatshapedamerica,  accessed 
August 6, 2015.
31. “Mein Kampf to Be Republished in Germany in Early 2016,” Telegraph (UK), 
February 25, 2015, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/germany/ 
11433843/Mein-Kampf-to-be-republished-in-Germany-in-early-2016.html, accessed 
August 6, 2015.
32. 227 F.3d 1110 (9th Cir. 2000).
33. The U.S. Copyright Act does allow copyright owners to impound or destroy 
infringing copies that are in possession of the infringer before they are sold, but not 
from third parties post-sale. See 17 U.S.C. § 503 (2013).
34. Bill Chappell, “Boy Says He Didn’t Go to Heaven; Publisher Says It Will Pull 
Book,” The Two-Way, NPR, January 15, 2015, http://www.npr.org/sections/the two
-way/2015/01/15/377589757/boy-says-he-didn-t-go-to-heaven-publisher-says-it 
-will-pull-book, accessed March 15, 2016.
35. Ron Charles, “‘Boy Who Came Back from Heaven’ Actually Didn’t; Books 
Recalled,” Washington Post, January 16, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
news/arts-and-entertainment/wp/2015/01/15/boy-who-came-back-from-heaven 
-going-back-to-publisher/, accessed March 15, 2016.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020222  Notes
36. See Marc Blitz, “Constitutional Safeguards for Silent Experiments in Living: 
Libraries, the Right to Read, and a First Amendment Theory for an Unaccompanied 
Right to Receive Information,” University of Missouri-Kansas City Law Review 74 
(2006): 799–882.
37. For a detailed argument on the dangers of tracking reader usage, see Privacy 
Authors and Publishers’ Objection to Proposed Settlement, Author’s Guild v. Google, 
Inc., no. 1:05-CV-08136-DC (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 8, 2009), ECF No. 281, https://www.eff 
.org/files/filenode/authorsguild_v_google/file_stamped_brf.pdf,  accessed  April  10, 
2016; Reader Privacy Act, 2011 Cal. Adv. Legis. Serv. 424 (LexisNexis), http://www 
.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/11-12/bill/sen/sb_0601-0650/sb_602_bill_20111002_chaptered.
html, accessed August 6, 2015.
38. See Corynne McSherry, “Adobe Spyware Reveals (Again) the Price of DRM: Your 
Privacy and Security,” Deeplinks (blog), Electronic Frontier Foundation, October 
7,  2014,  https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/10/adobe-spyware-reveals-again-price 
-drm-your-privacy-and-security, accessed August 6, 2015.
39. See Consensus Framework to Support Patron Privacy in Digital Library and Informa-
tion  Systems,  prepared  by  the  National  Information  Standards  Organization 
(Baltimore, 2015), http://www.niso.org/topics/tl/patron_privacy/, accessed April 10, 
2016.
40. See Riley v. California, 134 S. Ct. 2473 (2014); United States v. Jones, 132 S. Ct. 
945 (2012); Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967).
41. See, e.g., Tattered Cover, Inc. v. City of Thornton, 44 P.3d 1044 (Colo. 2002) (en 
banc), http://caselaw.findlaw.com/co-supreme-court/1340412.html, accessed April 
10, 2016.
42. Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735 (1979); United States v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435 
(1976).
43. United States v. Rumley, 345 U.S. 41, 57 (1953) (J. Douglas, concurring).
44. See Exec. Sess. of the S. Perm. Subcomm. on Investigations of the Comm. on 
Gov’t Operations, 83d Cong. 964 (1953) (testimony of Jerre G. Mangione).
45. Ibid. at 1697 (testimony of Mary Colombo Palmiero).
46. Lamont v. Postmaster Gen., 381 U.S. 301, 307 (1965).
47. David Streitfeld, “Kramerbooks Vows to Stand Firm,” Washington Post, May 
29,  1998,  http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/special/clinton/stories/
kramer052998.htm, accessed August 6, 2015. See also In re Grand Jury Subpoena to 
Kramerbooks & Afterwords, Inc., 26 Media L. Rep. (BNA) 1599, 1601 (D.D.C. 1998) 
(finding that as a result of a grand jury subpoena for a patron’s book purchases, 
“many customers have informed Kramerbooks personnel that they will no longer 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  223
shop at the bookstore because they believed Kramerbooks to have turned documents 
over ... that reveal a patron’s choice of books”).
48. “Bookstore Confidentiality Preserved in Lewinsky Case: A ‘Chilling’ Standoff 
Comes to an End,” PR Newswire, June 23, 1998, http://www.prnewswire.com/news
-releases/bookstore-confidentiality-preserved-in-lewinsky-case-a-chilling-standoff 
-comes-to-an-end-78064387.html, accessed August 6, 2015; David Streitfeld, “Starr 
Will  Get  Bookstore  Records,”  Washington  Post,  June  23,  1998,  http://www
.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/special/clinton/stories/starr062398.htm, 
accessed August 6, 2015.
49. In re Grand Jury Subpoena to Amazon.com, 246 F.R.D. 570, 573 (W.D. Wis. 
2007).
50. Dawinder S. Sidhu, “The Chilling Effect of Government Surveillance Programs 
on the Use of the Internet by Muslim-Americans,” University of Maryland Law Journal 
of  Race,  Religion,  Gender  and  Class  7,  no.  2  (2007):  375–393,  at  391,  http://
digitalcommons.law.umaryland.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1134&context 
=rrgc, accessed September 3, 2015. See also ACLU v. Gonzales, 478 F. Supp. 2d 775, 
805–806 (E.D. Pa. 2007) (finding that “many people wish to browse and access 
material privately and anonymously, especially if it is sexually explicit,” that “as a 
result of this desire to remain anonymous, many users who are not willing to access 
information non-anonymously will be deterred from accessing the desired informa-
tion,” and that “web site owners such as the plaintiffs will be deprived of the ability 
to provide this information to those users”); United States v. Curtin, 489 F.3d 935, 
959 (9th Cir. 2007) (Kleinfeld, J., concurring) (noting that “in the 1950s, people 
with leftist books sometimes shelved them spine to the wall, out of fear that visitors 
would see and report them”).
51. Between 2001 and 2005, libraries were contacted by law enforcement seeking 
information on patrons at least two hundred times. Eric Lichtblau, “F.B.I., Using 
Patriot Act, Demands Library’s Records,” New York Times, August 26, 2005, http://
www.nytimes.com/2005/08/26/politics/fbi-using-patriot-act-demands-librarys 
-records.html, accessed September 3, 2015.
52. City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 135 S. Ct. 2443 (2015), http://www.supremecourt
.gov/opinions/14pdf/13-1175_2qe4.pdf, accessed September 3, 2015 (finding that 
hotels have a right to object to government searches for information about their 
guests).
53. Quoted in Steven R. Harris, “Mortgaging Our Future on Ownership, or, the Plea-
sures of Renting,” Against the Grain 23, no. 4 (2011): 28, http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/
cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5934&context=atg, accessed September 4, 2015.
54. For more information on these endeavors, see Open Library’s website, https://
openlibrary.org/, accessed September 4, 2015, and the Digital Public Library of 
America’s website, http://dp.la/, accessed September 4, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020224  Notes
55. Additional information on NYPL Labs can be found at http://www.nypl.org/
collections/labs, accessed September 4, 2015.
56. HathiTrust, https://www.hathitrust.org/, accessed September 4, 2015.
57. See 17 U.S.C. § 107.
58. Project Cicero, http://www.projectcicero.org/, accessed September 4, 2015.
7  DRM and the Secret War inside Your Devices
1. Kyle Wiens, “e-Book Legal Restrictions Are Screwing Over Blind People,” Wired, 
December  15,  2014, http://www.wired.com/2014/12/e-books-for-the-blind-should 
-be-legal/, accessed September 5, 2015.
2. Eric Bangeman, “DirecTV DVR Clampdown: A Sober Reminder of DRM Sucki-
tude,” Ars Technica (blog), March 20, 2008, http://arstechnica.com/uncategorized/
2008/03/directv-dvr-clampdown-a-sober-reminder-of-drm-suckitude/, ,  aacccceesssseedd  SSeepp--
tember 5, 2015.
3. “Lending  for  Kindle,”  Kindle  Direct  Publishing,  https://kdp.amazon.com/
help?topicId=A2P1X97KAW8GZE, accessed September 5, 2015.
4. Cory Doctorow, Information Doesn’t Want to Be Free: Laws for the Internet Age (San 
Francisco: McSweeney’s, 2014), under sec. 1.1, “Anti-Circumvention Explained”: 
“Ever tried to fast-forward through the anti-piracy warning at the start of a DVD and 
gotten an action not allowed message? That’s a digital lock.” Ibid. “With digital 
locks, you can sell them only the right to look at the book after 6 p.m., while physi-
cally located in North America and not in a commercial establishment. If they want 
the ‘read on the subway’ rights, those can be sold separately.”
5. See also Laura Northrup, “Here’s Why Digital Rights Management Is Stupid and 
Anti-Consumer,”  Consumerist  (blog),  November  26,  2012,  http://consumerist
.com/2012/11/26/heres-why-digital-rights-management-is-stupid-and-anti 
-consumer/, accessed September 5, 2015.
6. “Smart Cow Problem,” Wikipedia, last modified June 3, 2014, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Smart_cow_problem, accessed September 5, 2015.
7. Home Recording of Copyrighted Works: Hearings on H.R. 4783, H.R. 4794, H.R. 4808, 
H.R. 5250, H.R. 5488, and H.R. 5705 Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Civil Liberties, and 
the Admin. of Justice of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 97th Cong. (1982) (testimony of 
Jack  Valenti,  president,  Motion  Picture  Association  of  America,  Inc.),  http://
cryptome.org/hrcw-hear.htm, accessed September 5, 2015.
8. See DVD Copy Control Ass’n, Inc. v. Kaleidescape, Inc., 97 Cal. Rptr. 3d 856 (Cal. 
Ct. App. 6th Dist. 2009).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  225
9. Sega also claimed that Accolade infringed its trademark because the TMSS code 
prompted the Genesis to display the Sega logo on screen. The court rejected this 
theory as well.
10. The statute also requires that copyright holders receive royalty payments for 
DAT sales.
11. Universal City Studios v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 439 (2d Cir. 2001).
12. The right to back up consumer-owned DVDs was also asserted in another impor-
tant section 1201 case, 321 Studios v. MGM Studios, Inc., 307 F. Supp. 2d 1085 (N.D. 
Cal. 2004). It similarly fell on deaf ears.
13. See  http://kotaku.com/the-anti-piracy-tech-thats-tearing-video-game-hackers-a 
-1759518600, accessed April 10, 2016.
14. Mike  Mansick,  “Ubisoft’s  Annoying  New  DRM  Cracked  within  Hours  of 
Release,”  Techdirt,  March  4,  2010,  https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20100304/
1302148421.shtml, accessed September 5, 2015.
15. See Tim Anderson, “How Apple Is Changing DRM,” Guardian (UK), May 15, 
2008,  http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/may/15/drm.apple,  accessed 
September 5, 2015.
16. Timothy Geigner, “The Full Counter-Argument to Game Studios Claiming a 
Need for DRM: The Witcher 3,” Techdirt, August 31, 2015, https://www.techdirt.com/
articles/20150827/05171032075/full-counter-argument-to-game-studios-claiming 
-need-drm-witcher-3.shtml, accessed November 20, 2015.
17. Steve Jobs, “Thoughts on Music,” Apple, Inc., February 6, 2007, https://web 
.archive.org/web/20070207234839/http://www.apple.com/hotnews/
thoughtsonmusic/, accessed September 5, 2015.
18. Jeff Elder, “Former iTunes Engineer Tells Court He Worked to Block Competi-
tors,” Digits (blog), Wall Street Journal, December 12, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/
digits/2014/12/12/former-itunes-engineer-tells-court-he-worked-to-block 
-competitors/, accessed September 5, 2015. As a matter of disclosure, one of the 
authors of this book was a paid consultant for the plaintiffs in the antitrust case 
against Apple.
19. Doctorow, Information Doesn’t Want To Be Free, 593.
20. This results in what Chris Anderson called “the long tail,” where the low costs 
of distribution allow for works to remain in circulation, even if their audience is 
small in absolute terms. See Chris Anderson, The Long Tail (New York: Hatchette 
Books, 2006).
21. Eric von Hippel, Democratizing Innovation (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), 
http://web.mit.edu/evhippel/www/democ1.htm, accessed September 5, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020226  Notes
22. Ibid.
23. Kevin Poulsen, “Hackers Sued for Tinkering with Xbox Games,” SecurityFocus, 
February 9, 2005, http://www.securityfocus.com/news/10466, accessed September 5, 
2015.
24. Davidson & Assoc. v. Jung, 422 F.3d 630 (8th Cir. 2005). One of this book’s 
authors represented the developers of bnetd in this case.
25. MDY Indus., LLC v. Blizzard Entm’t, Inc., 629 F.3d 928 (9th Cir. 2010).
26. For a detailed analysis of the Sony rootkit fiasco, see Deirdre Mulligan and Aaron 
Perzanowski, “The Magnificence of the Disaster: Reconstructing the Sony BMG 
Rootkit Incident,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 22, no. 3 (Summer 2007): 1157–
1232.
27. Doctorow, Information Doesn’t Want To Be Free, 779.
28. Chamberlain Grp., Inc. v. Skylink Techs., Inc., 292 F. Supp. 2d 1023, 1039 (N.D. 
Ill. 2003).
29. Chamberlain Grp., Inc. v. Skylink Techs., Inc., 381 F.3d 1178, 1202 (Fed. Cir. 
2004).
30. Lexmark Int’l, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522 (6th Cir. 
2004).
8  The Internet of Things You Don’t Own
1. Riley v. California, 134 S. Ct. 2474, 2489–90 (2014).
2. Cory Doctorow, “How Laws Restricting Tech Actually Expose Us to Greater 
Harm,”  Wired,  December  24,  2014,  http://www.wired.com/2014/12/government
-computer-security/, accessed September 7, 2015.
3. Tim Cushing, “DRM; Or How to Make 30,000-Hour LED Bulbs ‘Last’ Only One 
Month,”  Techdirt,  March  18,  2015,  https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20150317/
08091030343/drm-how-to-make-30000-hour-led-bulbs.shtml,  accessed  September 
7, 2015.
4. Aaron Smith, “New Ford Car Automatically Obeys Speed Limits,” CNN Money, 
March 25, 2015, http://money.cnn.com/2015/03/25/technology/ford-speed-limit/, 
accessed September 7, 2015.
5. Stuart Dredge, “White House Drone Crash Fallout Shows Who Really Owns Your 
Drones, Says EFF,” Guardian (UK), February 3, 2015, http://www.theguardian.com/
technology/2015/feb/03/white-house-drone-crash-eff, accessed September 7, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  227
6. Tim Cushing, “DRM, Or How to Turn Your Cat’s Litter Box into an Inkjet 
Printer,”  Techdirt,  January  8,  2015,  https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20150102/
09574429580/drm-how-to-turn-your-cats-litter-box-into-inkjet-printer.shtml, 
accessed September 7, 2015.
7. Kashmir Hill, “Samsung Wants You to Put a Motion Tracker under a Loved One’s 
Mattress—What Could Go Wrong?” Fusion, September 4, 2015, http://fusion.net/
story/193514/samsung-sleepsense-loved-ones-mattress/,  accessed  November  20, 
2015.
8. Rob Price, “The Smart-Home Device That Google Is Deliberately Disabling Was 
Sold with a ‘Lifetime Subscription,’” Business Insider, April 5, 2016, http://www
.businessinsider.com/revolv-smart-home-hubs-lifetime-subscription-bricked-nest 
-google-alphabet-internet-of-things-2016-4, accessed April 10, 2016.
9. Arlo Gilbert, “The Time That Tony Fadell Sold Me a Container of Hummus,” 
Medium, April 3, 2016, https://medium.com/@arlogilbert/the-time-that-tony-fadell
-sold-me-a-container-of-hummus-cb0941c762c1#.nhl96qogu,  accessed  April  10, 
2016.
10. “Apple Reinvents the Phone with iPhone,” Apple Press Info, Apple Inc., January 
9,  2007,  http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2007/01/09Apple-Reinvents-the-Phone 
-with-iPhone.html, accessed September 7, 2015.
11. Ibid.
12. Hush-A-Phone Corp. v. United States, 238 F.2d 266 (D.C. Cir. 1956).
13. See, e.g., Andrew “bunnie” Huang, Hacking the Xbox: An Introduction to Reverse 
Engineering (San Francisco: No Starch Press, 2003); MythTV, https://www.mythtv
.org/, accessed September 7, 2015.
14. See “First Jailbreaks by Device and iOS Version,” in “iOS Jailbreaking,” Wikipedia, 
last  modified  September  6,  2015,  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IOS_jailbreaking, 
accessed September 7, 2015.
15. Responsive Comment of Apple Inc. in Opposition to Proposed Exemption 5A 
and 11A (Class #1), In re Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, No. RM 2008-8 (U.S. Copyright 
Office,  February  2,  2009),  https://www.eff.org/files/filenode/dmca_2009/apple 
-inc-31.pdf, ,  aacccceesssseedd  SSeepptteemmbbeerr  77,,  22001155;;  RReessppoonnssee  ooff  AAppppllee  IInncc..  ttoo  QQuueessttiioonnss  SSuubb--
mitted by the Copyright Office Concerning Exemptions 5A and 11A (Class #1), In re 
Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies, No. RM 2008-8 (U.S. Copyright Office, July 13, 2009), 
https://www.eff.org/files/filenode/dmca_2009/apples-response-to-copyright-office 
-questions-of-6-23-09.pdf, accessed September 7, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020228  Notes
16. Adi Robertson, “As of Today, Americans Can Legally Unlock Their Phones 
Again,”  Verge,  August  1,  2014,  http://www.theverge.com/2014/8/1/5959915/
president-barack-obama-signing-phone-unlocking-bill, accessed September 7, 2015.
17. “Discovery of Gene” in “History of Roundup Ready Crops,” SourceWatch, last 
modified  August  19,  2012,  http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/History_of 
_Roundup_Ready_Crops#Discovery_of_Gene, accessed September 7, 2015.
18. Bowman v. Monsanto Co., 133 S. Ct. 1761 (2013), https://scholar.google.com/
scholar_case?case=14668330492460109241&hl=en&as_sdt=6&as_vis=1&oi 
=scholarr, accessed September 7, 2015. See also Monsanto Canada Inc. v. Schmeiser, 
[2004]  S.C.R.  902  (Can.),  http://scc-csc.lexum.com/scc-csc/scc-csc/en/item/2147/
index.do, accessed March 15, 2016. We’ll discuss the Monsanto patents and their 
associated lawsuits later in chapter 9.
19. Deere & Company, Operator Manual: 9120, 9220, 9320, 9420, and 9520 Tractors 
(2003), http://manuals.deere.com/omview/OMAR183678_19/, accessed September 
7, 2015.
20. Deere & Company, “Engine Control Unit Service Codes-(ECU),” in Operator 
Manual: 9120, 9220, 9320, 9420, and 9520 Tractors (2003), http://manuals.deere
.com/omview/OMAR183678_19/RW24911_0000099_19_05NOV01_1.htm, accessed 
September 7, 2015.
21. See, e.g., Kyle Wiens, “New High-Tech Farm Equipment Is a Nightmare for 
Farmers,” Wired, February 5, 2015, http://www.wired.com/2015/02/new-high-tech
-farm-equipment-nightmare-farmers/, accessed September 7, 2015.
22. Long Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption under 17 U.S.C. 1201 (Pro-
posed Class # 21) at 6, Section 1201 Exemptions to Prohibition against Circumven-
tion of Technological Measures Protecting Copyrighted Works: Second Round of 
Comments,  http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-032715/class%2021/John 
_Deere_Class21_1201_2014.pdf, accessed September 7, 2015.
23. Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 365 U.S. 336 (1961).
24. Isaac Newton to Robert Hooke, February 15, 1675, in The Correspondence of Isaac 
Newton, Vol. 1 (1661–1675), ed. H. W. Turnbull (London: Cambridge University 
Press, 1960), 416.
25. Eric von Hippel, Democratizing Innovation (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), 2.
26. See Ethan Zuckerman, “Eric von Hippel and 2.9 Million British Innovators,” ... 
My Heart’s in Accra (blog), September 14, 2010, http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/
blog/2010/09/14/eric-von-hippel-and-2-9-million-british-innovators/, ,  aacccceesssseedd  SSeepp--
tember 7, 2015.
27. Wiens, “New High-Tech Farm Equipment Is a Nightmare for Farmers.”
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  229
28. Comments of General Motors LLC (Proposed Class #21) at 10, Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies,  No.  2014-07  (U.S.  Copyright  Office,  March  27,  2015),  http://
copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-032715/class%2021/General_Motors 
_Class21_1201_2014.pdf, accessed November 20, 2015.
29. Michael Corkery and Jessica Silver-Greenberg, “Miss a Payment? Good Luck 
Moving That Car,” New York Times, September 24, 2014, http://dealbook.nytimes.
com/2014/09/24/miss-a-payment-good-luck-moving-that-car/,  accessed  September 
7, 2015.
30. “mbrace,”  Mercedes-Benz  USA,  LLC,  https://www.mbusa.com/mercedes/
mbrace, accessed September 7, 2015.
31. “Mercedes-Benz mbrace Terms of Service,” Mercedes-Benz USA, LLC, last modi-
fied  September  8,  2013,  http://www.mbusa.com/vcm/MB/DigitalAssets/pdfmb/
mbraceservicebrochures/mbrace_Terms_of_Service_9-8-13.pdf,  accessed  September 
7, 2015.
32. See “Massachusetts Right to Repair,” http://massrighttorepair.com/, accessed 
September 7, 2015; Jason Torchinsky, “Carmakers Want to Use Copyright Law to 
Make Working on Your Car Illegal,” Jalopnik (blog), April 21, 2015, http://jalopnik
.com/carmakers-want-to-make-working-on-your-car-illegal-beca-1699132210, 
accessed September 7, 2015.
33. Torchinsky, “Carmakers Want to Use Copyright Law to Make Working on Your 
Car Illegal.”
34. Alisa Priddle, “Ford Recalls 433,000 Cars Because Engines Won’t Shut Off,” USA 
Today, July 2, 2015, http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/cars/2015/07/02/ford
-recall/29620683/, accessed September 7, 2015.
35. Andy Greenberg, “After Jeep Hack, Chrysler Recalls 1.4M Vehicles for Bug Fix,” 
Wired,  July  24,  2015,  http://www.wired.com/2015/07/jeep-hack-chrysler-recalls-1
-4m-vehicles-bug-fix/, accessed September 7, 2015.
36. Bill Chappell, “11 Million Cars Worldwide Have Emissions ‘Defeat Device,’ 
Volkswagen Says,” The Two-Way, NPR, September 22, 2015, http://www.npr.org/
sections/thetwo-way/2015/09/22/442457697/11-million-cars-worldwide-have 
-emissions-problem-volkswagen-says, accessed November 21, 2015.
37. Charles Lane, “Emissions Scandal Is Hurting VW Owners Trying to Resell,” NPR, 
October 27, 2015, http://www.npr.org/2015/10/26/450238773/emissions-scandal-is
-hurting-vw-owners-trying-to-resell, accessed November 21, 2015.
38. Sean O’Kane, “Automakers Just Lost the Battle to Stop You from Hacking Your 
Car,”  Verge,  October  27,  2015,  http://www.theverge.com/2015/10/27/9622150/
dmca-exemption-accessing-car-software, accessed November 21, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020230  Notes
39. Daniel Cooper, “Ford’s New Car Will Force You to Obey the Speed Limit,” 
Engadget, March 24, 2015, http://www.engadget.com/2015/03/24/ford-smax-speed
-limit/, accessed September 7, 2015.
40. Jim Edwards, “Ford Exec: ‘We Know Everyone Who Breaks the Law’ Thanks to 
Our GPS in Your Car,” Business Insider, January 8, 2014, http://www.businessinsider
.com/ford-exec-gps-2014-1#ixzz3ksVKHeH4, accessed September 7, 2015.
41. Tim Cushing, “Ferrari ‘DRM:’ Don’t Screw with Our Logos and We’ll Let You 
Know If It’s OK to Sell Your Car,” Techdirt, September 3, 2014, https://www.techdirt
.com/articles/20140902/11491828395/ferrari-drm-dont-screw-with-our-logos-well 
-let-you-know-if-its-ok-to-sell-your-car.shtml, accessed September 7, 2015.
42. See “What Is Free Software?” Free Software Foundation, Inc., last modified Sep-
tember 1, 2015, http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html, ,  aacccceesssseedd  SSeepptteemm--
ber 7, 2015.
43. “Oops Landing Page,” Keurig Green Mountain, Inc., http://www.keurig.com/
content/oops, accessed September 7, 2015.
44. Brian Barrett, “Keurig’s My K-Cup Retreat Shows We Can Beat DRM,” Wired, 
May 8, 2015, http://www.wired.com/2015/05/keurig-k-cup-drm/, ,  aacccceesssseedd  SSeepptteemm--
ber 7, 2015.
45. Ted Cooper, “Bad News for Keurig Green Mountain Investors: TreeHouse Foods 
Says Keurig 2.0 Technology Can Be Cracked,” Motley Fool, June 23, 2014, http://
www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/06/23/bad-news-for-keurig-green-mountain 
-investors-treeh.aspx, accessed September 7, 2015.
46. Karl Bode, “Keurig’s Controversial Java ‘DRM’ Defeated by a Single Piece of 
Scotch  Tape,”  Techdirt,  December  11,  2014,  https://www.techdirt.com/
articles/20141210/07133329378/kuerigs-controversial-java-drm-defeated-single 
-piece-scotch-tape.shtml, accessed September 7, 2015.
47. Heather Long, “Keurig Green Mountain Gets Roasted. Stock Drops 10%,” CNN 
Money,  May  7,  2015,  http://money.cnn.com/2015/05/06/investing/keurig-green
-mountain-earnings-stock-fall/index.html, accessed September 7, 2015.
48. Samuel Gibbs, “Hackers Can Hijack Wi-Fi Hello Barbie to Spy on Your Chil-
dren,”  The  Guardian,  November  26,  2015,  http://www.theguardian.com/
technology/2015/nov/26/hackers-can-hijack-wi-fi-hello-barbie-to-spy-on-your 
-children, accessed November 27, 2015.
49. Anjie Zheng, “VTech Has Yet to Put a Price on Hack, Chairman Says,” Wall Street 
Journal,  December  8,  2015,  http://www.wsj.com/articles/vtech-has-yet-to-put-a
-price-on-hack-chairman-says-1449556689, accessed March 13, 2016.
50. Parker Higgins, “Big Brother Is Listening: Users Need the Ability to Teach  
Smart TV’s New Lessons,” Deeplinks (blog), Electronic Frontier Foundation, February 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  231
11,  2015,  https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/02/big-brother-listening-users-need-
ability-teach-smart-tvs-new-lessons, accessed September 7, 2015.
51. Jason Cipriani, “Vizio Reveals How It Secretly Tracks What You’re Watching in 
IPO Plan,” Fortune, July 26, 2015, http://fortune.com/2015/07/26/vizio-ipo/, accessed 
November 27, 2015.
52. Josh Lowensohn, “Former Apple Engineers Have Built a $1,495 Oven That Can 
Identify  Your  Food,”  Verge,  June  9,  2015,  http://www.theverge.com/2015/6/9/
8751947/june-oven-identify-your-food, accessed September 7, 2015.
53. See Paolo Riva, Simona Sacchi, and Marco Brambilla, “Humanizing Machines: 
Anthropomorphization of Slot Machines Increases Gambling,” Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Applied (August 2015), doi: 10.1037/xap0000057.
54. Andrew Gregory and Graham Morrison, “Karen Sandler: Full Interview,” TuxRa-
dar,  September  26,  2013,  http://www.tuxradar.com/content/karen-sandler-full
-interview, accessed September 7, 2015.
55. Emily Singer, “Getting Health Data from Inside Your Body,” MIT Technology 
Review,  November  22,  2011,  http://www.technologyreview.com/news/426171/
getting-health-data-from-inside-your-body/, accessed September 7, 2015.
56. Long  Comment  Regarding  a  Proposed  Exemption  under  17  U.S.C.  1201, 
Advanced Medical Technology Association Comments Regarding Proposed Class 27: 
Software—Networked Medical Devices at 2, No. 2014–07 (U.S. Copyright Office, 
March 27, 2015), http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-032715/class%2027/
AdvaMed_Class27_1201_2014.pdf, accessed September 7, 2015.
57. Biz Carson, “They Hacked Her Pancreas and Found Love along the Way,” Busi-
ness Insider, August 27, 2015, http://www.businessinsider.com/hacked-raspberry-pi
-artificial-pancreas-2015-8, accessed September 7, 2015.
58. Michael Corkery and Jessica Silver-Greenberg, “Miss a Payment? Good Luck 
Moving That Car,” New York Times, September 24, 2015, http://dealbook.nytimes
.com/2014/09/24/miss-a-payment-good-luck-moving-that-car/, accessed September 
7, 2015.
59. “Terms of Sale,” Fitbit, Inc., last modified December 30, 2014, http://www.fitbit 
.com/legal/terms-of-sale, accessed September 7, 2015.
60. “Fitbit Privacy Policy,” Fitbit, Inc., last modified December 9, 2014, http://www 
.fitbit.com/privacy, accessed September 7, 2015.
61. Kate Crawford, “When Fitbit Is the Expert Witness,” Atlantic, November 19, 
2014,  http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/11/when-fitbit-is-the 
-expert-witness/382936/, accessed September 7, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020232  Notes
62. “Technology Breakthrough: A Prosthetic Device That Connects to Patients and 
Health Care Providers via Mobile Communications Technology,” Business Wire, 
September  5,  2012,  http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20120905006102/
en/Technology-Breakthrough-Prosthetic-Device-Connects-Patients-Health, accessed 
September 7, 2015.
63. Dan Goodin, “Vast Array of Medical Devices Vulnerable to Serious Hacks, Feds 
Warn,” Ars Technica (blog), June 13, 2013, http://arstechnica.com/security/2013/06/
vast-array-of-medical-devices-vulnerable-to-serious-hacks-feds-warn/, ,   aacccceesssseedd   SSeepp--
tember 7, 2015; Jordan Robertson, “McAfee Hacker Says Medtronic Insulin Pumps 
Vulnerable to Attack,” Bloomberg, February 29, 2012, http://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2012-02-29/mcafee-hacker-says-medtronic-insulin-pumps-vulnerable-
to-attack, accessed September 7, 2015; Barnaby J. Feder, “A Heart Device Is Found 
Vulnerable  to  Hacker  Attacks,”  New  York  Times,  March  12,  2008,  http://www.
nytimes.com/2008/03/12/business/12heart-web.html, accessed September 7, 2015; 
William  H.  Maisel,  “Semper  Fidelis—Consumer  Protection  for  Patients  with 
Implanted Medical Devices,” New England Journal of Medicine 358 (2008): 985–987, 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMp0800495.
64. Dan Goodin, “Dick Cheney Altered Implanted Heart Device to Prevent Terrorist 
Hack  Attacks,”  Ars  Technica  (blog),  October  19,  2013,  http://arstechnica
.com/security/2013/10/dick-cheney-altered-implanted-heart-device-to-prevent 
-terrorist-hack-attacks/, accessed September 7, 2015.
65. Joe Uchill, “What New DMCA Rules Mean for Medical Device Research,” Chris-
tian  Science  Monitor,  October  30,  2015,  http://www.csmonitor.com/World/
Passcode/2015/1030/What-new-DMCA-rules-mean-for-medical-device-research, 
accessed November 21, 2015.
9  Patents and the Ordinary Pursuits of Life
1. Lexmark Int’l Inc. v Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522 (6th Cir. 
2005).
2. Bloomer v. McQuewan, 55 U.S. (14 How.) 539, 549 (1852). The Court also articu-
lated a specific economic rationale for such a limitation, one that tracks identically 
with the rationale for copyright exhaustion, that patentees “are entitled to but one 
royalty for a patented machine.”
3. Ibid. at 549–550.
4. Adams v. Burke, 84 U.S. (17 Wall.) 453, 455 (1873).
5. Ibid.
6. 157 U.S. 659, 666–667 (1875).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  233
7. Jill Jonnes, Empires of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, and the Race to Electrify the 
World (New York: Random House, 2003), 176–190.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid., 190.
11. Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co., 243 U.S. 502, 511 (1917).
12. See Zechariah Chafee Jr., “The Music Goes Round and Round: Equitable Servi-
tudes and Chattels,” Harvard Law Review 69 (1956): 1250–1264, 1261; Thomas W. 
Merrill and Henry E. Smith, “Optimal Standardization in the Law of Property: The 
Numerus Clausus Principle,” Yale Law Journal 110 (2000): 1–70, 26–28.
13. Motion Picture Patents, 243 U.S. at 519.
14. Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351, 1363 (2013).
15. Ibid.
16. 976 F.2d 700 (Fed. Cir. 1992).
17. 304 U.S. 175 (1938).
18. Ibid. at 180.
19. 976 F.2d at 702.
20. Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Elecs., Inc., 553 U.S. 617, 621 (2008).
21. Ibid. at 630.
22. Ibid. at 637 n.7.
23. Mallinckrodt v. Medipart, 976 F.2d at 708 (citation omitted).
24. 264 F. 3d 1094 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
25. 133 U.S. 697 (1890).
26. Ibid. at 703.
27. See John A. Rothchild, “Exhausting Extraterritoriality,” Santa Clara Law Review 
51 (2011): 1199–1201, 1205–1206.
28. Kirtsaeng, 133 S. Ct. at 1371.
29. Frank R. Lichtenberg, “Pharmaceutical Price Discrimination and Social Welfare,” 
Capitalism and Society 5, no. 1 (2010): 1–29, at 4.
30. See Sarah R. Wasserman Rajec, “Free Trade in Patented Goods: International 
Exhaustion for Patents,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 29 (2014): 317–376, at 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020234  Notes
361–367;  Ariel  Katz,  “The  First  Sale  Doctrine  and  the  Economics  of  Post-Sale 
Restraints,” Brigham Young University Law Review (2014): 55–142, at 80–81.
31. See Katz, “The First Sale Doctrine,” 81 (citing F. M. Scherer and Jayashree Watal, 
“Post-TRIPS Options for Access to Patented Medicines in Developing Nations,” Jour-
nal of International Economic Law 5 [2002]: 913).
32. See http://doggett.house.gov/images/DoggettLetter1.11.pdf, accessed April 10, 
2016.
33. Liyan  Chen,  “Best  of  the  Biggest:  How  Profitable  Are  the  World’s  Largest  
Companies,”  Forbes,  May  13,  2014,  http://www.forbes.com/sites/liyanchen/
2014/05/13/best-of-the-biggest-how-profitable-are-the-worlds-largest-companies/, 
accessed November 20, 2015.
34. Lexmark Int’l, Inc. v. Impression Products, Inc., No. 2014-1617, 2016 WL 
559042 (Fed. Cir. Feb. 12, 2016).
10  Ownership’s Uncertain Future 
1. Richard Fry, Young Adults After the Recession: Fewer Homes, Fewer Cars, Less Debt 
(Washington,  DC:  Pew  Research  Center,  2013),  2,  http://www.pewsocialtrends 
.org/files/2013/02/Financial_Milestones_of_Young_Adults_FINAL_2-19.pdf, accessed 
September 4, 2015: “The share of younger households owning their primary resi-
dence fell sharply from 40 percent in 2007 to 34 percent in 2011 ... In 2007, 73 per-
cent of households headed by an adult younger than 25 owned or leased at least one 
vehicle. By 2011, 66 percent of these young households had a vehicle.”
2. Tim Logan, Emily Alpert Reyes, and Ben Poston, “Airbnb and Other Short-Term 
Rentals Worsen Housing Shortage, Critics Say,” Los Angeles Times, March 11, 2015, 
http://www.latimes.com/business/realestate/la-fi-airbnb-housing-market-20150311-
story.html, ,  aacccceesssseedd  SSeepptteemmbbeerr  44,,  22001155;;  LLaauurraa  KKuussiissttoo,,  ““AAiirrbbnnbb  PPuusshheess  UUpp  AAppaarrtt--
ment Rents Slightly, Study Says,” Wall Street Journal, March 30, 2015, http://blogs
.wsj.com/developments/2015/03/30/airbnb-pushes-up-apartment-rents-slightly 
-study-says/, accessed September 4, 2015.
3. Rachel Monroe, “More Guests, Empty Houses,” Slate, February 13, 2014, http://
www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2014/02/airbnb_gentrification_how 
_the_sharing_economy_drives_up_housing_prices.html,  accessed  September  4, 
2015.
4. Stephen Gandel, “Uber-nomics: Here’s What It Would Cost Uber to Pay Its Driv-
ers as Employees,” Fortune, September 17, 2015, http://fortune.com/2015/09/17/
ubernomics/, accessed November 20, 2015.
5. Alison Griswold, “Uber Surged Prices during the Sydney Hostage Crisis. It Needs 
to Do Better,” Moneybox (blog), Slate, December 15, 2014, http://www.slate.com/
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  235
blogs/moneybox/2014/12/15/uber_sydney_hostage_crisis_it_s_time_for_uber_to_re 
_evaluate_how_it_prices.html, accessed September 4, 2015.
6. Dan Kedmey, “This Is How Uber’s ‘Surge Pricing’ Works,” Time, December 15, 
2014, http://time.com/3633469/uber-surge-pricing/, accessed September 4, 2015.
7. “Random  House  Launches  New  Digital-Only  Imprints,”  Publisher’s  Weekly, 
November 29, 2012, http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/digital/content 
-and-e-books/article/54930-random-house-launches-new-digital-only-imprints 
.html, accessed September 4, 2015.
8. Vish Khanna, “Why Aren’t There More Vinyl Pressing Plants?” The Pitch (blog), 
Pitchfork, June 9, 2014, http://pitchfork.com/thepitch/363-vinyl-shortage/, accessed 
September 4, 2015.
9. Ted Sarandos, “Why You’ll See Some High Profile Movies Leave Netflix US Next 
Month,”  Netflix  US  &  Canada  Blog,  August  30,  2015,  https://web.archive.org/
web/20151126144555/http://blog.netflix.com/2015/08/why-youll-see-some-high 
-profile-movies.html (site discontinued), accessed November 20, 2015.
10. If this seems farfetched, consider the statement of Ford’s VP of marketing and 
sales: “We know everyone who breaks the law, we know when you’re doing it. We 
have GPS in your car, so we know what you’re doing.” Jim Edwards, “Ford Exec 
Retracts Statements about Tracking Drivers with the GPS in Their Cars,” Business 
Insider,  January  9,  2014,  http://www.businessinsider.com/ford-jim-farley-retracts
-statements-tracking-drivers-gps-2014-1, accessed September 4, 2015.
11. See Jessica Litman, “Revising Copyright Law for the Information Age,” Oregon 
Law Review 75 (1996): 19–48 (describing a legislative process dominated by industry 
insiders).
12. Maria A. Pallente, “The Next Great Copyright Act” (lecture, Columbia Univer-
sity, New York, March 4, 2013), https://web.law.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/
microsites/kernochan/files/Pallante-The%20Next%20Great%20Copyright%20Act 
.pdf, accessed September 4, 2015.
13. Lesley Fair, “Full Disclosure,” FTC Business Blog, September 23, 2014, https://
www.ftc.gov/news-events/blogs/business-blog/2014/09/full-disclosure, ,  aacccceesssseedd  SSeepp--
tember 4, 2015.
14. Ibid.; Nancy S. Kim, Wrap Contracts (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), 
89–90.
15. Council Directive 93/13 1993 O.J. (l. 95); Jane K. Winn and Mark Webber, “The 
Impact of EU Unfair Contract Terms Law on US Business-to-Consumer Internet Mer-
chants,” Business Lawyer 62 (November 2006): 209–228.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020236  Notes
16. Rice University, “Removal of Restrictions Can Decrease Music Piracy, Study  
Suggest,”  ScienceDaily,  October  10,  2011,  http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/
2011/10/111007113944.htm, accessed September 4, 2015.
17. One practical problem is that the United States is a signatory to the WIPO Copy-
right Treaty. That treaty requires parties to “provide adequate legal protection and 
effective legal remedies against the circumvention of effective technological mea-
sures.” WIPO Copyright Treaty art. 11, April 12, 1997, S. Treaty Doc. No. 105-17 
(1997). Conceivably, the United States could limit anti-circumvention law in a 
manner consistent with exhaustion since the uses owners would make would be 
“permitted by law.” Ibid.
18. Chamberlain Grp., Inc. v. Skylink Techs., Inc., 381 F.3d 1178, 1202 (Fed. Cir. 
2004).
19. See Storage Tech. Corp. v. Custom Hardware Eng’g & Consulting, Inc., 421 F.3d 
1307, 1319 (Fed. Cir. 2005). The Fifth Circuit rejected an “interpretation [that] 
would permit liability under section 1201(a) for accessing a work simply to view it or 
to use it within the purview of ‘fair use’ permitted under the Copyright Act.” MGE 
UPS Sys. Inc. v. GE Consumer & Indus., 612 F.3d 760, 765 (5th Cir. 2005).
20. Although outside the scope of this book, in some instances breaking DRM could 
violate the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. See 18 U.S.C. § 1030 (creating civil and 
criminal liability for “knowingly access[ing] a computer without authorization or 
exceeding authorized access”).
21. H.R. 3048, 105th Cong. (1997).
22. Christopher Wolf, The Digital Millennium Copyright Act: Text, History, and Case-
law (Silver Spring, MD: Pike & Fischer, 2003), 460.
23. H.R. 862, 114th Cong. (2015).
24. “Grassley & Leahy Call for Copyright Study,” Sen. Chuck Grassley’s webpage, 
October 22, 2015, http://www.grassley.senate.gov/news/news-releases/grassley-leahy 
-call-copyright-study, accessed November 20, 2015.
25. See 17 U.S.C. § 107.
26. Pamela Samuelson, “Unbundling Fair Uses,” Fordham Law Review 77 (April 
2009): 2537–2621, at 2602–2615; Michael J. Madison, “A Pattern-Oriented Approach 
to Fair Use,” William & Mary Law Review 45, no. 4 (2004): 1525–1687, at 1687.
27. See 17 U.S.C. §§ 109 & 117.
28. Platt & Munk Co. v. Republic Graphics, Inc., 315 F.2d 847, 854 (2d Cir. 1963) 
(noting that “the ultimate question embodied in the ‘first sale’ doctrine is ‘whether 
or not there has been such a disposition of the article that it may fairly be said that 
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  237
the patentee [or copyright proprietor] has received his reward for the use of the arti-
cle’” (alteration in original) (quoting United States v. Masonite Corp., 316 U.S. 265, 
278 [1942]); Parfums Givenchy, Inc. v. C & C Beauty Sales, Inc., 832 F. Supp. 1378, 
1389 (C.D. Cal. 1993) (“The distribution right and the first sale doctrine rest on the 
principle that the copyright owner is entitled to realize no more and no less than 
the full value of each copy or phonorecord upon its disposition”); Burke & Van 
Heusen, Inc. v. Arrow Drug, Inc., 233 F. Supp. 881, 884 (E.D. Pa. 1964) (“The ulti-
mate question under the ‘first sale’ doctrine is whether or not there has been such a 
disposition of the copyrighted article that it may fairly be said that the copyright 
proprietor has received his reward for its use.”).
29. Christina Mulligan, “A Numerus Clausus Principle for Intellectual Property,” 
Tennessee Law Review 80 (2013), 280: “Digital works have greater hurdles to preserva-
tion than analog or physical copies of works; in addition to preserving a copy and 
translating the language, ‘digital translation’ presents an additional problem”; Reese, 
“The First Sale Doctrine in the Era of Digital Networks,” Boston College Law Review 44 
(2003): 577–652, at 633–639 (noting the difficulties of preserving readable digital 
content in an environment in which languages, software, hardware, and file formats 
undergo rapid change).
30. 17 U.S.C. § 107.
31. 17 U.S.C. § 109(b).
32. Tiffany (NJ) Inc. v. eBay, Inc., 600 F.3d 93 (2d Cir. 2010), aff’g 576 F. Supp. 2d 
463 (S.D.N.Y. 2008).
33. Viacom Int’l, Inc. v. YouTube, Inc., 676 F.3d 19 (2d Cir. 2012), aff’g in part, rev’g 
and rem’g in part, 718 F. Supp. 2d 514 (S.D.N.Y. 2010).
34. Case C-128/11, UsedSoft GmbH v. Oracle Int’l Corp., 2012 E.C.R. I-0000.
35. Rb. Den Haag, 3 september 2014, ECLI:NL:RBDHA:2014:10962, IEF 14164 (VOB/
Stichting Leenrecht e.a.) (Neth.), http://uitspraken.rechtspraak.nl/inziendocument?id
=ECLI:NL:RBDHA:2014:10962, accessed September 4, 2015.
36. Hof Amsterdam, 20 januari 2015, ECLI:NL:GHAMS:2015:66, NUV/Tom Kabinet 
(Neth.), http://uitspraken.rechtspraak.nl/inziendocument?id=ECLI:NL:GHAMS:2015 
:66, accessed September 4, 2015.
37. Ibid.
38. Christina Mulligan, “Killing Copyright,” on file with authors.
39. Public Hearing Filed in Response to 65 FR 63626, November 29, 2000 (testimony of 
Susan Mann, National Music Publishers Association).
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020238  Notes
40. National Telecommunications & Information Administration, Report to Congress: 
Study Examining 17 U.S.C. Sections 109 and 117 Pursuant to Section 104 of the Digital 
Millennium  Copyright  Act  (2001),  https://www.ntia.doc.gov/report/2001/report
-congress-study-examining-17-usc-sections-109-and-117-pursuant-section-104 
-digital, accessed September 4, 2015.
41. U.S. Copyright Office, DMCA Section 104 Report (2001), http://www.copyright
.gov/reports/studies/dmca/sec-104-report-vol-1.pdf, accessed September 4, 2015.
42. The proposed DPP standard would allow consumers to share digital files with 
anyone they chose using a “give” button. But when a recipient clicked a “take” 
button, access to all other copies originating with the initial purchaser would be 
disabled. Paul Sweazey, “Introduction to Digital Personal Property,” in Consumers in 
the Information Society: Access, Fairness and Representation, ed. Jeremy Malcolm (Kuala 
Lumpur: Consumers International, 2012), 53–71.
43. Erich Ringewald, Secondary market for digital objects, US Patent 8,364,595, filed 
May 5, 2009, issued January 29, 2013.
44. Eliza C. Block and Marcel van Os, Managing access to digital content items, US 
Patent Application 20130060616, filed June 22, 2012.
45. Jack Bertram Coronel and Joseph R. Coronel, Method, system, and device for 
providing a market for digital goods, US Patent 8,631,505, filed March 16, 2013, 
issued January 14, 2014; Brian K. Buchheit. Secondary marketplace for digital media 
content, US Patent 8,359,246, filed March 19, 2010, issued January 22, 2013.
46. Block and van Os, Managing access to digital content items: “A portion of the 
proceeds of the ‘resale’ may be paid to the creator of the digital content item.”
47. S. 2045, 113th Cong. (2014); H.R. 4103, 113th Cong. (2014).
48. See Sam Francis Foundation v. Christies, 78 F.3d 1320 (9th Cir. 2015).
49. Guy A. Rub, “The Unconvincing Case for Resale Royalties,” Yale Law Journal 
Forum 124 (2014): 1, http://www.yalelawjournal.org/forum/the-unconvincing-case
-for-resale-royalties, accessed September 4, 2015.
50. For a thorough discussion of the insights bitcoin offers for property in general 
and digital assets in particular, see Joshua A. T. Fairfield, “Bitproperty,” Southern 
California Law Review 88 (May 2015): 805–874.
51. James Grimmelmann and Arvind Narayanan, “The Blockchain Gang,” Slate, 
February 16, 2016, http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2016/02/
bitcoin_s_blockchain_technology_won_t_change_everything.html,  accessed  April 
10, 2015.
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Notes  239
52. Marc Andreessen, “Why Bitcoin Matters,” Dealbook (blog), New York Times, 
January 21, 2014, http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/01/21/why-bitcoin-matters/, 
accessed September 4, 2015.
53. Although the public ledger does not include sender and recipient names, it does 
include account numbers. There are steps users can take to maintain privacy, but 
they are admittedly imperfect. But efforts are underway for new privacy-enhancing 
tools. See Bitcoin, “Protecting Your Privacy,” https://bitcoin.org/en/protect-your 
-privacy, accessed September 4, 2015.
54. As with any property, the value of a digital asset can fluctuate. Dedicated Des-
tiny players will tell you that the once-mighty Gjallarhorn was “nerfed” by game 
maker Bungie, rendering it far less coveted.
55. Fairfield, “Bitproperty.”
56. See Arnold S. Weinrib, “Information and Property,” University of Toronto Law 
Journal 38 (1988): 117–150, at 120: “It also makes plain the conclusory nature of the 
term ‘property’: it is a legal characterization, a statement that the court has chosen 
to assign a particular form of protection to the interest in question” (footnote omit-
ted); see also Johnson v. M’Intosh, 21 U.S. (8 Wheat.) 543, 572 (1823) (stating that 
property claims “must be admitted to depend entirely on the law of the nation in 
which they lie”); Jeremy Bentham, The Theory of Legislation, ed. C. K. Ogden 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1950), 113: “Property and law are born together, 
and die together. Before laws were made there was no property; take away laws, and 
property ceases.”
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273334/9780262335959_cci.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Index
321 Studios v. MGM Studios, Inc., 225 iPad, 94
iPhone, 10, 62, 94, 141–143
ABC v. Aereo, 45 iPod, 38, 42, 133–34, 141
ACLU v. Gonzales, 223 iTunes, 20, 35, 39–43, 54, 59, 84, 93, 
Adams v. Burke, 157, 162, 232 122, 133–134, 186
Adobe, 7, 55, 59–60, 115 Watch, 4
Airbnb, 169, 171, 180 Archives, 103, 111–114, 118
Akerlof, George A., 207 Armstrong, Herbert, 113
Alamogordo, NM, 25 Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Re-
Alphabet, 141 placement Co., 228
Alpo Petfoods, Inc. v. Ralston Purina  Astrachan, James B., 214
Co., 213 AT&T, 141–142, 160
Alschuler, Albert W., 199 AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion, 213
Am. Exp. Co. v. Italian Colors Rest., 213 Atari, 25
Amazon Atkinson, George, 30
Kindle, 1–5, 39–40, 45, 48–51, 54, 62,  Audio Home Recording Act (AHRA), 130
93, 122 Augusto, Troy, 75–76
1984 incident, 1–2, 43, 93, 114 Author’s Guild v. Google, Inc., 222
American Library Association (ALA),  Automaker’s Alliance, 147
104–105, 218–219 Autonomy, 10–11, 24, 104, 121, 123, 
American Royalties Too (ART) Act, 187 137, 148, 151, 154, 170
Anderson, Chris, 225
Andreessen, Marc, 239 Bakos, Yannis, 207
Android, 93, 143 Barbie, 150–151, 230
Apache, 71 Barnes & Noble, 116
Apple Nook, 93–94
App Store, 61, 141 Barrett, Brian, 150, 230
Fairplay DRM, 122, 133–134 Basheer, Shamnad, 201
iBook, 93, 177, 183 Beachbody, 30, 202
iCloud, 42 Beatles, 52
iOS, 93, 141, 143 Beats, 49
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020242  Index
Beck, 51 Camfield v. City of Okla., 197
Bell, Alexander Graham, 141 Campbell, Joseph, 199
Bell Telephone. See AT&T Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc.,  
Bentham, Jeremy, 239 204
Bernard of Chartres, 145 Carterphone, 142
Bernasek, Anna, 210 Cartoon Network LP, LLLP v. CSC Hold-
Bernays, Edward, 104 ings, Inc., 47, 204
Betamax, 11, 201 Carver, Brian W., 210
Bitcoin, 189–191, 238–239 Chafee, Zechariah Jr., 198, 233
BitTorrent, 97 Chamberlain v. Skylink, 137, 138, 226, 
Blackstone, William, 20, 199 236
Blitz, Marc, 222 Charles of the Ritz Distribs. Corp. v. 
Blizzard, 135 FTC, 214
Block chain, 189–191 Cheney, Dick, 153
Blockbuster, 31, 51, 202, 205 Chrome, 61, 208
Bloomer v. McQuewan, 156, 162, 167,  Chrysler, 147, 229
232 Circumvention, 131–133, 138, 142, 156, 
Blu-ray, BD+ DRM used on, 133 176–177
Bluestone, Marisa, 204 City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 223
Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 27, 200 Clark, John Willis, 117
Boesch v. Graff, 164–165 Clemens v. Estes, 200
Borghi, Maurizio, 203 Cloud computing, 42
Boston Public Library, 108, 217–218 Coase, R. H., 197
Boucher, Rick, 178, 186 Coca-Cola Co. v. Procter & Gamble Co., 
Bowman v. Monsanto Co., 163, 228 213
Bradbury, Ray, 121, 123 Cohen, Julie E., 196
Brambilla, Marco, 231 Colligan v. Activities Club of N.Y.,  
Brantley, Peter, 87, 196, 212 213
Breaux, Travis, 217 ComiXology, 85
Bridge, Catherine, 215 Common law, 74, 156, 159, 165, 167–
Brooks, Garth, 30, 51–52 168, 178–179, 182
Bundle of rights. See Property Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA), 
Burke & Van Heusen, Inc. v. Arrow  236
Drug, Inc., 237 Computer Software Copyright Act of 
Buy Now button 1980, 204
consumer perception of, 2, 39, 90– Computer Software Rental Amendments 
101, 174–175, 180 Act, 31
used by Amazon, 77, 84 Contracts
used by Apple, 77 consideration, 66
Byrne, David, 51 duty to read, 70, 174
formation, 65–70
Cablevision, 47 unconscionability, 69, 174–175
California Reader Privacy Act, 104 Consumer surplus, 80
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Index  243
Content Scramble System (CSS),  DSC Commec’ns Corp. v. DGI Techs., 
127–128 210
DeCSS, 131–132 Dudamel, Gustavo, 109
Copy/work distinction, 36–38 DVD Copy Control Ass’n, Inc. v. Kaleid-
Copyright Act escape, 224
section 109, 73, 168, 179 Dye, Skip, 110
section 117, 42, 63–64, 73, 129, 163, 
177, 179, 183 E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, 25
section 1201 (see Digital Millennium  Easterbrook, Frank, 67–70, 79
Copyright Act [DMCA]) eBay, 10, 26, 28, 30, 63, 75, 184, 190
Copyright Office, 107, 131, 142–148,  Edison, Thomas, 158–160, 162
153, 186, 238 Eisenberg, Melvin Aron, 209
Corley, Eric, 132 Eisenstein, Elizabeth L., 203
Craigslist, 10, 33 Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), 
Cranor, Lorrie Faith, 217 142
Crawford, Kate, 153, 231 Elverum, Phil, 51
Cryptography, 125, 128, 190 Eminem, 62
End user license agreement (EULA)
De Mattos v. Gibson, 198 complexity of, 59–62
Davidson & Assoc. v. Jung, 226 as contracts, 65–71
De Sousa, Yannick Ferreira, 206 origins of, 62–65
Deceptive advertising. See False  length of, 59, 71
advertising as property transactions, 71–74
Diamond v. Diehr, 209 Engle, Mary Koelbel, 221
Dick, Philip K., 139 Equitable servitudes, 16
Digital audio tape (DAT), 130 Exhaustion
Digital downloads, 3, 35, 38–39, 42–43,  as an affirmative defense, 28–36
48, 53–54, 109 common law origins of, 24–28
Digital Era Copyright Enhancement  first sale doctrine, 25, 27–31, 40, 51, 
Act, 178 107, 157, 178–179
Digital Millennium Copyright Act  patent exhaustion, 156–168, 177–178 
(DMCA), 130–133, 137–140, 144,  (see Patents)
146, 148, 176–178 single recovery theory, 159
impact on research, 132–138 trademark exhaustion, 199
Digital Public Library of America, 117 Externalities, 8–9, 15, 21, 24, 171
Digital Rights Management (DRM), 4, 6, 
121–123, 128–132, 146–150 Facebook, 78, 95, 150
failure of, 123–128, 132–146 Fair use, 24, 105, 111, 112–113, 118, 
DiscoVision, 127 126, 143, 177, 179, 182–183
Disney, 9, 24, 30, 126–127, 197 Fairfield, Joshua A. T., 191, 199, 238, 
Doan v. Am. Book Co., 200 239
Doctorow, Cory, 134, 206, 220, 224–226 FairPlay DRM. See Apple
Douglas, Justice William O., 115 False advertising, 83–90, 97–98
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020244  Index
Farenthold, Blake, 178 Greenberg, Joshua M., 201
Farmers, 144–146, 163–164, 167 Greenwald, Glenn, 197
F.B.T. Prods. v. Aftermath Records, 209 Grimmelmann, James, 238
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Grossklags, Jens, 217
FTC Act, 87–90, 174–175 Grove Press v. Gerstein, 196
Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co.,  Gutenberg, Johannes, 36, 38, 203
199
Feldman, Lauren, 211 Hamlet, 59
Felten, Ed, 133, 135 HarperCollins, 109
Ferrari, 146, 148 Harrison v. Maynard, Merrill & Co.,  
Ferris v. Frohman, 203 200
Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. FTC,   HathiTrust, 117, 224
214 Hegel, Georg, 22
First sale doctrine. See Exhaustion HeinOnline, 86, 212
Fitbit, 4, 153, 231 Hesse, Thomas, 136
Fixation, 18, 37, 40 Higgins, Parker, 230
Ford Motor Company, 146–148, 235 Hoofnagle, Chris Jay, 214
Forward and delete technology, 186,  Houweling, Molly Shaffer Van, 198
188 Huang, Andrew “bunnie,” 227
Franklin, Benjamin, 95, 103 Hulu, 48–49
Free software, 71, 149 Humphrey, Watts S., 209
Free Software Foundation, 230 Hush-A-Phone Corp. v. United States, 
Freeman, Andrea, 211 227
French, Brian, 217
Fry, Richard, 234 IBM, 40, 62–63
Image Comics, 85–86, 212
GameStop, 31 In re Cliffdale Assocs., Inc., 214
Garage door openers, 137–143 Information costs, 7–10, 17–21, 74, 81, 
Gasser, Urs, 218–219 187–190
Gates, Bill, 124 Infringement, 12, 22, 27, 40, 45, 47, 50, 
General Motors (GM), 71, 146, 229 75, 97, 118, 123, 130, 155, 162, 164, 
General Talking Pictures v. Western  176–179, 183–185
Electric, 160 Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Gifts, 75, 94, 98, 180–181, 183 Engineers (IEEE), 186
GNU General Public License (GPL), 71 Intangible property. See Property
Goblin property, 17, 187 Intellectual property, 11–19, 24–26, 
Godwin, Mike, 125, 130 62–63, 71, 75, 111, 173
Good, Nathaniel, 217 Internet Archive, 117
Google, 61, 78, 95, 117–118, 140–141,  Internet of Things (IoT), 13, 135, 140–
151 141, 145, 150, 152, 157
Gordon, Wendy, 211 Interview, The, 9, 197
Grannis, Amanda, 217 Isbell, Jason, 51
Grassley, Chuck, 236 Iyengar, Sheena S., 211
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Index  245
Jailbreaking, 141–143 Lewis, Dana, 152
Jazz Photo Corp. v. International Trade  Lexmark
Commission, 164 Lexmark v. Impression Products, 155, 
Jeep. See Chrysler, 147 167, 177
Jefferson, Thomas, 19, 95, 199 Lexmark v. Static Control Compo-
Jobs, Steve, 133, 141, 143, 225 nents (SCC), 138, 213, 226, 232
Johansen, Jon, 131–133 Libraries
John Deere (Deere & Company), 144– dependence on ebook vendors, 108, 
146, 167 111, 115
John D. Park & Sons Co. v. Hartman,  restrictions on lending, 106–107
198 shift to digital collections, 108–111
John Wiley & Sons, 28–29, 78–79, 159,  Library Company of Philadelphia, 103
178, 200, 233 License. See End user license agreement 
Johnson & Johnson v. Smithkline Bee- (EULA)
cham Corp., 213 Licensed secondary markets, 63
Johnson v. M’Intosh, 239 Lichtenberg, Frank R., 233
Jonnes, Jill, 233 Liebesman, Yvette Joy, 199
Linux 131–132
Kahneman, Daniel, 206 Litman, Jessica, 235
Katz v. United States, 222 Liu, Katy K., 217
Katz, Ariel, 200, 234 Locke, John, 22, 199
Keeler v. Standard Folding-Bed Co., 157,  Lockout, 129
162 Los Angeles Philharmonic, 109
Kemmler, William, 158 Luke Records, Inc. v. Navarro, 197
Keurig, 4, 10, 149–150
Kidizoom, 151 Macbeth, 59, 71
Kim, Nancy S., 208 Made in the USA Found. v. Phillips 
Kindle. See Amazon Foods, Inc., 213
Kipling v. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 200 MAI v. Peak, 47
Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  Maisel, William H., 232
159, 178, 200, 233 Major League Baseball (MLB), 6
Konstan, Joseph, 217 Malarkey, Alex, 114
Korngold, Gerald, 198 Mallinckrodt v. Medipart, 160–162, 233
Market for lemons, 60
Lamont v. Postmaster Gen., 222 Market segmentation, 29,166
Lanham Act, 87–88, 212–213 Marotta-Wurgler, Florencia, 207, 215
Lardner, James, 201 Masnick, Mike, 207–208
Leahy, Patrick, 179, 236 Mattel. See Barbie
Leibrand, Scott, 152–153 McGraw-Hill, 29
Lemley, Mark, 67, 209 McNeilab, Inc. v. Am. Home Prods. 
lending, 96–100, 118, 170, 181–184,  Corp., 214
188, 191–193 MDY Indus. LLC v. Blizzard Entm’t, 
Lepper, Mark R., 211 Inc., 226
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020246  Index
MediaShop study, 90–101 Nintendo, 31
Medical devices, 141, 152–154 Nook. See Barnes & Noble
Meltzer, Kimberly, 211 Novartis Consumer Health, Inc. v. John-
Mercedes Benz, 146–147, 229 son & Johnson-Merck Consumer 
Merrill, Thomas W., 197, 233 Pharms. Co., 214
MGE UPS Sys. Inc. v. GE Consumer &  Nygaard, Linn, 2–3
Indus., 236
Microsoft O’Brien, David R., 218–219
MSN Music, 6 O’Reilly Media, 87
Xbox, 3, 10, 32, 94, 142 Obama, President Barack, 143, 228
Zune, 133 OverDrive, 86, 108–109, 118
Miles Med. Co. v. John D. Park & Sons  Ownership, distinguishing licenses from 
Co., 198 sales, 64, 74–81
Miller, Henry, 196 Oxford English Dictionary, 55
Miller, James C., 214
Moglen, Eben, 71, 210 P90X. See Beachbody
Mongan, D. T., 210 Pacemaker, 1, 140, 152–153
Monsanto 144, 163 Palfrey, John, 217–219
Bowman v. Monsanto, 163, 228 Pallante, Maria, 173, 235
Monsanto Canada Inc. v. Schmeiser,  Parfums Givenchy, Inc. v. C & C Beauty 
228 Sales, Inc., 237
Morewedge, Carey K., 206 Parton v. Prang, 203
Morrison, Heather, 201 Patents
Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal  international exhaustion, 164–165, 
Film Mfg. Co., 233 167–168
MSN Music. See Microsoft post-sale restrictions, 13, 156–157, 
Mulligan, Christina, 185, 198, 237 162–163, 167–168
Mulligan, Deirdre, 217, 226 self-replicating technologies, 163, 168
Munro, Alistair, 206 Pfizer, 166
Museums, 25–26, 73–74, 111, 117 Pharmaceuticals, 166
Phillips, Douglas E., 207
Napster, 32, 124 Phlips, Louis, 80, 211
Narayanan, Arvind, 238 Pigou, Arthur, 197
National Security Agency (NSA), 7, 116 Pirate Bay, The, 12, 50, 97, 198
National Telecommunication and In- Platt & Munk Co. v. Republic Graphics, 
formation Administration (NTIA),  Inc., 236
148, 238 PlayStation. See Sony
Nest, 140–141, 151 Pollio, Marie C., 217
Netflix, 5–6, 13, 21, 35, 48–51, 75, 81,  POM Wonderful, LLC. v. FTC, 214
98, 169, 172–173, Pope v. Curl, 203
New York Public Library (NYPL), 117 Pope, Alexander, 37
Newman, Chris, 210 Popken, Ben, 201
Newton, Isaac, 145, 228 Preemption, 176
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Index  247
Preservation, 9–10, 27, 42, 55, 105,  Rental, 16–17, 25, 30–33, 63, 74–75, 81, 
111–113, 135 84–85, 170, 180, 183
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 190 Repair, 1, 4, 6, 26, 103, 135, 139, 144–
Price discrimination, 5–6, 29, 67, 77–81,  148, 154, 157, 179
162, 166–167 Resale, 2–3, 6, 10, 17, 25–26, 40–43, 51, 
Price, Rob, 227 63, 75, 83, 85, 95–100, 103, 159–
Printers, 137–139, 155–156, 167 160, 183–184
Privacy, 7, 43, 104–105, 110, 114–117,  Resale Royalty Act, 187
151, 153, 170, 187, 192 Restraints on alienation. See Property
ProCD v. Zeidenberg, 67–68, 77, 209 Reverse engineering, 61, 72, 129, 131, 
Profit margins, 29, 94 138
Project Cicero, 118–119, 224 Revolv, 140–141
Property Reyes, Emily Alpert, 234
bundle of rights, 21–23, 83 Richards, Neil, 104, 218
intangible property, 44–45, 191 Right of First Refusal Agreement. See 
personal property, 2, 12–13, 15–27,  Ferrari
30, 32, 38, 44–45, 53, 74, 84, 97,  Right to Repair law, 147
103, 108, 121, 127, 138, 156, 189,  Riley v. California, 222, 226
192–193 Riva, Paolo, 231
real property, 15–16, 23 Roberts, Chief Justice John, 60, 140
restraints on alienation, 158–159 Robinson, Glen O., 198
servitudes on chattels, 16–17, 27 Rogers, Fred, 11, 126
Public goods, 19 Rootkit, 136–137, 226
Pushman v. New York Graphic Society,   Rose, Mark, 203
203 Rothchild, John A., 233
Rowling, J.K., 17, 187, 199
Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG   Rub, Guy A., 238
Electronics, Inc., 162–163, 178, 233 Russinovich, Mark, 136
Radin, Margaret Jane, 209 Sacchi, Simona, 231
Radiohead, 52 Sam Francis Foundation v. Christies, 
Rajec, Sarah R. Wasserman, 233 238
RAM copy doctrine, 46 Samsung, 17, 140, 151
Random House, 6, 86–87, 110 Samuelson, Pamela, 236
Reader Privacy Act, 117, 222 Sandler, Karen, 152
RealNetworks, 131, 134 Scholastic, 3
Harmony, 134 Schwartz, Barry, 211
Redbox, 7, 21 Secondary markets, 9, 12, 27, 50, 63, 80, 
ReDigi, 40–41, 185 111, 181, 184, 186–187
Reese, R. Anthony, 196, 219 Sega v. Accolade, 129, 225
Reidenberg, Joel R., 217 Serial Copy Management System 
Remote Storage Digital Video Recorder  (SCMS), 130
(RS-DVR), 47 Sharing economy, 169–171
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020248  Index
Shaver, Leah, 200 Taddy & Co. v. Sterious & Co., 198
Sheffner, Ben, 215 Tattered Cover, Inc. v. City of Thorn-
Shelley v. Kraemer, 198 ton, 222
Short notice, 90, 99–101, 174 Telebrands Corp. v. Media Grp., Inc., 
Sidhu, Dawinder S., 223 214
Silver-Greenberg, Jessica, 208, 229, 231 Tesla, Nikola, 158
Simpsons, The, 54, 206 Textbooks, 28–29, 166
Skyywalker Records, Inc. v. Navarro, 197 Thaw, David, 217
Sleepsense, 140 Theberge v. Galerie d’Art du Petit 
Smart cow problem, 125, 131, 133 Champlain Inc., 204
Smith v. Maryland, 222 Tiffany (NJ) Inc. v. eBay, Inc., 237
Smith, Henry E., 197, 233 Tom Kabinet, 184–185
Smith, Kevin, 109, 206, 220 Toyota, 17
Software ToyTalk, 150–151
backup copies, 61, 125, 129, Tractors, 144–146
licenses, 71 Trademarks, 18, 62, 83, 87, 189
ownership of copies, 63 Trademark Security System (TMSS),  
rental of, 31, 63–65 129
Song of the South, 9, 197 Transaction costs, 8, 69, 170, 183
Sony Trossen, David R., 207, 215
PlayStation, 3, 10, 48, 62, 94 Turow, Joseph, 211
Sony Corp. of Am. v. Universal City  Twain, Mark, 26
Studios, Inc., 126–127, 198, 202 Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. 
Sperb, Jason, 197 Aiken, 201
Spotify, 5, 13, 38, 48–53, 98, 169–172
State St. Bank and Trust Co. v. Signature  Uber, 169–171
Fin. Grp., Inc., 209 UMG Recordings v. Augusto, 75–76, 210
Stationers Company, 36 Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts 
Statute of Anne, 36 Directive, 175
Stephens v. Cady, 37, 203 Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), 
Storage Tech. Corp. v. Custom Hardware  74–75
Eng’g & Consulting, Inc., 236 United States v. Curtin, 223
Storia, 3 United States v. Jones, 222
Straus v. Victor Talking Mach. Co., 158,  United States v. Miller, 222
162 United States v. Rumley, 222
Streaming, 3, 5, 35, 46–54, 97, 117,   United States v. Wise, 204, 210
131, Universal City Studios v. Corley, 225
Striphas, Ted, 104, 218 Unlocking, 142–143
Subscription services, 3, 13, 31, 97,   Unlocking Consumer Choice and  
172 Wireless Competition Act, 143
growth of, 48–54 Unordered Merchandise Act, 210
Sweazey, Paul, 238 Urban, Jennifer M., 221
Swift, Taylor, 52–53, 205 UsedSoft GmbH v. Oracle, 237
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020Index  249
User innovation, 9–10, 27, 124, 132, 
135, 142, 145–146, 176
Valenti, Jack, 126, 128, 224
van Os, Marcel, 238
Vault v. Quaid, 129
VCR, 11, 32, 37, 125–128, 131
Vernor v. Autodesk, 76
Viacom Int’l, Inc. v. Youtube, Inc., 237
Video games, 25, 31
used market for, 31–32
Video Privacy Protection Act, 104
Vinyl records, 30, 38, 53–54, 93, 172, 
190
Volkswagen, 148
von Hippel, Eric, 145, 197, 225, 228
VTech, 151
Walmart, 6, 29, 31, 90, 196
Wearable technology, 4, 140
Webber, Mark, 235
Weinrib, Arnold S., 239
Westinghouse, George, 158
White-Smith v. Apollo, 47, 204
Wiens, Kyle, 145, 224, 228
William H. Morris Co. v. Group W, Inc., 
214
Wilson, Benjamin, 199
Winn, Jane K., 235
Worldwide Church of God v. Philadel-
phia Church of God, Inc., 113
Wu-Tang Clan, 74, 210
Wyden, Ron, 196
Xbox. See Microsoft
Yahoo, 6, 43
Yorke, Thom, 51
You Own Devices Act (YODA), 178
Zuckerman, Ethan, 145, 228
Zune. See Microsoft
Downloaded from https://direct.mit.edu/books/chapter-pdf/273335/9780262335959_cct.pdf
by guest Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573549
on 11 April 2020