First published in is 83 Tenn. L. Rev. 751 (2016).
LEADING NEW LAWYERS: LEADERSHIP AND 
LEGAL EDUCATION 
MICHAEL J. MADISON 
Lawyers  may  become  leaders,  but  leaders  also  may  become 
lawyers. The path to leadership can begin in law school. This short 
essay  describes  a  leadership  development  course  developed  and 
implemented at a law school over the last four years.  
 
I.  A STORY .....................................................................................7 51 
II.  TRANSFORMING .........................................................................7 53 
III.  GIVING .......................................................................................7 57 
IV.   RECEIVING .................................................................................7 65 
A.  The Classroom Experience .................................................. 765 
B.  Structural Choices ...............................................................7 66 
C.  Challenges and Barriers ..................................................... 767 
V.  BEGINNING AGAIN .....................................................................7 68 
I.  A STORY 
I  played  competitive  soccer  until  I  finished  high  school  and 
played in uniform off and on again until my mid-40s. I played on 
horrible teams and magnificent teams. I played for coaches who were 
tactical masters, experienced former professionals, veterans of soccer 
on  several  continents,  and,  occasionally,  complete  amateurs. 
Members of the first three groups taught me about soccer. A member 
of the last group was the best leader. That was Mark Speckman, my 
soccer coach during my junior year of high school. 
Mark Speckman was only about five years older than his players 
that year, and he was just starting his coaching career. He was a 
football coach—that is, he knew so-called “American-rules” football. 
He  knew  next  to  nothing  about  soccer.  In  fact,  he  likely  knew 
nothing at all about soccer. (He was hardly alone; in the mid-1970s, 
soccer was just finding its feet in suburban California, where I grew 
up.)  He  had  been  a  football  player  in  college,  earning  national 
recognition as a linebacker at Azusa Pacific University in the NAIA.1 
                                                                                                                 
 
       *  Professor  of  Law  and  Faculty  Director,  Innovation  Practice  Institute, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Email: 
michael.j.madison@gmail.com. Portions of this essay are adapted from material 
posted previously at madisonian.net, a blog. 
  1.  The National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics. 
 
751 752  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
He had a knack for intercepting the football. He was hanging around 
our high school, helping with the football team, when the regular 
soccer coach had to step aside unexpectedly. Mark Speckman was 
asked to take the reins of the soccer program for a year, and he 
agreed. 
Coach  Speckman  didn’t  teach  strategy,  tactics,  or  skills;  he 
couldn’t. Picture a non‐soccer playing linebacker, whose relatively 
simple job it had been to hit people–hard–to stop them from scoring, 
coaching a bunch of kids whose relatively complex job it was to put a 
round ball in the goal using any part of their bodies except their 
arms and hands. In part, he was smart and a quick study, and he 
put eleven men on the field in mostly the right places. But what I 
remember most is that at every practice and at every game, Coach 
Speckman was on fire. En fuego, as we said at the time. By virtue of 
his energy and enthusiasm for us and for the cause, by virtue of his 
own history and presence, and by virtue of his sheer relentlessness 
on both counts, Mark Speckman was a one‐man force of nature. One-
to‐one, in the group, whatever it took, Mark Speckman goaded us, 
cheered us, and validated us loudly and publicly whenever we made 
great plays and sometimes when we were merely OK but he and we 
all knew that better was there for the taking, with extra effort. He 
didn’t teach us what to do. He taught us what needed to be done. His 
was always the loudest, most positive, and most relentless voice on 
the sideline. Did I mention his relentlessness? 
I should mention at this point that Mark Speckman was born 
without hands. As a teenager, he gave up wearing prostheses. His 
different ability did not matter, to him or to us. Or, to put it another 
way, no hands for the coach; no hands for the players. Everyone was 
singing the same tune. 
I  honestly  don’t  remember  our  record,  though  the  team  did 
reasonably well. We were competing against schools that were five 
and  ten  times  our  size.  Occasionally  there  was  a  college  coach 
lurking here or there, looking for recruits, but to my knowledge, 
none  of  us  went  on  to  college  careers,  while  a  number  of  our 
opponents did. What I do remember, however, is that just about to a 
person, we would run through walls for Coach Speckman and for 
each  other.  I  played  on  better  and  more  successful  teams.  The 
following year, my club team won a state championship. But that 
year with Mark Speckman is the one that I remember most.2 
                                                                                                                 
 
  2.  After  one  year  of  soccer,  Mark  Speckman  returned  to  football  and 
eventually achieved recognition and success as the head football coach at Willamette 
University and as a motivational speaker. He has served as the running backs coach 
of the Montreal Alouettes of the Canadian Football League (CFL) and is currently 
the Offensive Coordinator of the football team at Lawrence University, in Wisconsin. 2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  753 
 
II.  TRANSFORMING 
I share that anecdote with my students. Not my law students in 
my law classes, but in a leadership course that I am developing at 
my law school and that is the subject of this essay. A growing chorus 
of  practitioners  and  scholars  calls  for  leadership  training  for 
lawyers.3 Relatively few people call for leaders to enter the legal 
profession.  Few  of  those  writers  move  beyond  talking  about 
leadership to training leaders. I’m trying to bridge that gap, not by 
theorizing  a  field  at  the  intersection  of  law  and  leadership,  but 
instead by helping to create that field in the classroom.4 I am not a 
                                                                                                                 
 
He recently published a memoir, titled—“Figure It Out: How I Learned to Live 
Without Digits in a Digital World.” MARK SPECKMAN & W. JASON NIEDERMEYER, 
FIGURE IT OUT: HOW I LEARNED TO LIVE WITHOUT DIGITS IN A DIGITAL WORLD (2d 
ed. 2015). Coach Speckman does not let up. 
  3.  Deborah Rhode, the leading voice among that group, notes: “Although 
leadership development is now a forty-five billion dollar industry, and an Amazon 
search reveals close to 88,000 leadership books in print, the topic is largely missing 
in legal education.” DEBORAH L. RHODE, LAWYERS AS LEADERS 1 (2013). Other 
notable works in the law/lawyers/leadership literature include: THOMAS C. GRELLA, 
LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP: ESSENTIAL SKILLS FOR LAWYERS (2013); SUSAN MCCARTY, 
LAW AND LEADERSHIP: INTEGRATING LEADERSHIP STUDIES INTO THE LAW SCHOOL 
CURRICULUM (Paula Monopoli & Susan McCarty eds. 2013); DEBORAH L. RHODE & 
AMANDA K. PACKEL, LEADERSHIP: LAW, POLICY, AND MANAGEMENT (2011); HERB 
RUBINSTEIN, LEADERSHIP FOR LAWYERS (2d ed. 2008); Neil W. Hamilton, Ethical 
Leadership in Professional Life, 6 U. ST. THOMAS L.J. 358 (2009); Ben W. Heineman, 
Jr., Lawyers as Leaders, 116 YALE L.J. POCKET PART 266 (2007); Deborah L. Rhode, 
Lawyers as Leaders, 2010 MICH. ST. L. REV. 413 (2010); Karen Cochran, Leadership 
and  Law:  An  In-House  Counsel’s  Perspective,  32  DEL.  LAW.  24  (2014).  Amid 
thousands  of  thoughtful  words  on  leadership,  almost  all  of  them  address  the 
importance of leadership in law, relevant theories of leadership, and appropriate 
ethical frameworks for discussing and pursuing leadership. Few of them are directed 
to producing or describing the “how-to” of leadership in legal education. One notable 
exception is Faith Rivers James, Engaging Law Students in Leadership, 31 ST. 
LOUIS U. PUB. L. REV. 409 (2011). 
  4.  That’s not to say that leadership programs in law schools are non-existent; 
they do exist. See, e.g., HOLLORAN CENTER FOR ETHICAL LEADERSHIP IN THE PROFS., 
http://www.stthomas.edu/hollorancenter/  (last  visited  Apr.  27,  2016)  (at  the 
University  of  St.  Thomas  School  of  Law);  INST.  FOR  PROF.  LEADERSHIP, 
http://law.utk.edu/centers/leadership/ (last visited Apr. 27, 2016) (at the University of 
Tennessee  College  of  Law);  PARRIS  INST.  FOR  PROF.  FORMATION, 
http://law.pepperdine.edu/parris-institute/default.htm (last visited Apr. 27, 2016) (at 
Pepperdine  University  School  of  Law);  PROGRAM  ON  L.  AND  LEADERSHIP, 
http://moritzlaw.osu.edu/pll/ (last visited Apr. 27, 2016) (at the Ohio State University 
Moritz College of Law); and THE LEADERSHIP PROGRAM, https://www.elon.edu/e/law/l
eadership/index.html (last visited Apr. 27, 2016) (at Elon University School of Law). 754  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
leadership researcher;5 I do not run a leadership center or program. 
But one need not commit to a life of leadership teaching in order to 
advance the state of leadership or the legal profession. One person, 
in one classroom, can make a difference. I’m a volunteer. Below, I 
describe what I do. 
Because  definitions  matter  from  time  to  time,  and  because 
theories and theorists of leadership abound, I note at the outset that, 
in my view, leadership is not about running things or about being in 
charge.  Leadership  is  about  vision,  voice,  and  change.  The  next 
section, which gets to the details of my course, explores those things 
in more detail. The key notions are these. There are lots of people 
running organizations in this world who are poor leaders or not 
leaders at all. People in charge may be great managers (or poor 
ones).  They  may  get  things  done.  But  getting  things  done,  or 
directing others to get things done, is not necessarily the exercise or 
the  product  of  leadership.  There  are  lots  of  people  who  are  not 
running organizations who are nonetheless great leaders. They may 
not have the power to get things done, but they can and do lead. 
They  shape  visions;  they  guide;  they  inspire.  Through  that 
combination, they change lives. They have a clear sense of their own 
agency in the world, using their voices and identities to help others 
realize  their  own  agency,  leading–eventually–to  life-changing 
impacts. This essay is not the place to unpack and explore all of 
those propositions. They emerge clearly and distinctly from much of 
the  rich  and  deep  leadership  literature  published  over  the  last 
several decades.6 I note them only to ensure that I situate what 
follows in a broader context that matters to me. 
By profession, I am a law professor and formerly a practicing 
lawyer,  and  this  brief  essay  about  leadership,  law,  and  legal 
                                                                                                                 
 
Elon  Law  also  hosts  the  fledgling  Journal  of  Leadership  and  the  Law, 
http://www.elon.edu/e-web/law/leadership_journal/default.xhtml (last visited Apr. 27, 
2016). 
  5.  My primary research fields are intellectual property law and knowledge 
commons.  See,  e.g.,  GOVERNING  KNOWLEDGE  COMMONS  (Brett  M.  Frischmann, 
Michael J. Madison & Katherine J. Strandburg eds., 2014). 
  6.  The field of leadership development has more than its fair share of jargon 
and sloganeering, and I don’t mind appropriating some of that. My emphasis on 
“voice” in leadership stems in part from the writings of the late Stephen Covey, 
author of THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE (1989). The eighth habit 
is “Find Your Voice and Inspire Others to Find Theirs.” See STEPHEN R. COVEY, THE 
8TH HABIT: FROM EFFECTIVENESS TO GREATNESS (2004). I find the slogan to be a 
helpful teaching tool, but I don’t need to borrow the entirety of Covey’s program. The 
reading list that follows in the text points to the portions of the relevant literature 
that I find most useful. 2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  755 
 
education has not yet touched meaningfully on the latter two topics. 
That’s primarily because in entering an emerging conversation about 
leadership and lawyers, I do not presume that there is anything 
unusual or distinctive or special about the challenges or impacts of 
leadership in the legal profession or law-related institutions.  
Many people start from a different presumption. Virtually all of 
the existing conversation about leadership in law uses distinctive 
attributes of lawyers and the legal profession as basic premises. The 
question to be answered by that conversation is why lawyers should 
study leadership, or why law firms need trained leadership. Lawyers 
first, leaders second, in short. That’s one useful way of framing the 
leadership and law question, because it is said that most lawyers do 
not think of themselves as potential leaders. Worse, most lawyers 
don’t think of themselves as needing leadership skills, or benefiting 
from them. Yet leadership matters to lawyers, law practice, and law 
firms.  The  initial  question  yields  useful  answers.  The  legal 
profession is a group of people with a set of shared values and goals, 
and  the  profession  and  its  subsidiary  groups  (also  with  shared 
values and goals) need leadership to get them where they want to go 
and to have the impacts that they want to have. 
Nonetheless, it is my ambition to move beyond that framework, 
to reverse the polarity of the leadership and law question, in order to 
ask  why  leaders  should  study  law,  or  should  become  lawyers, 
members of the legal profession, or, most broadly, members of what 
is  now  sometimes  called  the  legal  services  industry.  Why  not 
transform the very idea of the legal profession and the personal 
agency  that  it  embodies  and  represents?7  Why  not  leaders  first, 
lawyers second? My answer is this: If you want to transform the 
world and the lives of people within it–even if you only want to 
change your own world, in a very specific, micro-way–then law, law 
practice, and the legal profession offer rich sets of tools for doing just 
that.8 But law and the legal profession do not as such offer insights 
about leadership. One who chooses leadership may well also choose 
law, but need not. Yet why not? To borrow the old joke about the 
                                                                                                                 
 
  7.  It is mostly coincidental, but happily so, that conversations about the future 
of legal education and the legal profession have started to embrace questions of 
professional identity and identity formation. See generally WILLIAM M. SULLIVAN ET 
AL., EDUCATING LAWYERS: PREPARATION FOR THE PROFESSION OF LAW 126-61 (2007) 
(the so-called “Carnegie Report”) (describing the purposes and dimensions of legal 
education in forming professional identity and purpose). 
  8.  For more on this theme, see Stephanie A. Dangel & Michael J. Madison, 
Innovators, Esq.: Training the Next Generation of Lawyer Social Entrepreneurs, 83 
UMKC L. REV. 967 (2015) (describing a planned program for training new lawyers to 
lead social change through innovation and entrepreneurship). 756  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
origins of the Reese’s Peanut Butter Cup: One may look at this as 
getting the peanut butter of law mixed up with the chocolate of 
leadership.  Or  one  may  look  at  this  as  getting  the  chocolate  of 
leadership mixed up with the peanut butter of law. Either way, a 
tasty combination follows. The path to leadership may begin almost 
anywhere. It may certainly begin in law school. 
I  come  to  the  idea  of  transformation  and  transformative 
leadership via an unorthodox and very personal route. (Amid the 
many  strengths  of  the  new  law-and-leadership  literature  is  the 
weakness of its adherence to a very lawyerly de-personalization of 
the  material.  Again,  my  approach  differs.)  Twenty  years  after 
graduating from law school, with that time divided roughly equally 
between ten years of law practice and ten years of law teaching, I 
expressed in full the most deeply conventional ideas of my personal 
role within the legal profession. As a lawyer, I represented clients; I 
managed cases. Later, as a law professor, I taught my students; I 
wrote my scholarly articles. Beginning in 2006, however, what had 
been a relatively modest volunteer career participating in alumni 
activities at Yale, where I went to college, took a new turn. 
The alumni association at Yale has long done what most people 
think college alumni associations do. It helps local chapters and 
classes of graduates organize social events, some of which are linked, 
directly or indirectly, to fundraising activities. In 2006, however, 
new  professional  leadership  at  the  association9  challenged  its 
volunteer board of directors to imagine a different role, a new and 
non-traditional  role,  organized  around  volunteerism,  service,  and 
leadership.  The  board  wrote  a  strategic  plan;  volunteers  were 
recruited and trained; and small and later large service programs 
were developed and implemented. Those programs continue today. I 
was a member of that board from 2004 to 2014; from 2010 to 2012 I 
served as the chair of the board. In that role, among many other 
things, I helped organize, draft, and implement a strategic plan for 
Yale’s alumni association that was and is themed around service at 
local and global levels.10 That plan aims explicitly to share the ideas 
of alumni service, volunteerism, and leadership with other alumni 
associations and alumni networks around the world, in partnership 
                                                                                                                 
 
  9.  Here I mean leadership, not merely management. 
  10.  For more, see Strategic Plan, YALE ALUMNI ASS’N, http://www.aya.yale.edu/ 
content/strategic-plan (last visited Apr. 27, 2016) (providing .pdf versions of the 
inaugural 2008 Strategic Plan and the 2012 update). Leadership development is part 
of the Yale alumni program. See also Leadership Forums, YALE ALUMNI ASS’N, http:// 
www.aya.yale.edu/content/leadership-forums (last visited Apr. 27, 2016) (describing 
a leadership forum “to ensure that volunteers are effectively motivated, inspired, and 
equipped to lead alumni organizations at Yale”). 2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  757 
 
with other volunteer service organizations, some related to Yale in 
some  respect,  some  not.  I  was  trained  in  volunteer  leadership, 
practiced it, and helped to train others in it. 
My experience in that setting and in that role was transformative 
in exactly the sense that bears on how I think about leadership in 
general. I was transformed in my sense of agency and impact, in 
learning about my voice and the voices of others, and in the power of 
a shared vision to inspire and shape action. In no sense did that 
experience depend on or derive from my training as a lawyer or as a 
professor. But I wondered: What if I could introduce my students to 
those same ideas? 
III.  GIVING 
I wonder no longer. What follows is an outline of a five-week 
introductory leadership development course that I have offered to 
the students, staff, faculty, and alumni community at the University 
of Pittsburgh School of Law (“Pitt Law”) three times: first in early 
2014, and again in early 2015 and early 2016. I piloted a one-day, 
micro version of the course in 2012 and in 2013 as a service item 
that I donated to the annual fundraising auction, sponsored by the 
public interest student organization at Pitt Law. Each of those pilots 
involved five or six students spending the better part of a day at my 
house, with breakfast and lunch supplied by me, in an in-depth 
conversation about leadership and their lives.11 The feedback from 
those students was so overwhelmingly positive that I resolved to 
expand the program and offer it to the whole school. 
The outline requires some background. This was and is still not a 
Pitt  Law  course  or  program  or  formal  offering.  It  is  an 
extracurricular activity, offered on a volunteer basis by me. I get no 
compensation from anyone, and I get no “credit” from the law school 
for the hours served. I teach a package of four classroom courses at 
Pitt Law (13 credit hours) directed primarily to intellectual property 
law.  Attendees  at  the  leadership  course  are  likewise  volunteers. 
Current students get no course credit or transcript recognition. I 
offer  a  certificate  of  completion  acknowledging  that  they  have 
completed the program, but that’s no more than a relatively minor 
merit badge. Participants who are not current students (current law 
school faculty members and staff members have participated, along 
                                                                                                                 
 
  11.  I  wrote  about  the  first  pilot  workshop  at  Leadership  for  Lawyers, 
MADISONIAN.NET (Mar. 6, 2012), http://madisonian.net/2012/03/06/leadership-for-law 
yers-2/. 758  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
with  graduates  of  the  law  school)  get  whatever  life  and  career 
lessons they wish to take away.  
At Pitt Law, I am the Faculty Director of a program called the 
Innovation Practice Institute (IPI), which coordinates relationships 
with community-based organizations and academic units elsewhere 
at Pitt and at Carnegie Mellon University in which we “embed” 
volunteer law students. Law students get a preliminary sense of 
what it is like to work alongside their non-lawyer peers, including 
budding  entrepreneurs  and  innovators  of  various  sorts.  The 
professional development skill set needed to thrive in “innovation 
law”  environments  (which  is  to  say,  today,  just  about  all  legal 
profession environments today) includes many of the skills to which 
a  leadership  course  introduces  students,  so  I  have  branded  my 
leadership course the “IPI Leadership Forum” and publicly aligned 
leadership development with the broader goals of the IPI. But there 
is nothing obligatory about that relationship. The IPI would thrive 
without the leadership component, and the Leadership Forum would 
be useful to law students even in the absence of the IPI. 
The course runs for ten hours of meeting time, broken up into 
five two-hour segments, with meetings held one evening per week for 
five consecutive weeks. I have scheduled the course in February, 
largely because not much happens in February in Pittsburgh, and I 
have been able to arrange to be physically present in Pittsburgh on 
five  consecutive  Tuesday  evenings.12  I  advertise  the  program  in 
advance to the entire law school community, welcoming anyone who 
wishes  to  attend  but  requiring  an  advance  commitment  that 
attendees  will  be  present  at  all  class  sessions.  I  also  distribute 
information about homework and course readings (in part to signal 
that the course requires doing some real work, and in part to signal 
that the work involves some modest expense). It’s possible, I am 
sure, to devise an arrangement that would allow meeting the goals 
of  the  course  via  Skype  or  other  virtual  or  online  course 
environment, but I much prefer engagement face to face.  
For  the  first  version  of  the  course,  in  2014,  I  distributed 
information  about  the  course  to  the  law  school  community  and 
learned that it had “leaked” to recent graduates. For the second 
version,  I  posted  invitations  online  where  I  expected  recent 
graduates would learn about the course, and then the invitation 
“leaked” to less recent graduates. None of this was truly a surprise, 
                                                                                                                 
 
  12.  Any schedule inevitably makes the course more accessible to some people 
and less accessible to others. The number of participants that I report is net of some 
prospective participants telling me that the evening meetings conflict with family or 
work obligations, and others telling me that they can attend some but not all of the 
sessions. 2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  759 
 
nor was it unwelcome. Both classes were comprised of current JD 
students (including both first-year and upper-level students), LLM 
students, non-professional degree students, law school staff, and law 
school graduates (some more recent, some less so). Before 2016, no 
full-time faculty members participated, though I received notes from 
a couple of colleagues praising my initiative. The first two versions 
each entailed a group of roughly ten people in addition to me; the 
2016  edition  comprised  fifteen  people  in  total,  and  some  of  the 
attendees  were  “word  of  mouth”  recruits,  having  talked  to  prior 
years’ participants rather than responding to my marketing. It is 
possible, of course, to conduct the course with a larger group or a 
smaller one. 
With  that  as  a  background  and  context,  the  following 
summarizes  the  class-by-class  design  and  content  of  the  IPI 
Leadership Forum. The summary is presented in a form that can be 
excerpted from this essay and distributed “as is,” on a standalone 
basis.   760  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
LEADERSHIP FORUM OUTLINE 
Michael J. Madison – University of Pittsburgh School of Law 
VISION 
This is a course in how to be an effective leader, rather than 
a course about leadership. 
 
I define leadership, as others have done, in broad terms: 
Finding your own voice and inspiring others to find theirs. 
Leadership  for  my  purposes  operates  at  a  high,  almost 
metaphorical level. My focus is on helping students and new 
lawyers identify and build confidence in their capabilities as 
professionals and as individuals. I also want to push students 
to see themselves in social context. Leadership development 
is not only about them; it is also about how they affect others. 
In a profession increasingly dominated by ominous signs of 
institutional  change  and  challenges  to  traditional  careers, 
new law school graduates need tools for authoring their own 
lives and careers and for understanding the impacts that 
they have on their colleagues and communities. 
 
A course on leadership is intended eventually to become part 
of a suite of short courses that supplement classroom-based 
and clinical legal education with training in skills and visions 
sometimes associated with management education (training 
in  business  planning  and  strategic  planning,  teamwork, 
project management, finance and accounting, technology use, 
and  marketing)  but  also  more  broadly  associated  with 
successful professional engagement with the broader world. 
GOALS 
A short course in leadership (five weeks, at one session per 
week) can only introduce students to ideas of leadership and 
can  only  begin  to  draw  students  into  reflection  and 
engagement  about  their  own  histories,  capabilities,  and 
trajectories. By the end of the Leadership Forum, students 
should have developed an enhanced, more optimistic sense of 
their capabilities to build and guide their own careers and 
lives amid the challenges of shifting marketing and changing 
professional expectations and norms. 
BACKGROUND 
In addition to serving as Faculty Director of the IPI, since 
2006 I have been a leader in the alumni community at Yale 
University, where the global ambitions of the University’s 2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  761 
 
alumni community have focused on volunteer leadership and 
service. I have participated in leadership training at Yale as 
both volunteer and leader, and I put those leadership lessons 
to use as chair of the alumni association from 2010 to 2012. I 
received both alumni association and university awards for 
leadership  and  service.  The  vision  and  format  of  the  IPI 
Leadership Forum are inspired by the vision and format in 
use at Yale. 
OVERVIEW OF THE COURSE 
READINGS  
(students are expected to read the entirety of each book) 
(ordered alpha by first author) 
 
ORI BRAFMAN & ROD A. BECKSTROM, THE STARFISH AND THE 
SPIDER:  THE  UNSTOPPABLE  POWER  OF  LEADERLESS 
ORGANIZATIONS (2006) 
 
DAVID  R.  CARUSO  &  PETER  SALOVEY,  THE  EMOTIONALLY 
INTELLIGENT MANAGER: HOW TO DEVELOP AND USE THE FOUR 
KEY EMOTIONAL SKILLS OF LEADERSHIP (2004) 
 
JIM COLLINS, GOOD TO GREAT: WHY SOME COMPANIES MAKE 
THE LEAP . . . AND OTHERS DON’T (2001) 
 
FRANCES HESSELBEIN, MY LIFE IN LEADERSHIP: THE JOURNEY 
AND LESSONS LEARNED ALONG THE WAY (2011) 
 
THOMAS A. KOLDITZ, IN EXTREMIS LEADERSHIP: LEADING AS 
IF YOUR LIFE DEPENDED ON IT (2007) 
CLASS-BY-CLASS SUMMARY 
Class 1 
 
Reading:  DAVID  R.  CARUSO  &  PETER  SALOVEY,  THE 
EMOTIONALLY INTELLIGENT MANAGER: HOW TO DEVELOP AND 
USE  THE  FOUR  KEY  EMOTIONAL  SKILLS  OF  LEADERSHIP 
(2004). 
 
In-class  material:  Video  excerpts  from  TWELVE  O’CLOCK 
HIGH (20th Century Fox 1949) (this is a “classic” leadership 
film, widely used in management courses) (focus on the scene 
in which the new commander takes charge of the bomber 
wing); video consisting of Celebrate What’s Right with the 
World (Star Thrower 2001), produced by Dewitt Jones. 
 762  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
Discussion prompts: What is leadership? What has been your 
own journey to leadership? Why are you here? Where do you 
see barriers in your journey? Where do you see opportunities? 
 
Intended  outcome:  Students  should  begin  to  engage  in 
critical – but not negative – self-reflection, and to start to 
gain confidence that they can share their stories, or some of 
them, in a trusted, open setting. Step one is helping students 
to find their own voices, and suggesting to them that they 
can use their voices, along with others, to forge visions for 
themselves and groups and organizations of which they are a 
part. 
 
Class 2 
 
Reading: FRANCES HESSELBEIN, MY LIFE IN LEADERSHIP: THE 
JOURNEY AND LESSONS LEARNED ALONG THE WAY (2011). 
 
In-class material: Video excerpts from BUTCH CASSIDY AND 
THE SUNDANCE KID (20th Century Fox 1969) (focus on the 
knife fight at the Hole-in-the-Wall). 
 
Discussion prompts: (i) Who inspires you? Who do you want 
to inspire? Why? (ii) Deconstruct the BUTCH CASSIDY clip 
using emotional intelligence tools from CARUSO & SALOVEY. 
 
Intended outcome: Students should begin to be aware of their 
own voice, values, and vision, as those relate to personal 
skills (awareness of self) and interpersonal skills (awareness 
of  others).  The  emotional  intelligence  lesson  is  that  this 
bundle of skills can be systematized, just as other kinds of 
knowledge and information can be systematized. Students 
learn  to  be  conscious  and  aware  of  their  emotions,  their 
sources, their normalcy, their power, and the emotions of 
others, and how those are key skills in negotiating situations 
to enhance and advance voice and vision. 
 
Class 3 
 
Reading:  THOMAS  A.  KOLDITZ,  IN  EXTREMIS  LEADERSHIP: 
LEADING AS IF YOUR LIFE DEPENDED ON IT (2007). 
 
In-class  material:  Video  excerpts  from  INSIDE  OUT  (Pixar 
Animation Studios 2015) (focus on the penultimate scenes 
with Joy and Sadness).13  
                                                                                                                 
 
  13.  Earlier versions of the Leadership Forum relied on excerpts from THE 
DEVIL WEARS PRADA (20th Century Fox 2006) (focus on the “cerulean blue” belt 2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  763 
 
 
Discussion prompts: (i) Reflect on Frances Hesselbein and 
her journey. What impressed you about her life story? What 
puzzled  you?  What  discouraged  you?  (ii)  Describe  an 
opportunity to lead. Why is it an opportunity? What needs to 
be done? 
 
Intended outcome: Students should begin to understand the 
elements associated with shaping or building a vision, for 
themselves  and  for  and  with  others.  What  does  “vision” 
mean? What is a vision? How do you find and/or build a 
vision? How do you figure out who you are? What are your 
values (what do you believe in)? How do you figure out who 
others  are?  How  do  you  translate  that  into  outcomes? 
Students should begin to see the range of things in play, from 
questions  of  hierarchy,  collaboration,  power,  ethics, 
vulnerability, and demeanor (at the more abstract end) to 
questions of project management, tasks, roles, responsibility, 
and accountability (at the more concrete end), among other 
things. 
 
Class 4 
 
Reading:  JIM  COLLINS,  GOOD  TO  GREAT:  WHY  SOME 
COMPANIES MAKE THE LEAP . . . AND OTHERS DON’T (2001). 
 
In-class  material:  Video  excerpts  from  ANIMAL  HOUSE 
(Universal Pictures 1978) (focus on the scene that features 
the immortal line, “Was it over when the Germans bombed 
Pearl Harbor?”). 
 
Discussion  prompts:  Share  reactions  to  the  Kolditz  book. 
What would Frances Hesselbein make of Kolditz? Describe a 
situation (in your own experience) where power and ethics 
issues could have been handled better; describe a situation 
where they were handled well. In each case, why? Discuss 
the ANIMAL HOUSE clip using Kolditz’s scheme. 
 
Intended outcome: Students should understand the need to 
manage change, the dimensions of risk, and the dynamics of 
groups.  These  combine  technical  competence  (knowledge, 
preparation,  judgment,  and  the  importance  of  combining 
inspiration and personal investment) and normative values 
(ethical issues and power dynamics). 
   
                                                                                                                 
 
scene and its aftermath). 764  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
 
Class 5 
 
Reading: ORI BRAFMAN & ROD A. BECKSTROM, THE STARFISH 
AND THE SPIDER: THE UNSTOPPABLE POWER OF LEADERLESS 
ORGANIZATIONS (2006). 
 
In-class material: Video clips from LEGALLY BLONDE (MGM 
2001)  (focus  on  the  bend-and-snap  scene);  DEAD  POETS 
SOCIETY (Touchstone Pictures 1989) (focus on the “tear it 
out” scene). Discuss the LEGALLY BLONDE clip or the DEAD 
POETS SOCIETY clip using any of the tools and frameworks 
introduced in the course. 
 
Discussion prompts: What do you do next? How do you keep 
the questions and lessons from this course alive in your own 
lives and experiences? 
 
Intended  outcome:  Students  should  take  away  the  joint 
questions of accountability and legacy. How does the vision 
outlast  you?  Who  is  responsible?  Film  clips  are  fun  and 
useful prompts for classroom discussion and debate, but in 
the real world (as, occasionally, in film), actions and words 
have consequences, and leadership includes being aware of 
what  those  are  and  what  those  might  be  and  of  how  to 
integrate that knowledge into one’s behavior.   2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  765 
 
IV.   RECEIVING 
As  many  people  would  anticipate,  the  content  of  each  class 
meeting is heavily improvised by me, even given the reading and 
video frameworks that I bring in. I spend a lot of time reflecting on 
what is working well and what is working poorly, both overall and in 
each class session, and adapting both as I go and as I update the 
course from year to year. What I have learned, I reflect back, below. 
A.  The Classroom Experience 
The in-person class sessions are heavily personal. I work hard to 
create a space in which every participant feels comfortable sharing 
stories  and  experiences  from  her  or  his  own  life.  Those  may  be 
grounded in work experiences, educational experiences, volunteer or 
faith-based experiences, and even in family experiences. It is usually 
the case that just about everyone in the room has stories about 
themselves that connect in some way to the leadership themes that I 
want to focus on. I’ve talked to many law students who self-report 
that they are not leaders or have no leadership experience. When I 
draw out some of their life experiences, that almost always turns out 
not to be true. Sometimes they have positive experiences to share; 
sometimes they have negative or hurtful experiences. Both matter. 
Both are welcome. 
To create that safe conversational environment, I need to do my 
own storytelling, and I do. That’s both to model the kind of sharing 
that helps the group learn and also to demonstrate a species of the 
vulnerability that binds the entire group together and eventually 
gives  the  course  as  a  whole  the  sort  of  emotional  and  practical 
impact that I try to achieve. That vulnerability can be signaled in all 
sorts of ways. In my regular classes, I am “Professor Madison” to my 
students; in the Leadership Forum, I am “Mike” or “Michael.” I talk 
about  Coach  Speckman.  I  talk  at  times  about  some  of  my  own 
leadership misses and failures. 
One otherwise obvious leadership topic that is largely absent 
from the conversation is appreciating and understanding the lives 
and choices of celebrated leaders through history. I both hypothesize 
and find in practice that people will come to find and understand 
their  own  leadership  identities  more  readily  through  their  own 
experiences and through the experiences of those similar to them 
and  in  close  proximity  to  them,  rather  than  by  studying  others’ 
experiences. 766  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
B.  Structural Choices 
In designing the course, I consciously reach out to the entire law 
school  community.  Participants  come  from  a  variety  of 
backgrounds—age, gender, life experience, professional status—and 
that  diversity  seems  to  breathe  useful  life  into  the  classroom 
conversation.  
I believe that the voluntary character of the course is important 
to its impact. Likewise, its relative brevity (five weeks in all) helps. 
The course is relatively intensive and at times emotionally intense. 
It would be difficult to sustain either characteristic over a longer 
period of time or with a roomful of people who were required to 
participate.  
Despite its voluntary and personal character, the course needs 
some rigor, and I supply that by requiring that participants complete 
one book per week.14 The books are sequenced so that each one 
builds  loosely  on  its  predecessors  (readers  who  are  leadership 
studies insiders will recognize some of the personal and professional 
links among the authors). But the Leadership Forum is not a book 
club; we talk about the books and their authors in class sessions to 
the extent that the reading offers context for more personal stories. 
Film clips are different. I use film clips for typical or standard 
reasons. Visuals engage students in different ways. Visuals offer 
different sorts of emotional resonance, and visuals offer different 
sorts of focal points for discussion and analysis. The tradeoff with 
film clips is that any choice of film or scene (as with any choice of 
written text) simultaneously includes and excludes in all sorts of 
ways. I believe that the benefits outweigh the costs for the film 
choices that I have made, but I am continuously alert to the fact that 
I might improve the course by using different examples.15 
I sequence the readings and the classroom conversations with a 
specific linearity in mind. I want participants to begin by focusing on 
themselves—their  goals,  interests,  values,  voices,  and 
opportunities—and  progressively  to  expand  their  range  to  see 
                                                                                                                 
 
  14.  I choose books that are available as inexpensive used books. The Barco Law 
Library at Pitt Law generously agreed to purchase a set of the books and hold them 
on course reserve for the benefit of participants who choose not to purchase their own 
copies. 
  15.  I talk about my choices with participants and solicit suggestions from them 
regarding additional or different clips to use. I prefer film to television, largely 
because the story arc of a film often lends itself to extracting scenes that are the 
right length for class discussion (television scenes often depend on context that is 
less accessible) and partly because I’m a film buff and not a TV buff. I play the film 
clips from authorized DVD copies of the relevant movies. 2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  767 
 
connections with and impacts on others. They start with a degree of 
self-directedness  and  close  with  a  degree  of  other-directedness. 
Readings  about  organizational  dynamics  appear  at  the  end,  for 
example. Readings that are more personal and memoirist appear at 
the start. Still, the line between the two is never neat, and the best 
outcome  would  involve  students  seeing  explicit  linkages  and 
reciprocal relationships between them. 
Introducing  participants  first  to  concepts  clustered  in  the 
emotional intelligence domain is both a signal and a substantive 
move intended to distance participants from the conventionality of 
readings in primary and secondary “legal” sources. I want to prompt 
students to reflect over the duration of the course on unanticipated 
links between our leadership conversations and what they otherwise 
might imagine to be their purpose in studying law. To be clear, as I 
am eventually in the leadership course, my implicit claim here is 
that the skills and capabilities that one develops in the context of 
leadership training are quite valuable, even critical, in domains that 
have little nominally to do with leadership. A law student or lawyer 
who begins to develop a broader and deeper sense of personal agency 
may put that sense to use in many different ways. 
C.  Challenges and Barriers 
Regarding  the  values  embedded  in  my  stylistic  and 
organizational choices, few choices are ever tension-free or final. 
For example, can (and should) anyone participate in this sort of 
program?  Can  anyone  be  a  leader?  Can  leadership  be  taught?  I 
believe that the answer to the first question is yes, and I believe that 
this answer moots the second question. I believe that anyone may 
derive something valuable for him or herself by participating in this 
program. It doesn’t matter to me whether that value manifests in 
the  near  term  or  in  the  longer term,  whether  it  manifests  in  a 
visible,  run-an-organization  way  or  in  a  law  practice  context,  or 
whether participants self-identify as “leaders” now or later.16  
Questions of gender, class, race, ethnicity, sexuality, age, and 
power, both individual and collective, permeate the course to greater 
and lesser degrees, as they do leadership itself. As facilitator of the 
conversations and organizer of the materials, I have to be respectful 
and careful to ensure that all people and topics are as welcome as I 
can  make  them.  Inevitably  and,  I  believe,  productively, 
                                                                                                                 
 
  16.  Some people do not agree. For a brief introduction to the proposition that 
leadership instruction is neither conceptually nor practically coherent, see Duff 
McDonald, Can You Learn to Lead?, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 7, 2015), http://www.nytimes.c
om/2015/04/12/education/edlife/12edl-12leadership.html. 768  TENNESSEE LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 83:751 
 
conversations  and  participation  get  fraught.  I’ve  been  through 
different versions of the program’s predecessors myself several times 
both  as  participant  and  as  facilitator,  so  like  any  teacher  I  can 
anticipate some challenging moments–but never all of them. And my 
handling  of  delicate  moments  is  inevitably  imprecise.  No  two 
participants will experience the course in the same way or take away 
all of the same lessons for themselves.  
In five weeks and ten hours of face-to-face meetings, I can only 
initiate conversations and push and pull participants gently along a 
pathway that leads in lots of different directions. I don’t sugar-coat 
the future; leadership isn’t easy. At the same time, I want to make 
leadership accessible, because even taking potentially problematic 
personal histories into account, leadership is not categorically off-
limits to anyone, least of all to people who find themselves studying 
law or having graduated from law school. Anecdotally, the feedback 
that I receive says this: People who came to law school thinking that 
they are there primarily to learn the law come away enhanced, even 
inspired, by the sense that they have not only the abstract power to 
change the world but also some preliminary skills that will help 
them to do it. People who came to law school intending to change the 
world (and who may be disappointed by the conventional focus of 
legal education on analytic skills) are restored in their faith that 
they are in the right place after all. 
To borrow one of the key themes from the course itself: There are 
few obstacles that cannot be seen instead as opportunities. Part of 
leadership is a relentless faith in the possible. 
V.  BEGINNING AGAIN 
What will the future bring? For me, I plan to continue to offer 
the course more or less as described above. I am always looking for 
ways to extend it and build complements, whether inside the law 
school  or  beyond  it.  New  audiences?  New  partnerships?  Added 
modules to focus on complementary skills and capabilities, which my 
introduction  to  the  course  design  hints  at?  Extensions  of  this 
foundation  into  modules  framed  in  terms  of  legal  education’s 
emerging emphasis on experiential learning? I’ve had expressions of 
interest in each of these things from students who have participated 
in the course, from alumni of our law school and from faculty at 
other schools at my university.  
For  participants  in  the  course,  I  emphasize  that  they  have 
acquired not merely an initial acquaintance with leadership concepts 
and an awakening of leadership capabilities in themselves, but also 
the power to share their knowledge and capabilities with others. I 
begin the training of a generation of leaders as lawyers, and in the 
best  of  worlds  that  group  puts  their  capabilities  into  motion, 2016]  LEADING NEW LAWYERS  769 
 
inspiring and enacting productive change and beginning the process 
of training yet more generations of leaders in law and elsewhere.  
The Leadership Forum itself is only one example of this principle 
at work. I put my leadership ideas into practice at my law school not 
only via the Forum but also via my guidance of two of our law 
journals  (the  University  of  Pittsburgh  Law  Review  and  the 
Pittsburgh Journal of Technology Law & Policy). My relationship 
with  the  journals’  editors-in-chief  is  based  explicitly  on  the 
leadership model that I describe above, with an emphasis on each 
student leader’s taking that model and running with it in executing 
each journal’s mission. I want participants in the Leadership Forum 
to pay it forward similarly, in their own experience. The certificate of 
completion  that  I  distribute  to  them  does  not  just  mark  their 
accomplishment.  It  characterizes  them  as  “Leadership 
Ambassadors.”  
Will that characterization pay off? I hope so, but I don’t know. In 
addition to thinking about extensions of and enhancements to the 
Leadership Forum, I continue to consider how to assess its impact, 
both in the short term and in the long run. 
I  didn’t  consciously  think  about  Mark  Speckman,  my  soccer 
coach, for almost thirty years after I finished my season with him. 
Beginning  nearly  a  decade  ago,  my  Yale  alumni  experience  re-
awakened  those  dormant  memories.  Drawing  clear  and  direct 
connections among my high school athletic experiences, my alumni 
leadership experiences, and my legal profession experiences would 
be a mistake. Life for me, as for many people, has been too variable 
and unpredictable, and context and culture have been too different 
in too many places and at too many different times, for me to say 
that  leadership  has  always  been  a  top  priority  and  an  effective 
personal strategy. What strikes me instead is the consistency of the 
themes and practices that inspired and moved cultures forward in 
my  different  experiences—things  that  changed  lives—when 
changing a culture was both desirable and deemed to be possible. 
Perhaps I am writing this essay for precisely that reason, because I 
envision how leadership development can and perhaps should be a 
part  of  the  professional  development  of  law  students—all  law 
students. Law students, no less than any other cohort of emerging 
professionals, should be given the opportunity to learn about the full 
range of their capabilities as people, not only as lawyers. They can 
lead.  Law can be one of their tools, or one of their vehicles. 
Am I right? Time will tell. I am, of course, open to all ideas and 
suggestions. 
   