Why Are Generic 
Introduction
Most new drugs are protected by pharmaceutical pat-
ents, which give the patent holder exclusive control 
Drugs Being Held 
over that drug’s supply for 20 years. When the patent 
term expires, the drug becomes available for generic 
Up in Transit?  production by any company. The resulting competi-
tion typically leads to dramatic reductions in price. In 
Brazil, generic drugs are on average 40% cheaper than 
Intellectual 
reference or brand-name drugs.1 In the United States, 
the Federal Drug Administration reports up to 85% 
price differences.2 Consumers in India have witnessed 
Property Rights, 
more than 100-fold price reduction for antiretrovi-
ral (ARV) drugs due to generic production.3 Gener-
International  ics thus play a key role in broadening access to health 
care, mostly by driving costs down, both in the devel-
oping and developed world. 
Trade, and the 
Yet access to generic medicines often depends on a 
country’s ability to import them. Widely known as “the 
pharmacy of the developing world,”4 India exports 
Right to Health 
67% of its drugs production to developing countries 
that either cannot produce any drugs or whose local 
in Brazil and  production is not enough to meet local needs. India 
and China are also the world’s main suppliers of active 
ingredients — the raw material for drug production 
Beyond
— that support the generic drug industries of several 
other countries, including Brazil. As will be shown 
below, even for large countries with a strong and 
established generic industry, importation channels are 
Mônica Steffen Guise Rosina and 
essential to making these drugs available. This makes 
Lea Shaver the supply of generic drugs vulnerable to new “border 
measures” restricting the transshipment of such drugs 
through some European countries. 
Between 2008 and 2009, Dutch authorities con-
fiscated several shipments of generic drugs bound for 
various developing countries in South America and 
Africa.5 Most of the drugs were produced in India, 
and were seized on suspicion of patent and trademark 
infringement. The shipments contained generic ver-
sions of drugs originally developed by large pharma-
ceutical companies, such as Pfizer and Novartis, who 
still held patent rights in the European Union.6 These 
drugs were not protected by patent in India, however, 
nor in any of the destination countries for which they 
were bound. After they were seized, some of the ship-
ments were destroyed, some were returned to India, 
and a few were eventually allowed to continue on to 
their destinations.7 
Mônica Steffen Guise Rosina, Ph.D., is a Professor at 
Fundação Getulio Vargas School of Law in São Paulo and an 
expert in the fields of intellectual property and international 
trade law. Lea Shaver, J.D., is an Associate Professor at the 
Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law, and 
an expert in human rights and intellectual property law.
pharmaceutical firms and the right to health • summer 2012  197SYMPOSIUM
Negotiations over at least two new international  ment of pharmaceutical patents will effectively allow 
treaties have sought to expand this practice by man- European countries of transit to set higher standards 
dating border enforcement of intellectual property  for protection than the destination countries would 
protections.8 As a growing number of countries con- have chosen for themselves. 
sider such measures, pharmaceutical exporters have  This article explores these legal and ethical tensions 
a new problem on their hands. Small producers, in  through the particular experience of Brazil. A coun-
particular, may be unable to sustain the financial and  try of great income inequality, Brazil has succeeded 
legal risks of having their shipments seized. Drug costs  in making drugs broadly available largely because of 
may also rise as exporters turn to less efficient shipping  generic availability. Yet this supply is now at risk due 
International human rights law remains quite unsure of how to handle the 
tension between pharmaceutical patents and access to medicines. There is  
no legal consensus as to whether health should come before patents,  
or vice versa, or where the appropriate balance between the two legal regimes 
lies. The reigning compromise has been to permit each country substantial 
flexibility and autonomy in striking the right balance within its own territory. 
Yet is precisely this compromise that is challenged by the new trend toward 
intellectual property enforcement at transit points. If allowed to stand,  
border enforcement of pharmaceutical patents will effectively allow  
European countries of transit to set higher standards for protection than  
the destination countries would have chosen for themselves. 
routes in order to minimize border risks. As a result,  to the political vulnerability of European importation 
access to essential medicines will be diminished across  channels, through the new trend of “border enforce-
the developing world.  ment” of intellectual property. This phenomenon 
From a human rights perspective, this new threat to  requires new scrutiny of the relationship between 
public health poses unique challenges. International  intellectual property, international trade, and the 
human rights law traditionally imagines human rights  human right to health. The article first demonstrates 
violations in a primarily national paradigm: each gov- the vulnerability of the Brazilian public health system 
ernment is responsible for respecting and protecting  to disruptions of international trade in pharmaceu-
rights within its own territory. In the case of generic  tical compounds. It then explores how international 
drug seizures in foreign ports, however, human rights  legal institutions might address the unique human 
are being threatened by the actions of a foreign gov- rights dimensions of this particular trade dispute.
ernment. The traditional mechanisms and institutions 
of state accountability may therefore be inadequate to  Drug Production in Brazil
address this uniquely transnational harm.  Brazil has garnered worldwide recognition for its pub-
In  addition,  international  human  rights  law  lic health system.9 Based on the 1988 constitutional 
remains quite unsure of how to handle the tension  recognition of health as a fundamental right, the Bra-
between pharmaceutical patents and access to medi- zilian Public Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde 
cines. There is no legal consensus as to whether health  - SUS) offers comprehensive medical coverage to Bra-
should come before patents, or vice versa, or where  zil’s 190 million citizens.10 The publicly funded system 
the appropriate balance between the two legal regimes  provides universal access to medical services as well as 
lies. The reigning compromise has been to permit  most drugs needed for treatment, at no charge to the 
each country substantial flexibility and autonomy in  patient. Therefore, the use of similar and generic drugs 
striking the right balance within its own territory. Yet  has long been essential to the Ministry of Health’s 
is precisely this compromise that is challenged by the  strategy of access to medicines, both through impor-
new trend toward intellectual property enforcement  tation and local production. A brief look at certain 
at transit points. If allowed to stand, border enforce- aspects of the Brazilian dynamics of access to health, 
198  journal of law, medicine & ethicsRosina and Shaver
intellectual property rights, and pharmaceutical pro- The studies of Gadelha, Quental and Fialho15 and 
duction may help the reader see the bigger picture.  Radaelli et al.16 show that since the 1970s the private 
From 1971 to 1996, Brazil did not offer patent pro- Brazilian pharmaceutical sector as a whole has been 
tection for chemical-pharmaceutical products and  dominated by multinational companies: even though 
processes. In practice, this meant that branded drugs  in numbers they represent only 20% of the pharma-
could be copied and sold domestically by any com- ceutical companies in Brazil, they hold 80% of the 
pany. Until the late 1990s, two types of drugs were  total market share. One notable feature of the trans-
available in the Brazilian market: branded and simi- national drug companies installed in Brazil, however, 
lar.11 However, several significant legal and policy  is the fact that they do not conduct local R&D activi-
changes impacted Brazil’s drug industry in the late  ties; their local actions consist mainly of finalizing, 
1990s. When the World Trade Organization (WTO)  packing, and distributing medicines.17 
was established, patent protection for pharmaceutical  National companies also invest very little in inno-
products became mandatory under the Agreement on  vation. When looking at the Brazilian pharmaceuti-
Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights  cal sector, Gadelha, Quental and Fialho18 observe 
(TRIPS). This significantly limited similar producers’  that national technological development is minimal, 
scope of drug production, as patent rights now made  restricted to a very small number of companies and 
it illegal for them to copy the drugs that were released  public laboratories. Capanema and Palmeira Filho19 
from there on.  reach a similar conclusion: there is hardly any local 
Credibility was another major problem similar drugs  production of new drugs and very little investment 
faced. In a successful attempt to address this issue  in R&D. Looking at the local production of new drug 
(among others), in 1999, Brazil’s Law n. 9.787 (The  technology in Brazil, Rosina20 finds there has been 
Generic Statute) defined new rules for generic pro- little change over the past years: national investments 
duction, which helped assure the population that high  in R&D — when they exist — are mainly focused on 
quality-low cost medicines were available on the mar- the drug-making process, not on the development of 
ket. Unlike similar drugs, generics are entirely inter- new or improved medicines. This makes the national 
changeable with reference drugs, the bioequivalence  pharmaceutical industry as a whole heavily limited to 
process being supervised by The Brazilian National  branded drugs whose patents have already expired. 
Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de  The Brazilian generics drug industry is thus heavily 
Vigilância Sanitária - ANVISA). A strong governmen- dependent on the importation of innovations from 
tal campaign launched in 1999 promoting the safety  abroad, making the topic of intellectual property regu-
and efficacy of generic drugs was the final trigger to a  lation a crucial one. 
successful launch. On top of that, strong incentives to  The Brazilian generics market is also dependent 
the local generic industry were channeled through the  on importation of a more concrete nature. Studies 
Brazilian Bank for Social and Economic Development  report that over 80% of active pharmaceutical ingre-
(Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e  dients used in the local production of generic drugs 
Social - BNDES).12 From 2000 on, generics slowly but  are imported.21 And in some instances, local generic 
steadily started to gain space and force in the Brazilian  production has not been able to meet public health 
drug market. needs, thus requiring the importation of fully manu-
Transnational  pharmaceutical  companies  also  factured medicines. Research conducted by Antunes 
started producing generic drugs in Brazil, as they  and Canongia22 confirms this scenario, identifying the 
quickly identified the growing market potential. Most  main drugs and active ingredients on which the coun-
generic drug production, however, is still done by  try is most heavily dependent.
public laboratories and private national companies.  The case of Efavirenz is emblematic in this sense. In 
National pharmaceutical companies have specialized  May 2007, the Brazilian government issued a compul-
in producing generic versions of branded drugs, sup- sory license,23 which allowed for the production and 
plying over 80% of all generics sold in the Brazilian  sales of the drug in the country. It was not until the end 
market,13 while public laboratories play a key role in  of 2009, however, that local production started.24 For 
providing these drugs to the public health system. In  over a year and a half, access to this crucial HIV treat-
2010, Farmanguinhos claimed credit for the supply of  ment depended on the importation of a generic ver-
over 1 billion medicines,14 which reached the popula- sion from India. As Gadelha and Maldonado25 point 
tion at no cost through the public health system. Bra- out, this strong and growing dependency on imports 
zil thus has a uniquely strong generics industry today.  means that national social policies are increasingly 
This industry, however, also has points of vulnerability. vulnerable, to an extent that might actually put the 
population’s well-being at serious risk. 
pharmaceutical firms and the right to health • summer 2012  199SYMPOSIUM
Thus, when it comes to drug production, Brazil cer- All WTO members are now required to extend pat-
tainly does not stand on its own two feet, both on the  ent protection to pharmaceutical products and pro-
innovative and generic fronts. Historically and cur- cesses. Nonetheless, the situation may often arise that 
rently, little is invested in the R&D process that might  a particular drug under patent in one country is not 
lead to new drugs. And generics production, free from  under patent in another.31 Some countries, including 
patent protection, remains dependent on either active  India, chose not to retroactively extend patent protec-
ingredients or pharmaceuticals that are not locally  tion to drugs already on the market when the TRIPs 
available, but rather imported. International trade is  changes took effect.32 Countries also retain flexibil-
thus truly at the heart of the Brazilian public health  ity as to many aspects of pharmaceutical protection, 
system. Increasingly, this diagnosis is cause for con- including precise legal standards for reviewing pat-
When it comes to drug production, Brazil certainly does not stand on its own 
two feet, both on the innovative and generic fronts. Historically and currently, 
little is invested in the R&D process that might lead to new drugs. And generics 
production, free from patent protection, remains dependent on either active 
ingredients or pharmaceuticals that are not locally available, but rather imported. 
International trade is thus truly at the heart of the Brazilian public health system.
cern. When these channels are threatened, the pub- ent applications, as well as the ability to issue com-
lic health system faces critical shortages of important  pulsory licenses. Finally, patents may also be granted 
drugs. An inability to rely on generic drugs would also  erroneously, due to administrative error or unclear 
challenge the financial sustainability of the public  legal standards. In such cases, an issued patent may 
health system over the longer term.26  be challenged and invalidated in a particular domes-
tic jurisdiction, but perhaps not in every jurisdiction 
New Threats to Trade in Generic Drugs for reasons of economy or strategy. Thus, although the 
European Community Regulation No 1383/2003  broad principles of pharmaceutical patent protection 
authorizes border enforcement of intellectual prop- are consistent internationally, it may often be the case 
erty rights in the European Union (EU), empowering  that a particular product may be under patent within 
customs agents to seize goods where there is suspected  the European Union, but off patent elsewhere. The 
infringement of intellectual property rights. The ratio- effect of border enforcement is to take away this abil-
nale behind such action lies in the so-called “manu- ity of non-EU countries to trade in products that EU 
facturing fiction,” according to which drugs passing  countries would consider infringing.
through customs are treated as if they were manufac- There have been several incidents of drug seizures 
tured in and/or bound for the European country where  pursuant to EC regulation 1383/2003, but two in par-
they are found, instead of merely in transit. If in this  ticular have garnered global media attention. The first 
country the particular product is under patent, then  was a shipment of generic AIDS medicines produced 
the goods are treated as infringing. Initially designed  in India and on its way to Nigeria. The drugs were pur-
for copyright infringement only,27 the European Union  chased by UNITAID,33 and were not patent protected 
regulation now extends to trademarks, patents, and  in either India or Nigeria. As it passed through an air-
other intellectual property rights,28 thus giving customs  port in Amsterdam in 2009, the shipment was confis-
agents the ability to inspect, detain, and seize goods  cated by Dutch authorities on suspicion of trademark 
that arrive at any EU port of entry, even if they are only  infringement.34 
passing through en route to a non-EU destination. This  The second incident involved a large shipment 
temporary detainment gives the patent rights holder  from India to Brazil of the hypertension drug losar-
a chance to verify infringement, and in some cases  tan potassium. Dutch authorities seized the 500-kilo-
threaten the alleged infringer with destruction of the  gram shipment in December 2008 and after a 36-day 
shipment.29 In most cases, the process has led to the  delay it was sent back to India.35 Hypertension is one 
return of the drugs to their country of origin.30  of the main causes of death in Brazil, affecting over 
Patent protection has been internationally harmo- 10 million people in the country.36 The free distribu-
nized to a significant degree by the TRIPs Agreement.  tion of hypertension drugs — among which is losartan 
200  journal of law, medicine & ethicsRosina and Shaver
— through SUS is, thus, an essential part of its public  generic drugs would be subject to seizure on grounds 
health policy.  of trademark and trade-dress infringement.41 
India claims that between 2008 and 2009 at least  Following the same trend, the Trans-Pacific Part-
19 consignments of generic drugs were seized by cus- nership (TPP) is under current negotiations between 
tom authorities in The Netherlands, “16 of which orig- New Zealand, Chile, Singapore, Brunei, the United 
inated in India.”37  States, Australia, Peru, Vietnam, and Malaysia. Like 
Given the substantial stakes, countries benefitting  ACTA’s, the negotiations of this treaty have been kept 
from international trade in generic medicines are  secret. The draft text leaked earlier this year by Knowl-
seeking to challenge this new practice. In 2009, both  edge Ecology International42 revealed that the agree-
India and Brazil argued before the Council for TRIPS  ment contains specific provisions regarding border 
that the Dutch seizures violated the TRIPS agree- measures that mirror the EU Regulation discussed 
ment. And in 2010, the same countries38 requested  above.43 These provisions would turn seizures of in-
These more recent international negotiations show that current instances  
of pharmaceutical patent enforcement against goods in transit point  
toward a broader future trend. Treaties such as these constrain national 
discretion and set a new standard of “minimum” intellectual property 
protection. Given the geographical location of all countries involved,  
they also pose new risks to legitimate global trade in generic medicines.  
It thus becomes increasingly important to confront the negative  
implications of this practice for the human right to health.
consultations before the WTO’s Dispute Settlement  transit merchandise into a standard action between 
Body, alleging the repeated seizures of generic drugs  TPP Member States, as long as there is any alleged 
by European Union customs to be inconsistent with  intellectual property infringement.44 
GATT39 and TRIPS40 free trade provisions. Asserting  These more recent international negotiations show 
substantial trade and public health interests in both  that current instances of pharmaceutical patent 
consultations, the following countries have officially  enforcement against goods in transit point toward a 
requested to join the discussions: Turkey, China,  broader future trend. Treaties such as these constrain 
Japan, Ecuador, and Canada. There is no way of pre- national discretion and set a new standard of “mini-
dicting what the outcome of both disputes will be like,  mum” intellectual property protection. Given the geo-
but the fact that proceedings were actually initiated  graphical location of all countries involved, they also 
before the WTO is a strong indicator that countries  pose new risks to legitimate global trade in generic 
that rely on generics in order to promote and protect  medicines. It thus becomes increasingly important to 
the right to health are willing to take the necessary  confront the negative implications of this practice for 
steps to make sure such trade channels remain free.  the human right to health.
Unfortunately, the Dutch efforts to enforce EC 
border measures are no isolated instance, but part  International Trade and the Human Right of 
of a broader trend extending well beyond Europe. A  Access to Medicines
recently finalized international agreement further  The issue at stake before the WTO in the complaints 
regulates intellectual property rights at the borders.  lodged by India and Brazil is whether EU’s border 
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) is  measures are against free trade rules and principles, 
a plurilateral treaty between Australia, Canada, the  as this is the scope of the WTO’s regulation and assess-
E.U., Japan, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Singa- ment. Viewed solely in these terms, border enforce-
pore, South Korea, Switzerland, and the United States.  ment of intellectual property laws is of questionable 
While ACTA does not directly address patent infringe- legality.45 An underlying issue, however, is the extent 
ment of generic drugs in transit, commentators believe  to which human rights considerations should inform 
that certain provisions do threaten the practice, and  international regulation on freedom of trade. Can the 
could eventually impede global access to medicines, as  WTO recognize the significant threat to the human 
pharmaceutical firms and the right to health • summer 2012  201SYMPOSIUM
right to health posed by border patent enforcement,  In theory, the WTO could take notice of the interna-
as grounding an international legal obligation in its  tionally recognized right to health as a relevant factor 
own right? Or must the WTO proceed as if essential  in interpreting whether border enforcement of pat-
drugs were any other commodity, such as steel or cot- ents violates international trade agreements. In prac-
ton? Answering this question requires some nuance. tice, however, such a synthesis seems unlikely. The 
In theory, international trade obligations and  WTO is simply institutionally ill equipped to interpret 
international human rights obligations are of equal  and apply human rights concepts; its jurisdiction is 
standing in the law, neither definitively trumping the  restricted to the enforcement of trade agreements and 
other.46 In practice, however, the two legal regimes are  its experts are trained and experienced in trade law, 
deeply incommensurate. International trade law has  not human rights analysis.49 
fundamentally pragmatic bases. On the level of prin- Additionally, the international legal status of the 
ciple it is committed to open trade, but this principle  human right to health is less clear than many other 
is subject to pervasive exceptions largely slanted in  human rights. The right to health is recognized in the 
favor of the industrialized countries. The WTO system  Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Inter-
stops short of requiring truly free trade in agricultural  national Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
commodities, and not only permits but mandates  Rights (ICESCR), but many countries, including the 
restrictions on trade designed to shore up intellectual  United States, are not parties to the latter convention. 
property protection. Because the substance of inter- The European Convention on Human Rights does not 
national trade law is determined through a deeply  recognize a right to health. The Charter of Fundamen-
political process, its enforcement stage is relatively  tal Freedoms of the European Union contains a health 
less complicated. Effective international institutions  provision that is significantly more modest compared 
exist to secure compliance with its terms and breaches  to the ICESCR. Interpreting the human right to health 
of the rules are relatively rare. Human rights law, in  in the context of any specific dispute also involves 
contrast, is fundamentally concerned with the dignity  significant conceptual challenges.50 These legal and 
of the individual. When interests conflict, this regime  political complexities make it all the more likely that 
generally seeks its solutions through principled inter- the WTO will choose not to directly address the right 
pretation, rather than through political bargaining.  to health.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the international institutions  India and Brazil are not obligated, however, to con-
for human rights enforcement are relatively weak.  fine their complaints to the international trade system. 
The trade and human rights realms have encoun- Arguments from human rights would find a warmer 
tered each other previously; the creation of the World  reception in the international institutions specifically 
Trade Organization was broadly criticized as under- created to consider these issues, such as the United 
mining labor rights. The WTO’s IP provisions have  Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural 
also been contested by advocates of the right to health,  Rights or one of the regional human rights systems. 
who correctly identified the regime’s pursuit of global  Such venues offer powerful opportunities to publicize 
patent standards as a threat to access to medicines,  the human rights concerns raised by border enforce-
particularly in the developing world.47 Many aspects  ment of pharmaceutical patents. There are, however, 
of the WTO’s patent rules represent compromises that  challenges and limits to this approach. These human 
may be understood as grudging accommodations of  rights institutions are invested with dramatically less 
public health demands. The WTO system does not,  power than the trade institutions. For India and Brazil, 
however, treat access to medicines as a human right.  a victory at the WTO will mean a change in European 
Promotion of health is considered as a domestic policy  practice or at least, some form of compensation for 
aim, rather than as an international legal obligation.  India and Brazil. A victory in a human rights forum, in 
Within WTO procedures, moreover, human rights  contrast, might not lead to a change in on-the-ground 
claims do not provide a justification for failure to com- circumstances because of the weaker enforcement 
ply with trade rules. Arguments for human rights may  mechanisms of these institutions.
only be used to help interpret ambiguous trade rules.48 Additionally, human rights law dominantly con-
The dispute over border enforcement presents a  ceives of state responsibility in strongly territorial 
new and different angle. As India and Brazil present  terms. It accounts for the possibility that the right 
the argument, the interests of free trade and of human  to health of Brazilian citizens would be violated by 
rights in this instance are aligned: the European regu- actions of the Brazilian government. It has largely not 
lation aims to protect domestic companies from for- struggled with the possibility that the right to health 
eign competition through an interference in freedom  of Brazilian citizens would be violated by actions of 
of trade, which also happens to threaten public health.  European governments. The structures of human 
202  journal of law, medicine & ethicsRosina and Shaver
rights accountability are simply not designed to han- Because South Africa has a constitutional framework 
dle such external threats. Brazilian citizens harmed by  favorable to the right to health, public health advo-
interruption of their access to essential medicines may  cates were able to use domestic litigation to pub-
certainly appeal to the Brazilian court system or to the  licly highlight the impact of TRIPS rules on human 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Nei- rights. This transnational legal strategy ultimately 
ther of these institutions, however, has any authority  led to concessions in trade rules later negotiated at 
to order a change in behavior on the part of European  the WTO.54 Similarly, public health advocates today 
regulators.  should not rely solely on proceedings at the WTO to 
An appeal to the European Court of Human Rights  challenge border enforcement of pharmaceutical pat-
stands a better chance of yielding an enforceable deci- ents. Proceedings in domestic and international fora 
sion, in light of that institution’s jurisdiction over  that are more receptive to claims based on the right to 
the relevant actors. Politically, however, this regime  health can help to politically frame the human impact 
is beholden to European interests. This includes  of border enforcement. Even if these institutions lack 
The newest challenge is border enforcement of European patents against 
pharmaceutical compounds in transshipment from India to other developing 
countries. This practice rests on dubious legal grounds, and is being 
challenged through the WTO dispute resolution process. Bringing a human 
rights perspective to bear on the issue, however, will require innovative 
advocacy beyond the confines of the World Trade Organization.
Europe’s increasing embrace of intellectual property  the power to require European countries to abandon 
protection as itself a human right.51 For instance, the  border enforcement, pronouncements condemning 
2000 Charter of Fundamental Rights of the Euro- the practice as a violation of human rights would have 
pean Union provides that “Intellectual property shall  significant symbolic value. In this way, parallel pro-
be protected,” without acknowledging the tension  ceedings in human rights institutions, can ultimately 
between such protection and the enjoyment of other  put greater public pressure on European countries 
human rights.52 The construction of patent protection  not to engage in tactics that threaten health, and 
in human rights terms is deeply questionable from a  influence the outcome in the WTO dispute resolution 
doctrinal standpoint.53 Yet it poses a new hurdle for  process.
needy patients who would seek to challenge European 
measures against generic drugs in European courts. Conclusion
These dilemmas point to a need for new work in  Long hailed as a model for the developing world, Bra-
international law to address the problems posed by  zil’s public health system is under increasing financial 
situations in which the realization and enjoyment of  pressure as new patent rules restrict its ability to use 
human rights is fundamentally dependent on free- generic medicines. The newest challenge is border 
dom of international trade. Apart from the situation  enforcement of European patents against pharmaceu-
of access to medicines, topics such as food security  tical compounds in transshipment from India to other 
and freedom of communication may also raise these  developing countries. This practice rests on dubious 
issues. The seizure of generic drugs in transit through  legal grounds, and is being challenged through the 
Europe may thus be a test case that gauges the abil- WTO dispute resolution process. Bringing a human 
ity of international human rights advocates and insti- rights perspective to bear on the issue, however, will 
tutions to effectively respond to this unique form of  require innovative advocacy beyond the confines of 
threat to human rights.  the World Trade Organization. More broadly, border 
In confronting the immediate problem of border  seizures of generic drugs also point to the need for new 
enforcement of pharmaceutical patents, the best  work in international law addressing the problems 
chance of success will come from strategic use of  faced where enjoyment of human rights depends on 
multiple legal fora. The case of South African litiga- freedom of trade.
tion surrounding generic production of antiretrovi-
ral medicines in 2001 can be particularly instructive. 
pharmaceutical firms and the right to health • summer 2012  203SYMPOSIUM
15.  C. A. Gadelha, C. Quental, and B. C. Fialho, “Saúde e inovação: 
References
uma abordagem sistêmica das indústrias da saúde,” Cadernos 
1.  C  . Quental et al., “Medicamentos genéricos no Brasil: impac-
de Saúde Pública 19, no. 1 (2003): 47-59, available at <http://
tos das políticas públicas sobre a indústria nacional,” Ciência e 
www.scielosp.org/pdf/csp/v19n1/14904.pdf> (last visited Jan 
saúde coletiva 13 (2008): 619-628, at 621. 
12, 2010) (translation: Health and innovation: a systemic 
2.   Federal Drug Administration, “Facts and Myths about Generic 
approach to the health industries). For similar data, see V. 
Drugs,” 2011, available at <http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/
Radaelli, C. Andrade, and J. Furtado, Trajectory of Develop-
ResourcesForYou/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely/
ment Based Innovation: The Pharmaceutical Sector in Bra-
UnderstandingGenericDrugs/ucm167991.htm> (last visited 
zilian Industrial Policy, 2011, available at <www.merit.unu.
May 21, 2012). 
edu/MEIDE/papers/2009/1236001150_VR.pdf> (last visited 
3.  C  . Park and A. Jayadev, “Access to Medicines in India: A 
March 10, 2011); and L. Hasenclever, Diagnóstico da indústria 
Review of Recent Concerns,” in R. Subramanian and L. Shaver, 
farmacêutica brasileira (Brasília: United Nations Economic, 
eds., Access to Knowledge in India: New Research on Intellec-
Social, and Cultural Organization/Rio de Janeiro: Universi-
tual Property, Innovation and Development (London: Blooms-
dade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 2002) (translation: Diagnosis 
bury Academic, 2011): at 78.
of the Brazilian pharmaceutical industry). 
4.  M  SF 2007; T. Bazzle, “Pharmacy of the Developing World: 
16.  Id. (Radaelli et al.) at 34.
Reconciling Intellectual Property Rights in India with the 
17.  S ee Quental, Gadelha and Fialho, supra note 15.
Right to Health: TRIPS, India’s Patent System and Essential 
18.  Id., at 52.
Medicines,” Georgetown Journal of Intenational Law 42, no. 3 
19.  L. X. L. Capanema and P. L. Palmeira Filho, “A cadeia 
(2011): 785-815, at 785; id. (Park and Jayadev), at 78.
farmacêutica e a política industrial: uma proposta de inserção 
5.   In all of these cases authorities seized the shipments in accor-
do BNDES,” BNDES Setorial, 19, (2004): 23-48, available at 
dance with the European Community’s Council Regulation No 
<http://www.bndes.govol.br/SiteBNDES/export/sites/default/
1383/2003.
bndes_pt/Galerias/Arquivos/conhecimento/bnset/set1902.
6.  S . Xavier, Border Measures Concerning Goods Allegedly 
pdf> (last visited July 15, 2010) (translation: The pharmaceu-
Infringing Intellectual Property Rights: The Seizures of Generic 
tical chain and industrial policy, a BNDES proposal): at 36. 
Medicines in Transit, Working Paper, International Centre for 
20.  M. S. G. Rosina, A regulamentação internacional das patentes 
Trade and Sustainable Development, 2009, at 01.
e sua contribuição para o processo de desenvolvimento do Bra-
7.  W  orld Trade Organization, European Union and a Member 
sil: análise da produção nacional de novos conhecimentos no 
State – Seizure of Generic, Drugs in Transit, DS408, 2010, 
setor farmacêutico, Tese (Doutorado em Direito Internacional 
available at <http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/
e Comparado) – Faculdade de Direito, Universidade de São 
cases_e/ds408_e.htm> (last visited May 21, 2012); see also 
Paulo, São Paulo, 2011, at 203-210. 
World Trade Organization, European Union and a Member 
21. S ee Cunha et al., supra note 13, at 10; E. A. Oliveira and J. 
State – Seizure of Generic Drugs in Transit, DS409, 2010, 
Bermudez, “A produção pública de medicamentos no Brasil: 
available at <http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/
uma visão geral,” Cadernos de Saúde Pública 22, no. 1 (2006): 
cases_e/ds409_e.htm> (last visited May 21, 2012).
2379-2389 (translation: Public drug production in Brazil: a 
8.  T  he treaties are known as the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade 
general overiew): at 2381.
Agreement (ACTA) and the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). 
22. A  . M. De Souza Antunes and C. Canongia, “Prospecção tec-
The details of these negotiations are discussed later in this 
nológica da indústria farmacêutica nacional: fármacos e medi-
article.
camentos da RENAME com potencial de inovação,” in P. M. 
9.   For more detailed information on the dynamics of the Brazil-
Buss, J. da Rocha Carvalheiro, and C. P. Romero (Org.) Casas, 
ian public health system, see M. S. Guise, D. W. L. Wang, and 
Medicamentos no Brasil: inovação e acesso (Rio de Janeiro: 
T. C. de CAMPOS, “Access to Medicines: Pharmaceutical Pat-
Ed. Fio Cruz, 2008): 145-165, at 149-155. 
ents and the Right to Health,” in L. Shaver, Access to Knowl-
23.  The issuance of this compulsory license was based on national 
edge in Brazil: New Research on Intellectual Property, Innova-
public health concerns. At the time, Efavirenz alone took took 
tion and Development (London: Bloomsbury, 2010).
up a large share of the Ministry of Health’s total budget. For 
10. I nstituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística, “Censo 2010,” 
further details, see Guise et al., supra note 9.
2011, available at <http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/> (last vis-
24. A  t the time, the Ministry of Health alleged lack of techno-
ited May 21, 2012).
logical capacity for immediate local production. The drug is 
11.  U  nlike the generic drugs sold in Brazil today, similar drugs 
currently produced in Brazil through a partnership between 
were not required to provide proof of bioequivalence. Today, 
public laboratories and a few private generic companies.
the pharmaceutical market in Brazil is comprised of reference, 
25.  C. A. Grabois Gadelha and J. M. S. de V. Maldonado, “O papel 
similar and generic drugs. 
da inovação na indústria farmacêutica: uma janela de opor-
12. T wo main programs were aimed at assisting the generics 
tunidade no âmbito do complexo industrial da saúde,” in Buss 
pharmaceutical industry: (1) support for production and reg-
et al., supra note 22, at 41-59, 43. 
istration of medicines; and (2) support for the importation of 
26.  See Guise et al., supra note 9. 
equipments. National companies were the ones who mostly 
27.  S. P. Kumar, “Border enforcement of intellectual property rights 
benefited from BNDES’ finance lines. Medley, EMS Sigma 
against in transit generic pharmaceuticals: an analysis of char-
Pharma, and Eurofarma e Biosintética are examples of com-
acter and consistency,” European Intellectual Property Review 
panies that made full usage of such programs, renovating their 
and SSRN Research Paper 2009, at 9, available at <http://
plants and enhancing technical capacity (see Quental et al., 
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1383067>.
supra note 1, at 621).
28.  Art.135, Council Regulation n. 450/2008.
13.  A. M. Cunha et al., Relatório de acompanhamento setorial: 
29. S ee Kumar, supra note 27, at 05.
complexo da saúde - indústria farmacêutica, Vol. I. ABDI and 
30. S ee Xavier, supra note 6, at 02.
UNICAMP 2008, (translation: Sectoral monitoring report: 
31. F . M. Abbott, “Seizure of Generic Pharmaceuticals in Tran-
health complex – pharmaceutical industry): at 14. 
sit Based on Allegations of Patent Infringement: A Threat to 
14. F armanguinhos, Ministério da Saúde e Fundação Oswaldo 
International Trade, Development and Public Welfare,” World 
Cruz, “Mais de 1 bilhão de medicamentos por ano para a 
Intellectual Property Organization Journal 1, no. 1 (2009): 
população brasileira,” 2011, available at  <http://www2.far.
43-50. 
fiocruz.br/farmanguinhos/> (last visited May 21, 2012) (trans-
32. T  his was not the case for Brazil. See Guise et al., supra note 9, 
lation: More than 1 billion drugs per year for the Brazilian 
for further information on pipeline protection.
population).
33.  UNITAID is an international drug purchasing facility that 
provides medicine and treatment against HIV/AIDS, malaria, 
204  journal of law, medicine & ethicsRosina and Shaver
and tuberculosis for the poorest people of developing countries  a sharply worded public statement criticizing the proposal as 
who otherwise could not afford them. It is hosted and admin- ‘a threat to numerous public interests,’ including to freedom 
istered by the World Health Organization (WHO). For further  on the internet, basic civil liberties including privacy and free 
information, see <http://www.unitaid.eu/> (last visited May  expression, free trade in generic medicines, and to the policy 
21, 2012). balances between protection and acces that lie at heart of all 
34.  H. G. Ruse-Khan, Trade Agreement Creating Barriers to Inter- intellectual property doctrines.
national Trade? ACTA Border Measures and Goods in Transit,  42. K  nowledge Ecology International, available at <http://keion-
Max Planck Institute for Intellectual Property, Competition &  line.org/node/1091> (last visited May 21, 2012).
Tax Law, Research Paper Series n. 10-10, 2011, at 06. 43. D  rug-safety testing data is another issue regulated by the 
35.  See WTO, DS408, supra note 7.  agreement that would hinder access to generics worldwide.
36. M  inistério da Saúde, Nota informativa: subsídios do Minis- 44. A  rt. 14.4 Each Party shall provide ex officio border measures 
tério da Saúde frente ao tema e às apreensões holandesas de  with respect to imported, exported, or in-transit merchandise, 
medicamentos genéricos, Mimeo, 2010.  or merchandise in free trade zones, that is suspected of being 
37.  See WTO DS408, supra note 7.  counterfeit or confusingly similar trademark goods, or pirated 
38.  WT/DS408/1, May 19, 2010; WT/DS/409/1, May 19, 2010. copyright goods.
39.  GATT art. 5 (2): “There shall be freedom of transit through the  45. S ee Abbott, supra note 31. 
territory of each contracting party, via the routes most conve- 46. L  . R. Helfer and A. Graeme, Human Rights and Intellectual 
nient for international transit, for traffic in transit to or from  Property: Mapping the Global Interface (Cambridge: Cam-
the territory of other contracting parties.” bridge University Press, 2011).
40.  TRIPS Preamble: “Members, desiring to reduce distortions and  47. S . K. Sell, “TRIPS and the Access to Medicines Campaign,” 
impediments to international trade, and taking into account the  Wisconsin International Law Journal 20, no. 20 (2002): 
need to promote effective and adequate protection of intellectual  418-522.  
property rights, and to ensure that measures and procedures to  48.  G. Marceau, “WTO Dispute Settlement and Human Rights, ” 
enforce intellectual property rights do not themselves become  European Journal of International Law 13, no. 13 (2002): 753-
barriers to legitimate trade”; and art. 41: “These procedures  814; H. Hestermeyer, Human Rights and the WTO: The Case of 
[enforcement of intellectual property rights] shall be applied in  Patents and Access to Medicines, Oxford, 2007.
such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate  49.  Id. (Hestermeyer).
trade and to provide for safeguards against their abuse.”   50. M  . Langford, ed., Social Rights Jurisprudence: Emerging 
41. S ee Ruse-Khan, supra note 34, and B. K., ACTA: Risk of Third  Trends in International and Comparative Law, 2009. 
Party Enforcement for Access to Medicines, Program on Infor- 51.  L. R. Helfer, “The New Innovation Frontier? Intellectual Prop-
mation, Justice and Intellectual Property. Research paper n.  erty and the European Court of Human Rights,” Harvard 
1, American University Washington College of Law, 2010; S.  International Law Journal 49, no. 1 (2008): 1-52. 
Flynn, ACTA’s Constitutional Problem: The Treaty That Is Not  52.  Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union,  
a Treaty (Or an Executive Agreement), PIJIP Research Paper  December 7, 2000, Official Journal of the European Com-
no. 19., American University Washington College of Law,  munities, December 18, 2000 (2000/C 364/01), available at 
Washington, D.C., 2011, at 10, reports that:  <http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/3ae6b3b70.html> (last 
     [...] as the text of ACTA was gradually leaked, and then  visited June 16, 2012).
officially released, during the last year of the negotiation,  53. S ee Helfer, supra note 51. 
the substance of ACTA came under broad criticism. In June  54. L  . Forman, “‘Rights’” and Wrongs: What Utility for the Right 
2010, nearly 650 international intellectual property experts  to Health in Reforming Trade Rules on Medicines?” Critical 
and public interest organizations from six continents adopted  Concepts 10, no. 10 (2008): 37-52. 
pharmaceutical firms and the right to health • summer 2012  205