"A Period of Consequences"': Global
Warming Legislation,  Cooperative
Federalism, and the Fight Between  the
EPA and the State of California
Krista Yee*
TABLE OF CONTENTS
IN TR O D U CTIO N ....................................................1.8.5........................................... 
I.  IS IT PROPER TO THINK GLOBALLY BUT ACT LOCALLY? ...................... 185
A.  Argum ents for Federal Control .......................18.6............................ 
B.  Im portance of State Initiatives .......................1.8.7............................ 
C . C ooperative Federalism ............................1.88................................... 
II.  FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL LEGISLATION ........................1.9.0.................. 
A . C lean A ir A ct ..................................1.90............................................ 
1.  B ackground .................................1.9 .1........................................ 
2.  The "California W aiver .........................1.91.............................. 
a.  C ongressional Intent ........................1.9.2............................. 
b.  W aiver Requirem ents .......................1.9.3............................ 
c.  State Adoption of California Standards ............1.95............. 
d.  History of California's Waiver Applications .........1.9.5....... 
B.  Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 ...............1.96.............. 
III.  PA V LEY B ILL ...............................................1.9.9....................................... 
A . Pavley B ill G enerally ................................1.9.9................................. 
B.  Automobile Industry's Response to the Pavley Bill ...........20.0......... 
C.  California Requests a Waiver Pursuant to CAA .............2.0.3........... 
* J.D., Notre Dame Law School, 2008; B.A., English, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2004.
I am deeply indebted to Professor Anthony J. Bellia for his invaluable guidance in preparing this
article as well as for sparking my interest in the subject.  Thanks are also owed to Kameron Cox and
Lani Chan for their enduring patience and encouragement; in addition, to the members of Environs
for their editorial assistance in preparing this article for publication.  Most importantly, I thank my
family, particularly my mom for her unconditional love and support.
I AN INCONVENIENT TRUTH (Lawrence Bender Productions 2006).  Al Gore used this phrase
in to reference to the increase in global warming over the years.  This phrase is originally attributed
to Winston Churchill, who did not use it in reference to environmental problems, but rather, referred
to wartime concerns.184  University of California,D  avis  [Vol. 32:1
IV.  EPA'S FIRST DENIAL TO CALIFORNIA IN FORTY YEARS .......................  204
A . Final Agency Action ....................................................................  204
B.  N inth Circuit Petition for Review ................................................  206
C.  Probable Outcom e ........................................................................  207
CONCLUSION ....................................................................................................  2122008] A Periodo f Consequences
INTRODUCTION
Average temperatures on Earth have increased steadily over the years due to
greenhouse  gas emissions in the  atmosphere.  This climate  change, known as
global warming, threatens a number of living species - including plants, animals
and  humans  - as  glaciers  melt, polar  ice  caps  shrink,  and  sea  levels  rise.
Increased media attention, including Al  Gore's book and film documentary An
Inconvenient Truth, has placed global warming at the forefront of discussion in
the  United  States.  Indeed,  both  the  2008  Republican  and  Democratic
Presidential  candidates,  John  McCain  and  Barack  Obama,  committed  to
reducing greenhouse gas emissions.2
Given the serious nature of global warming, local action, rather than purely
federal legislation, may be appropriate.  In particular, individual states may want
to create regulations more stringent than existing federal standards.  California,
for example, often leads the nation's efforts in solving environmental problems,
with global warming as no exception.
Part  I  of this  paper  discusses  environmental  concerns,  particularly  global
warming, and how these concerns implicate federalism.  While some advocate
for solely national legislation3 and others suggest environmental legislation best
occurs  at  state  level,4  in  fact,  a  hybrid  cooperative  federalism  model  best
addresses environmental concerns.  Part II examines the Clean Air Act ("CAA")
as a cooperative  federalism model for environmental  legislation.5  Part II  also
evaluates  whether  a  later  statute,  the  Energy  Policy  and  Conservation  Act
("EPCA"),  preempts states  from enacting their own  legislation pursuant to the
CAA.  Part III looks at the Pavley Bill, also known as Assembly Bill  1493, one
of  California's  most  recent  legislative  acts  requiring  a  CAA  waiver,  and
explores  whether  the  CAA  permits  such  legislation.  Part  IV  discusses  the
EPA's  denial  of California's  waiver  request  for  the  Pavley  Bill  and  the
reasoning  behind  this historic  move.  Finally,  this  paper  concludes  with  a
discussion of why the Ninth Circuit should overturn the EPA's decision and how
the Pavley Bill exemplifies the most effective form of cooperative federalism.
I.  IS IT PROPER TO THINK GLOBALLY BUT ACT LOCALLY?
One of the debates in environmental law concerns whether issues should be
addressed at a national  or local  level.  While  strong arguments  exist on both
sides, a cooperative model of federalism that incorporates efforts at the national
2 See, e.g., Juliet Eilperin, Gore Launches Ambitious Climate Advocacy Campaign, WASH.
POST, Mar. 31,  2008, available at 2008 WLNR 6042078; Chris Holly, Rowe to Hill: Get Going on
Climate Change Bill, 36 ENERGY DAILY 29, Feb. 13, 2008, availablea t 2008 WLNR 5229718.
3 See infra, Part I.A.
4 See infra, Part I.B.
5 Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7543(a) (2006).  The Clean Air Act will be discussed in greater
detail, infra, Part II.A.University of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
and local levels will best solve environmental problems.
A.  Arguments for FederalC  ontrol
Since environmental problems have far reaching effects on national - in fact,
global - concerns, some argue only national legislation can adequately address
these issues.  Critics of state global warming legislation assert that since some
states  may  be unwilling  to enact  statutes,  particularly costly  legislation, only
national legislation sufficiently addresses these issues.  Furthermore, proponents
of a purely federal approach reason that environmental concerns involve issues,
such as air and water, not confined to any one state.  Finally, proponents argue
that efficiency demands federal legislation.6
Critics  of state-level  global warming  legislation argue  that  elements  of the
environment, such as air and water, do not exist in the exclusive domain of any
one  state  and  therefore  require  national  attention.  One  critic  stated  that
"spillover  effects among the states create the strongest justification for federal
legislation. 7  Since  "pollution knows no boundaries,"  state legislation  would
fail to adequately  regulate  greenhouse gas emissions.8  Federal legislation, on
the other hand, is "better able to regulate interstate pollution"  because it "has a
national focus and is a national forum to establish regulations and procedures to
resolve  interstate  conflicts."9  Essentially, these  proponents  argue  that global
problems require large-scale attention on a national and global stage rather than
at state or local levels.
As a corollary to the idea that environmental  elements affect the whole nation
rather than individual states, some critics of state action believe their position is
grounded  in  science.  Ultimately,  proponents  for exclusively  federal  control
argue  "only  comprehensive,  national  legislation  can deal  with environmental
systems, which are by their nature systemic."'  In essence, "[w]hen the United
States Supreme  Court pretends that comprehensive systems can be divided into
fragmented and unrelated parts, in the name of federalism, the Court is ignoring
simple science.""
Moreover, proponents  of federal environmental  legislation assert that some
6 See, e.g., Alice Kaswan, The Domestic Response to Global Climate Change: What Role for
Federal,S tate and Litigation Initiatives?, 42 U.S.F. L. REV. 39, 63 (2007).
7 Robert L. Glicksman, From Cooperative to Inoperative Federalism: The Perverse Mutation
of Environmental Law and Policy, 41 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 719, 735 (2006) (quoting Richard B.
Stewart, Environmental Quality as a National Good in a FederalS tate, 1997 U. CHI. LEGAL F. 199,
210 (1997)).
8 Id. at 735 (citations omitted).
9 Id.
10 Bruce Ledewitz,  The Present and Future of Federalism, 43 DUQ. L. REV. 645, 649 - 50
(2005) ("Scientifically speaking, there is no such thing, for example, as intrastate water.  All water
has moved across state borders in the past and, of course, will do so again in the future.").
II Id.2008] A Period of Consequences
states are unwilling to enact laws to combat global warming, particularly when
they fear  costly  legislation  will  provoke the loss  of industry.  Since  a  state
primarily concerns  itself with what happens within its boundaries,  "states  are
likely to under-regulate, since they might regulate only to the extent necessary to
address in-state consequences."''2   States do not have the ability to adequately
address global warming effects because they would view the transactional costs
associated with interstate  regulations as too high.'3  Thus, "federal  legislation
would allow  states  to enjoy  environmental  protections without fear  of losing
industry,"  given  that  all  fifty  states  would  have  to  comply  with  the  same
regulations. 14
B.  Importance of State Initiatives
Equally  strong  arguments  for  encouraging  state  environmental  initiatives
exist.  For example,  some argue  states  should determine  for themselves  the
amount  of  environmental  protection  desired  and  how  to  implement  these
regulations.15  When  it legislates, a state could potentially establish the proper
balance "between environmental protection and economic development."'16
Furthermore, in response to the claim that global problems require global - or
at least national - attention, proponents  of local  initiatives believe states have
the ability to significantly contribute to greenhouse  gas reductions.  Moreover,
the United States government  has not been particularly aggressive with global
warming  legislation.'7   Thus,  states  should  be  able  to  contribute  to  the
worldwide  effort  to  reduce  greenhouse  gases  when  the  federal  government
declines to do so.  As one proponent noted, "The global nature of climate change
does not denigrate the importance of state efforts," but "as a practical matter...
states should not be held hostage to the United States'  unwillingness to engage
18
globally.'
12  Kaswan, supra note 6, at 6.  See also Glicksman, supra note 7, at 735 ("and it seems unlikely
that upwind states would ever adequately take into account the concerns of downwind states.  The
upwind states lack any incentive to cooperate with the downwind states..
13 Glicksman, supra note 7, at 735.
14 Kaswan, supra note 6, at 62 - 63.  ("Scholars argue that the desire to avert the race to the
bottom, as demonstrated by the states' failure to control pollution, was a significant factor in the
passage of numerous comprehensive federal environmental laws in the 1970s.").
15 See, e.g., id. at 61.
16 Id.
17 See, e.g., id. at 67.
18 Id.  See also CBS/AP, US. Rejects Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Cuts Despite Scientists'
Declarationa nd Senate Action, U.S. Officials Want No Mandatory Reduction, CBS NEWS,  Dec. 6,
2007, availablea t http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/l 2/06/tech/main3583099.shtml (last visited
Nov. 20, 2008)  ("The United States, participating with nearly  190 nations in a United Nations
conference on climate change, is holding firm in its opposition to mandatory cuts in greenhouse gas
emissions,  despite mounting  international  and domestic  pressure.");  Christopher T. Giovinazzo,
Comment, California'sG  lobal Warming Bill: Will Fuel Economy Preemption Curb California'sA ir
Pollution Leadership?,3 0 ECOLOGY L.Q. 893, 899 (2003).University of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
In addition, the federal government has embraced state action in the field of
environmental  legislation  and policy.  When  Congress  enacts environmental
legislation, it often adopts state plans, demonstrating how states effectively serve
as  laboratories  for  national  legislation.'9   Other  states  and  the  federal
government  can learn  from the successes  and failures of varying approaches,
incorporating the most successful components  into new legislation.  When the
government  limits states to only one federal approach,  the United States loses
the opportunity to learn from different methods and, arguably, will enact  less
effective legislation.
C.  CooperativeF  ederalism
The environmental legislative regime need not rely solely on either federal or
state regulations.  To the contrary, cooperative  federalism addresses  concerns
raised by both sides of the federalism debate.  Cooperative federalism takes into
account the positives and negatives of each regime, integrating federal and state
legislation to best serve the environment.  Thus, "policy-makers  do not have to
choose  between  federal  and  state  approaches;  the two  can  complement  one
'20
another.
One  may broadly  describe  cooperative  federalism  as  a  hybrid system  of
"federal  legislation positing  cooperation through  interacting  state  and federal
consent."21  The Supreme Court recognized  cooperative federalism as a system
"that  rejects, a  nationally  uniform  approach  to  problem  solving  in  which
Congress  preempts  state  authority,  and  that  instead  allows  state  and  local
authorities  to  make  at  least  some  decisions,  subject  to  minimum  federal
standards."22  Cooperative federalism thus allows states to create regulations to
meet their own particular needs  subject only to federally mandated  minimum
standards2. 3
19  See, e.g., Robert B. McKinstry, Jr. and Thomas D. Peterson, The Implications of the New
"'Old"F ederalism in Climate-ChangeL egislation: How to Function in a Global Marketplace When
States Take the Lead, 20 PAC. McGEORGE GLOBAL Bus. & DEV. L.J. 61,  67 (2007) ("By way of
example, key provisions of the Clean Air Act were based on California laws regulating air pollution.
Many of the strategies incorporated into the Clean Water Act were first worked out by the states
comprising the Delaware River Basin Commission.  Pennsylvania's efforts to address the problems
created by irresponsible mining practices served as the model for the federal Surface Mining Control
and Reclamation Act. New Jersey's efforts at hazardous site remediation served as a model for the
federal Comprehensive Response, Compensation and Liability Act."); Kaswan, supra note 6, at 71
("Moreover,  the federal government has embraced the state's active role.  Rather than perceiving
state efforts as a threat to federal power, the federal government has touted state efforts as part of the
nation's overall approach to climate change.").
20  Kaswan, supra note 6, at 79.
21  Glicksman, supra note 7, at 725 (quoting Frank R. Strong, CooperativeF  ederalism, 23 IOWA
L. REv. 459, 504 (1938)).
22 Id. at 726 (citing City of Rancho Palos Verdes v. Abrams,  544  U.S.  113,  128 (2005) (J.
Breyer concurring)).
23  Aside from environmental law, cooperative federalism endeavors have commonly included2008] A Periodo f Consequences
Environmental law in the United States is certainly marked by this hybrid of
federal and state legislative interaction: "In fact, almost all of the modem federal
environmental  laws contemplate  a concurrent and significant state  role. 24  In
the world of environmental legislation, a federal legislative framework allowing
states  to  enact  more  stringent  regulations  allows  for  greater  protection,
ultimately  leading  to  more  effective  contributions  toward  combating  global
warming.
Some,  particularly  those  constrained  by  environmental  regulations,  may
complain that without uniform federal legislation, too many different standards
would make  compliance extremely difficult. 25  This problem can be curbed,
however, by creating a
modified  federalism  in  which  the  federal  government  sets  a national
standard while one state is allowed to diverge.  The remaining states can
then choose between the federal or the divergent state standard.  While not
achieving a uniform standard, industry is nonetheless confronted with only
26
two, instead of... fifty, standards.
Thus,  a  successful  cooperative  federalism  system  for  environmental
legislation need not give all fifty states free reign to enact divergent statutes.  To
the  contrary,  giving  states  two  or  three  options  may  provide  sufficient
opportunity  for  experimentation  while  keeping  economic  costs  down  for
industries affected by environmental regulations.
Indeed, this type  of modified  or cooperative  federalism has  existed  in the
realm of environmental regulation for the past forty years.  Beginning around
1970,  Congress  enacted  a number of statutes affecting  public  health and the
environment; almost all these regulations  employed some form of cooperative
federalism.27  For example, Congress enacted the CAA in an attempt to curb air
pollution  by  regulating  automobile  emissions.28  This  statute  represents  a
compromise  between  federal  regulations  and  state  standards,  creating  a
minimum federal standard while  allowing states to choose the more stringent
alternative.29
educational  programs  for  disabled  children,  financial  aid  for needy  families,  health  insuirance
programs, financial security for senior citizens, and interstate efforts to fight crime. Id.
24 Kaswan, supra note 6,a t 79.
25  For example, the automobile industry must comply with automobile emission regulations.
Given that it is easier to ensure compliance with a single industry standard, automobile makers might
challenge any system in which multiple standards exist in order to reduce production costs for cars.
26 Kaswan, supra note 6, at 80 (citing Ann Carlson, Federalism, Preemption, and Greenhouse
Gas Emissions, 37 U.C. DAVis L. REV. 281, 313 -18 (2003)).  See also id. at 83 ("If a multiplicity of
standards in commerce is a significant concern, some sort of 'modified federalism' may be possible,
whereby one or two innovative states, like California, are permitted to set an alternative standard,
and other states are given the choice of following the national standards or the California standard.").
27 See, e.g., Glicksman, supra note 7, at 729.
28 See, e.g., Kaswan, supra note 6, at 80.
29 The CAA allows California to request a waiver of preemption provided that California meetsUniversity of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
Through its environmental legislation, Congress created national standards to
promote  environmental  care  but  "did  not  completely  divest  the  states  and
localities from their preex:isting regulatory authority ...  many of the statutes that
Congress adopted during the 1970s and 1980s created cooperative partnerships
between federal and state governments."30  The CAA reflects a commitment to
cooperative federalism: although the federal government sets national minimum
environmental standards it also allows states "to determine in many contexts the
appropriate  ways  to  achieve  those  goals ...  , to  share  the  responsibility  to
enforce  state requirements  adopted to implement  federal  regulatory programs,
and..,  to  adopt  regulatory  standards  more  stringent  than  the  federal
government."31
II.  FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL LEGISLATION
As  previously  noted,  Congress  responded  to  environmental  problems  by
enacting  legislation  largely  relying  on  a system  of modified  or cooperative
federalism.  Two of the most prominent pieces of legislation  are the CAA, a
federal  model  allowing  for  state  innovation,  and  the  Energy  Policy  and
Conservation  Act  ("EPCA"),  which  appears  to  rely  solely  on  the  federal
government.
A.  Clean Air Act
Congress  first  responded  to  environmental  concerns  by  regulating  air
pollution with the enactment  of the Air Quality Act of 1967.32  This statute,
which  later evolved  into  the modern CAA,  advocated a joint effort between
federal and state governments to combat  environmental problems. 33  It stated
that "the  prevention  and control  of air pollution at its source  is the primary
responsibility of States and local governments., 34  Thus, Congress distributed
shared  accountability  among  state  and  federal  governments.  Congress
"definitively entered the field of regulating air pollution, but did so by adopting
a regulatory program dependent upon cooperation between the federal and state
governments. 35
certain requirements.  This waiver will be discussed in more detail, infra, Part II.A.2.
30 Glicksman, supra note 7, at 728.  During this period, Congress also enacted the Clean Water
Act,which may also serve as a model for cooperative federalism.
31 ld. at 80 1.
32 Air Quality Act of 1967, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 (2006).
33  See Giovinazzo, supra at note 18.
34  Air Quality Act of 1967, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 (2006).
35 Giovinazzo, supra note 18, at 899 ("Through both the AQA and its successor the Clean Air
Act, the federal approach to air pollution control has maintained this high degree of dependence on
state  cooperation,  principally through reliance on  state adoption and enforcement of State
Implementation Plans." (emphasis added)).2008] A Period of Consequences
1.  Background
Congress first codified the modem CAA in 1970 and amended it in 1977 and
1990.36  The CAA regulates a number of factors and toxins associated with air
pollution,  including:  "criteria  pollutants, 37  mobile  sources,  such  as  motor
vehicles,38  an  air  toxics  program  for  hazardous  air  pollutants,39  industrial
emissions,  particularly  those  believed  to  contribute  to  acid  rain,40  an  Air
Emissions  Program  operated  by  states  under  EPA  supervision,41  and  the
production  and use of chemicals  believed  to  deplete the  stratospheric  ozone
later.42
Within these regulated areas, CAA generally preempts states from adopting
any  conflicting  regulations.  In  particular,  and  at  issue  here,  CAA  largely
prohibits  states  and political  subdivisions  of states from  adopting  their own
standards  for  motor  vehicle  emissions.43   Although  federal  environmental
legislation remains dependent on state cooperation, Congress acknowledged the
need  to  avoid  multiple  auto  emissions  standards,  fearing  that  such  variety
"would result in 'increased  costs to consumers nationwide, with benefit only to
those in one section of the country."'"
2.  The "California Waiver"
Despite  the  desire  to  keep  consumer  costs  low  by  imposing  a  uniform
automobile emissions standard, Congress did not create a system in which only
one federal model could exist.  Instead, Congress acknowledged the advantages
of a purely federal system, but also realized the need for state autonomy.  Thus,
Congress created a compromise, embodied by Section 209 of the CAA, allowing
California to enact its own regulations provided that the state obtained a waiver
of preemption from the EPA.45  While  generally preempting other states from
issuing  their  own  emission  standards,  Congress  gave  California  "a  special
waiver in deference to California's  'unique problems and pioneering efforts.' 46
36 The first Clean Air Act was actually enacted in 1963.  See Environmental Protection Agency,
History of the Clean Air Act, http://epa.gov/air/caa/caa-history.html  (last visited Nov. 22, 2008).
However, the modem Clean Air Act was based more on the 1970 version than the 1963.  As stated
previously, the modem Clean Air Act actually has its roots in the Air Quality Act of 1967 rather than
the Clean Air Act of 1963. See supra notes 32 and 33.
37 42 U.S.C. § 7401,  tit. 1 (2006).  These include particulate  matter, sulfur dioxide, carbon
monoxide, nitrogen oxides, ozone, and lead.
38 42 U.S.C. § 7401, tit. 11 (2006).
39 42 U.S.C. § 7401, tit. II1 (2006).
40  42 U.S.C. § 7401, tit. IV (2006).
41  42 U.S.C. § 7401, tit. V (2006).
42  42 U.S.C. § 7401, tit. VI (2006). For example, chlorofluorocarbons.
43  Glicksman, supra note 7, at 783.
SId. at 783-84.
45  Clean Air Act §209,42 U.S.C. § 7543 (2006); See also Giovinazzo, supra note 18, at 901.
46  Giovinazzo, supran ote 18, at 901 (quoting S. REP. No. 403, 90'b Cong., I' Sess. 33 (1967)).University of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
Once California obtained a waiver for its own emissions regulations, other states
could choose to adopt either the federal or California standard.47
a.  Congressional Intent
Congress likely chose to create a waiver exception in order to ensure states
could  still  serve  as  laboratories  for  vehicle  emissions  regulation  without
increasing  the  cost  to  consumers.  The  waiver  exception,  as  enacted  by
Congress,  creates  only  the  potential  for two  differing  standards  rather  than
creating  a  situation  where  manufacturers  would  have  to  comply  with  fifty
different  standards.48  Thus,  by  permitting  one  state  to  create  a  different
standard,  the  CAA  allows  for  greater  experimentation  in  the  field  of auto
emission regulation.  Greater experimentation arguably leads to development of
more  effective  regulations.  As  a  result,  the  successes  or  failures  of one
regulation allow lawmakers to change or modify existing rules.
When  Congress  decided  to  adopt  the CAA's  waiver  exception,  California
seemed like an obvious choice due to its unique needs as a large coastal state
and its prior innovations in environmental  legislation.  Congress acknowledged
that California confronted  "unique problems ...  as  a result  of its climate and
topography. ' 9  Furthermore, California "took steps in the 1960s to control auto
emissions  even  before  the  federal  government  did.",50   To  avoid  obvious
favoritism, Congress forbade states from enacting more stringent auto emissions
regulations with the exception of "any state which [had] adopted  standards...
for the control  of emissions  from new  motor vehicle  or new  motor vehicle
engines prior  to  March  30,  1966."'5   Being  the only  state  to  regulate  auto
emissions prior to March 30, 1966, California is the only state that can request a
47 See id.
41 Complaint  for Declaratory  and Injunctive  Relief at  50-51,  California  v. United  States
Environmental Protection Agency, No. 1:07-cv-02024-RCL  (D.C. Cir. Nov. 5, 2007) [hereinafter
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief]; Giovinazzo, supra note 18, at 901 ("By including
the 'California waiver' despite the auto industry's fierce opposition, Congress signaled its desire to
encourage  California's  continued  role  as  a  'laboratory  for emission  control  technology  and
regulation that could be applied  later at the federal level."'  In addition, "California's vehicular
emission standards are more than just an average example of state action in a field of traditional state
power.  They are  the realization  of a very specific Congressional  interest  in encouraging  state
experimentation  and  flexibility.  California's  emission  controls  have  been successful  for  both
California and the nation at large."  Id. at 951.)
49 Glicksman, supra note 7, at 784 (citations omitted).
So  Id.  See also Giovinazzo, supra note  18, at 900 ("Within this cooperative approach to air
pollution, no state was more instrumental  to the formulation of national air pollution policy than
California.  Indeed, it was California and the California Air Resources Board whose studies first
raised the modem awareness of the sources and impacts of air pollution.").
51 Clean Air Act §209(b)(1),  42 U.S.C. § 7543 (2006). California was the only state regulating
motor vehicle emissions prior to March 30, 1966, and is therefore the only state granted a waiver
under the CAA.  See also Central Valley Chrysler-Jeep, Inc. v. Goldstene, 529 F.Supp.2d 1151 (E.D.
Cal. 2007).2008] A Periodo f Consequences
waiver of preemption from the EPA.52  Congress created the form of cooperative
federalism embodied in the CAA "to preserve the earlier California innovations
in traditional air pollution control mechanisms that provided a model for many
53
of the Clean Air Act's provisions."
In addition, Congress intended for California to have the ability to adopt more
stringent regulations, thereby allowing the state "to act more quickly than [the
EPA] in adopting air pollution control measures. 54  In essence, California does
not need to wait for the federal  government  to acknowledge  a problem exists
before taking legislative action to try to repair or reduce harms to the coast line
or mountain ranges; the state need not sit idly by as  environmental problems
worsen.
Congress  also  declared  that California  should have  the  "broadest  possible
discretion in selecting the best means to protect the health of its citizens. 55  By
using the phrase "broadest possible  discretion,"  Congress clearly  indicated  its
desire for California  to act with  innovation  and to create new standards with
minimal federal interference.  As a result of this special waiver, California has
traditionally  led  the  way  in  creating  the  nation's  automobile  emission
standards.56   In  sum,  "Congress  clearly  intended  that  California,  having
established  itself as  having  both particular  needs  with  regard  to  air quality
regulation and particular expertise in developing regulations to address its needs,
should be empowered to develop alternative and more protective regulations for
'57
the control of air pollutants.
By amending  the  CAA,  Congress  underscored  its  desire for  California  to
create regulations more stringent than federal standards.  The 1977 amendment,
for  example, required  California's  standards  to be  at  least  as protective  as
federal standards, but only "in the aggregate."58  Thus, in evaluating California's
standards, the EPA must analyze the proposed regulatory scheme in its entirety,
rather than  standard-by-standard.59  This  amendment  gives  California greater
flexibility by allowing the state to devise entirely unique regulations, so long as
they, in the aggregate, are ultimately as strong as the national regulations.
.b.  Waiver Requirements
Within  the  text  of the  CAA,  Congress  made  the  requirements  for  the
California  waiver  explicit:  the  EPA  Administrator  must  grant  California's
32 See Central Valley Chrysler, supra note 51, at 1156.
11 McKinstry, supra note 19, at 64.
54 Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 48, at 50 -51.
55 Central Valley Chrysler, supra note 51, at 1172 (citation omitted).
56 Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 48, at 50 -5 1.
57 See also Central Valley Chrysler, supra note 51.
58 Clean Air Act § 209, 42 U.S.C. § 7543 (2006); See also Giovinazzo, supra note 18, at 901.
59 Giovinazzo, supra note 18, at 901.University of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
waiver application except in three narrow circumstances.60  The language of the
statute reads:  "The Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity  for public
hearing, waive application of this section..." provided that California finds that
its proposed standards "will be, in the aggregate, at least as protective of public
health  and  welfare  as  applicable  Federal  standards."61   The  word  "shall"
emphasizes the absence of agency discretion; the EPA is essentially required to
grant a waiver, with few exceptions.  The Administrator can only deny a request
for  waiver  of  preemption  under  the  CAA  if  he  finds:  1)  California's
determination that its standards are at least as protective as federal standards is
arbitrary and capricious;  2) California does not need separate standards to meet
"compelling  and  extraordinary  conditions;"  or  3) California's  standards  are
inconsistent with CAA section 202(a), which prescribes the standards for motor
62
vehicle air pollution.
Traditionally,  both  the  EPA  and  courts  broadly  construe  these  waiver
requirements.  As  a  result,  the  exceptions  to  granting  a  waiver  have  been
interpreted  so as to  apply  only  in narrow  circumstances.63  For example,  in
determining  whether  California  faces  "compelling  and  extraordinary
conditions," the EPA stated these requirements refer only to general conditions
within  the  state.64  Such  conditions  include  California's  large  human  and
vehicular population,65 as well as its unique topography, which encompasses a
. 60 Clean Air Act § 209(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. § 7543 (2006) (emphasis added).  The focus of this
paper is on  statutes regulating everyday  automobile  emissions.  Thus,  this  section exclusively
discusses Section 209(b), which governs the waiver exception with regard to regulations for road
vehicles.  It is worth mentioning, however, that Section 209(e) contains a similar waiver provision
for non-road engines  or vehicles.  This section states,  "the Administrator shall,  after notice and
opportunity  for public  hearing,  authorize  California to  adopt and  enforce  standards and  other
requirements  relating  to the  control of emissions  from such vehicles  or engines  if California
determines that California standards will be, in the aggregate, at least as protective of public health
and welfare  as  applicable  Federal  standards.  No  such  authorization  shall  be  granted  if the
Administrator finds that (i) the determination of California is arbitrary and capricious, (ii) California
does not need such California standards to meet compelling and extraordinary conditions, or (iii)
California standards and accompanying enforcement procedures are not consistent with this section."
Clean Air Act § 209(e)(2), 42 U.S.C. § 7543 (2006).  In addition, states other than California can
adopt these standards "if  (1) such standards and implementation and enforcement are identical,  for
the  period  concerned,  to  the  California  standards  authorized  by  the  Administrator  under
subparagraph  (A), and (ii) California and such State adopt such standards at least 2 years before
commencement of the period for which the standards take effect."  Clean Air Act § 209(e)(2)(B), 42
U.S.C.  § 7543  (2006); see also Giovinazzo, supra note  18,  at 902 ("The CAA also encourages
California's  innovation  and  flexibility  by  including  a  nearly  identical  California  waiver  to
preemption of state emissions standards for non-road vehicles and by allowing California to pass its
own fuel additive requirements without EPA approval.")
61 Id.
62  Clean Air Act § 202(a), 42 U.S.C. § 7521 (2006).  This provision requires that regulations
take into account the most feasible standards given the technology available at the time.
63 See e.g., Giovinazzo, supra note 18, at 903 (citation omitted).
SId.
65  Today, California is the most populous state in the nation, home to one in seven Americans.
Its population currently approaches thirty-seven million and is projected to reach forty-four million2008] A Periodo f Consequences
large coastline, mountain range, and forest area highly susceptible to wildfire.66
In addition, the South Coast and San Joaquin regions of California "experience
the highest ozone concentrations  in the United States; they have the only severe
and serious health designations for the national 8-hour ozone standard.  Global
warming increases the formation of ozone. 67  Such conditions make "it almost
impossible  to  refute  that"  California  will  always  have  "compelling  and
extraordinary conditions" when it applies for a waiver.68  California's uniquely
diverse topography  and  high population  are unlikely to  change  in the future.
Therefore,  the  state  should  certainly  continue  to  meet  the  "compelling  and
extraordinary  conditions"  requirement  as  the  EPA  and  courts  construe  the
phrase.
c.  State Adoption of California Standards
Initially, Congress did not permit  any state other than California  to deviate
from federal  regulation  of auto  emissions.  However,  Congress  significantly
amended the CAA in  1977 to allow  states the choice of adopting the national
standard or emission regulations identical to California's.69  Currently, pursuant
to  Section  209(b)(3)  of the  CAA,  other states  may  not  request  waivers  of
preemption  to  create  their  own  standards,  but  they may  adopt  California's,
provided the regulations received a waiver of preemption.70  States that follow
the California standards enacted pursuant to a grant of waiver are deemed to be
in compliance with the national standards.71
d.  History of California's Waiver Applications
Historically, the EPA has granted California's waiver requests whenever the
proposed standards  meet minimum  federal standards.  During  the  forty years
between  the  enactment  of the  CAA  in  1967  and  most  of 2007,  the  EPA
by the year 2020 and sixty million people by 2050.  Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief,
supra note 48, at 23 -24. This high population has led to greater ozone concentrations in California
than  in  other  states.  See
http://ag.ca.gov/globalwarming/pdf/Summaryof  AG-Testimony_011 008.pdf.
I  Office of the Attorney General, State of California, Global Warming Impacts  in California
http://ag.ca.gov/ globalwarming/impact.php (last visited Nov. 20, 2008).
67 Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 48, at 35.
66 See Giovinazzo, supra note 18, at 903.
69 Clean Air Act § 209(b)(3), 42 U.S.C. § 7543 (2006); See Glicksman supra note 7, at 784.
70 Clean Air Act § 177, 42 U.S.C. § 7507 (2006). Clean Air Act § 209(b)(3), 42 U.S.C. § 7543
(2006) ("In the case of any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine to which state standards
apply pursuant to a waiver granted under paragraph (1),  compliance with such State standards shall
be treated as compliance with applicable Federal Standards for purposes of this title.").  See also
Central Valley Chrysler-Jeep, Inc. v. Goldstene, 529 F.Supp.2d 1151 (E.D. Cal. 2007).
71 See, e.g.,  Central Valley Chrysler, 529  F.Supp.2d at 1173.  They are  deemed to  be  in
compliance under Section 209(b)(3) 42 U.S.C. § 7543.University of Californla,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
consistently approved California's waiver requests.72  Indeed, prior to the Pavley
Bill, California's requests for preemption waivers under the CAA were always
at least partially granted by the EPA.73
As a result of EPA's liberal approval of the California waiver, other states as
well as the federal government  have benefited  from  California's successes  in
environmental  legislation.  California  legislation, enacted  pursuant to  Section
209  of CAA, has  been  largely popular as evidenced  by the  numerous  states
adopting  these regulations.74   Moreover,  the  federal  government  "repeatedly
draws  from California's playbook  in adopting its own emission  standards., 75
From banning lead in gasoline to creating clean vehicle standards, Congress has
repeatedly taken advantage of California's  innovations, signaling its continued
support for the California waiver.76
B.  Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975
After  the  enactment  of  the  CAA,  Congress  continued  to  legislate  on
environmental issues.  For example, the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of
1975  (EPCA)  attempts  to  broadly  meet  the  nation's  energy  demands  and
encourages conservation wherever feasible.77  Unlike the CAA, however, EPCA
did  not include  a provision  for  addressing  California's needs  for preemption
waivers.  The absence of a waiver provision resulted in some uncertainty as to
whether  California  regulations  under  the  CAA  that  related  to  energy
conservation could be preempted by the EPCA.
72 James E. McCarthy and Robert Meltz, California's Waiver Request to Control Greenhouse
Gases Under the Clean Air Act, CRS REPORT FOR CONGRESS, Oct. 1, 2007, at 11 - 12 (". . .one
might say that there have been at least 95 waiver requests, but nearly half of these were relatively
minor actions that may not deserve to be counted as formal requests.  Of these, all were granted in
whole or in part.  'I don't think we've ever outright denied a request,'  according to an OTAQ
official; 'but there were some grants in which we denied part or delayed the effective date of part on
feasibility grounds,'  he added.").  See also California Attorney General, News and Alerts: "Brown
Blasts EPA for Betraying Public Trust," http://ag.ca.gov/newsalerts/release.php?id=1516,  Jan. 10,
2008 (last visited Nov. 20, 2008); Giovinazzo, supra note  18,  at 903  ("In practice, California's
waiver applications are almost always approved."); Kaswan, supra note 6, at 50 ("EPA has virtually
always granted California's waiver requests..
73 See supra note 72.
74 See, e.g., Glicksman, supra note 7, at 784 ("In 1977, Congress amended the CAA to allow
other states to adopt and enforce motor vehicle emissions controls that are identical to any California
standards for which EPA has already granted a waiver.  Several states, particularly in the northeast,
have  taken advantage of this provision  by adopting standards' equivalent to  the more  stringent
California standards approved by EPA.").
75 Giovinazzo, supra note  18,  at 951 ("When California required catalytic converters,  a few
years later their effectiveness was clear and the federal government required them as well.  When
California banned lead in gasoline, the federal government followed suit.  When California adopted
a groundbreaking  clean  vehicles  program, the federal government followed,  explicitly adopting
CARB's standards and initiating a clean-vehicles program-in California.").
76 Id. and accompanying text.
77 See Energy Policy and Conservation Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6201 (2006).20081 A Period of Consequences
Congress'  stated  purpose  for  the EPCA  includes,  for example,  regulating
certain  energy uses and  creating energy  conservation  programs,78  conserving
water79 and improving the energy efficiency of certain consumer products such
as motor vehicles.80  In order to improve the energy efficiency of automobiles,
Congress  imposed  strict  new  fuel  efficiency  requirements  known  as  the
Corporate  Average  Fuel  Economy  ("CAFE")  standards.81   The  EPCA  also
contained a broad preemption clause, which, unlike the CAA, did not provide
California with a waiver exception.  The EPCA expressly says states "may not
adopt or enforce a law or regulation related to fuel economy standards. 82
Despite the broad preemption clause and lack of waiver exception,. the EPCA
does  not affect California  regulations enacted  pursuant to Section 209  of the
CAA.  In other words, California may still establish its own standards under the
CAA  without  violating  the  EPCA.  If the  EPCA  did,  in  fact,  preempt
California's CAA  regulations,  the EPCA would  effectively bar the  state from
passing emission standards different from the federal standards.83  However, in
passing the EPCA, Congress had no intention of limiting California's flexibility
under the CAA.84
I  While EPCA does contain a broad preemption provision, applying it literally
would  preempt  a variety  of state  laws and  lead to absurd  results  surely  not
intended by Congress.  Putting aside the California  waiver under the CAA,  a
literal application of the EPCA preemption provision would preempt states from
setting speed limits85 or imposing gasoline taxes,86 since  these acts "relate" to
fuel  economy.  However, it seems illogical that Congress would use EPCA to
prevent  states from creating  their own speed limits or taxing  fuel.87   Reading
EPCA to preempt California from enacting legislation related to fuel economy
78 42 U.S.C. § 6201(4) (2006).
79 42 U.S.C. § 6201(8) (2006).
80 42 U.S.C. § 6201(5) (2006).
81 42 U.S.C. § 7543(a) (2006).  These standards set the minimum average fuel miles-per-gallon
for all trucks and cars in a manufacturer's fleet by model year.  Because these standards only apply
to the average of a manufacturer's fleet, the CAFE standards "encouraged carmakers to sell lots of
small fuel-efficient vehicles at sometimes unprofitable prices, so they could keep selling their more
profitable gas guzzlers."  Karen Lundegaard, Crash Course: How the U.S. Shifted Gears to Find
Small Cars Can be Safe Too; Studies Discover Size, Quality Are as Important as Weight; Drafting
Rules for SUV's; Honda Sticks Upf or Little Guy, WALL ST. J., Sept. 26, 2005, at Al.
82 Energy Policy and Conservation Act, 49 U.S.C. § 32919(a) (2006).
83 Giovinazzo, supra note 18, at 893.
4 See, e.g., id at 897 ("Congress never meant EPCA to limit California's autonomy.").
81 Id. at 897 & n.240 ("For a variety of technical reasons, a vehicle driven faster than about
forty-five  miles per hour over a given  distance is. progressively  less efficient-i.e.  bums more
gasoline-than a car driven slower over the same distances.  Thus, lowering highway speed limits
increases  vehicular  fuel  economy."  (citing  U.S.  Dep't  of Transp.,  Think  Fast,  available at
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/outreach/safesobr/pub/think.pdf)).
8  By imposing a tax on gasoline, consumers may be more conservative with automobile use,
leading them to give more consideration to fuel economy when purchasing a car.
87 Giovinazzo, supran ote 18, at 933.University of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
would also conflict with what Congress intended to accomplish under CAA.88
Thus, the preemption provision contained in the EPCA should not be  read as
broadly as the plain language suggests.
Congress  also  demonstrated  the  intent  for California  to  continue  using  its
CAA  waivers,  notwithstanding  the  EPCA.  Congress  understood  California
CAA  regulations  "as  a  category  of federal  emissions  standards.  For  legal
purposes,  then, California's emissions  regulations are federal  regulations,  and
the EPCA's preemption clause does not reach them at all.",89  Additionally, the
EPCA  originally  recognized  California's  CAA  waiver by  defining  "federal
standards"  to  include  "emission  standards  applicable  by  reason  of section
209(b)"  of the CAA.90  Thus, when Congress enacted  EPCA, it accounted for
regulations enacted pursuant to the California waiver by giving these standards
the same status as federally enacted regulations.
Furthermore, in evaluating both the EPCA and the CAA, courts have held the
two  statutes are not  at odds with each  other; instead, courts equate California
regulations  enacted under the CAA waiver  provision with  federal  standards.
One  court  concluded  the  California  standards  enacted  under a  preemption
waiver become  "federalized,"  thereby eliminating the concern for state versus
federal regulations under the EPCA.91  The court noted that "when EPCA was
passed, Congress  unequivocally  stated  that  federal  standards  included  EPA-
approved California emissions standards. 92  Alternatively, courts have also held
that,  even  if California  standards  are  not  "federalized,"  still  no  preemption
problem exists:
This court again declines to cast the issue as being one of 'federalization'
of the  proposed  California  standards.  Rather,  the  court  refers  to  its
discussion on EPCA preemption  in which it determined  that there is no
indication  of  congressional  intent  that  a  proposed  California  state
regulation granted waiver of preemption under section 209 of the Clean Air
Act  is  different  for any  purpose from  a regulation  that  is  promulgated
directly by EPA.93
Thus, whether or not California standards are "federalized,"  remains largely
irrelevant;  it is  enough to say these regulations should be treated the same as
88 See, e.g., Giovinazzo,  supra note  18,  at 893 ("Constricting California's autonomy would
directly conflict with Congress' intent and would impede the kind of state innovation that should be
favored by an administration and a Supreme Court friendly to federalism.").
89 Id. at 948 -49.
90 Pub. L. No. 94-163 § 502(d)(3)(D)(i-ii), 89 Stat. 901,  905 (1975).  Note, however, that when
the EPCA was reauthorized  in 1994, this language was deleted.  H.R. REP. NO.  103-180 at 584
(1994).
91 Central Valley Chrysler-Jeep, Inc. v. Goldstene, 529 F.Supp.2d 1151,  1164 (E.D. Cal. 2007)
(citation omitted).
92 Id. at 1173 (citing § 502(d)(3)(D)(i)).
93 Id. at 1182.2008] A Periodo f Consequences
those promulgated by the EPA.  Due to the fact that California regulations are
treated  like  federal  standards,  legislation  enacted  pursuant to  the  California
waiver does not conflict with the EPCA.
In addition, because the CAA waiver provision accounts for California's pre-
CAA/EPCA  automobile  pollution  regulations,  "the  court  must presume  that
Congress did not intend that EPCA would supersede California's exercise of its
historically established police powers."94  The Supreme Court has made clear
that EPA regulations,  as well as those enacted by California pursuant to CAA
waiver, "that  control carbon dioxide emissions serve a purpose that is distinct
from, and not in conflict with, the purpose of the EPCA."95  Although both CAA
and  EPCA  promote  a  cleaner  environment  by,  at  least  in  part,  governing
automobile  emissions,  they ultimately  serve  distinct  and  separate  purposes.
These purposes,  while complimentary,  do not overlap to an extent that would
create conflict between the two.  Thus, California legislation enacted pursuant to
CAA waiver does not conflict with EPCA and is therefore not preempted.
III.  PAVLEY BILL
California  has  taken  advantage  of  Section  209  of  CAA  on  numerous
occasions, with the EPA always granting California's petition for waiver.  These
waiver requests often face strong opposition as the automobile industry fights to
dissuade  other  states  looking  to  adopt  California's  tough  new  standards.
Recently,  California  generated  even  more  attention  when  the  EPA  flat  out
denied the state's waiver request for the first time in the history of CAA.
A.  Pavley Bill Generally
On July 22, 2002, former California Governor Grey Davis signed Assembly
Bill  1493  into  law,  requiring  automobile  companies  to  reduce  vehicular
greenhouse  gas emissions.96   Given  that  automobile  emissions  account  for
twenty  percent  of the  nation's  greenhouse  gas  emissions,97  California  has
deemed  it necessary to curb the harmful  effects of tailpipe exhaust.  Tailpipe
emissions  present  an even  larger  problem  for  California,  amounting  to  over
thirty percent of the state's greenhouse gas emissions.98 More commonly known
as the Pavley Bill,99 the statute authorizes the California  Air Resource Board
("CARB") to regulate greenhouse gases as part of the California Motor Vehicle
Program  and was the  first law to  address  greenhouse  gases  emitted  by auto
94 Id.a t 1174 -75.
95 Id. at 1175.
96 CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE § 43018.5 (West 2006).
97 Kaswan, supra note 6, at 48.
98 Id.
99 Named  for  California  Assemblywoman  Fran  Pavley  (Dem.)  who,  on  behalf of the
environmental group Bluewater Network, authored the bill.  See, e.g., id.University of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
exhaust.
Under  the Pavley Bill, the California legislature  directed CARB to develop
"regulations  that achieve the maximum feasible and cost-effective reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions from motor vehicles."100  In response, CARB adopted
standards  designed to  curb  tailpipe  emissions  in  September  2004.101  These
aggressive standards gave the automobile industry until the 2009 model-year to
produce a new California breed of motor vehicles-that, collectively, would result
in  a  twenty-two  percent  emissions  reduction  by  2012  and  a  thirty  percent
reduction by 2016.102
Notably, the  Pavley Bill was the  "first (and  only)  regulatory effort  in  the
nation  to  address  the automobile  sector's greenhouse  gas  emissions."'103   If
granted  a preemption  waiver,  the  bill has  the potential  to  influence  tailpipe
emissions  throughout  the  nation  since  other  states  may  adopt  California
standards.  Already adopted by fourteen other states,104 the Pavley Bill clearly
set a standard favored by roughly forty percent of the national population.105 In
fact, these states began implementing the Pavley Bill standards even prior to the
EPA's decision on California's waiver request.06
B.  Automobile Industry's Response to the Pavley Bill
Global  warming  legislation  often  impacts the  automobile industry,  forcing
manufacturers  to  create  new  cars  in  compliance  with  recently  enacted
environmental  standards,  sometimes 'at great  cost.107   Thus,  from a business
perspective,  it is natural for the automobile industry to resist new environmental
legislation.  As expected,  the automobile manufacturers  promptly brought suit
'0o  CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE § 43018.5 (West 2006).
101 Kaswan, supra note 6, at 49.
102  Democratic  Energy,  Automobile  C02  Emissions  Rule-California,
http://www.newrules.org/environment/ climateca.html (last visited Nov. 20, 2008).
103 Kaswan, supra note 6, at 48. See also J.R. DeShazo and Jody Freeman, Timing and Form of
Federal Regulation: The Case of Climate Change, 155 U. PA. L. REv. 1499, 1526 -27 (2007).
104 California Attorney General, News and Alerts: "Brown  Blasts EPA  for Betraying  Public
Trust,"  available at http://ag.ca.gov/newsalerts/release.phpid=1516,  Jan.  10, 2008.  These  states
include: Arizona, Connecticut, Florida, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New Mexico,
New York, Oregon,  Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont and Washington.  Four other states,
Colorado, Delaware, Illinois and Utah are in the process of adopting the Pavley Bill standards.
105 See  Environmental  Defense  Fund, States  Take Action on  Climate:  Regional and  State
Agreements  to  Limit  Emissions  (Sep.  13,  2007),  available  at
http://www.edf.org/article.cfm?contentid=4889 (last visited Nov. 20, 2008).
106 DeShazo, supra note 103, at 1521 -22.
107 Due to  these costs, the automobile industry has  vigorously fought any deviation from a
single, unified national standard.  Having lost the fight over allowing California to create its own
standards, automobile companies turned  instead to other states and "have  consistently sought to
block, other states from adopting standards that are not 'identical to California's, on the ground that
disparate standards would force the automakers to produce a 'third car' in addition to the two (one
federal, one Californian) that the Act already permits."  DeShazo, supra note 103, at 1513.2008] A Periodo f Consequences
after Governor Davis signed the Pavley Bill into law.
The  Alliance  of Automobile  Manufacturers,  Association  of International
Automobile Manufacturers, and a number of California automobile dealers filed
a federal lawsuit arguing that California  lacks the authority to regulate tailpipe
greenhouse  gas emissions.'08  The lawsuit claimed EPCA preempts  any state,
even California, from regulating greenhouse gas emissions from automobiles.09
In  support,  the  industry  observed  that  any  regulation  would  require
manufacturers  to  significantly  improve  fuel  efficiency,  as carbon  dioxide  in
tailpipe  emissions  are  a  byproduct  of  fuel  economy."°  Furthermore,  the
automobile industry argued that the federal government has the sole authority to
regulate  fuel  economy  and  federal law therefore preempts  the  Pavley Bill."'
Finally, the automobile  industry argued, foreign policy considerations prevent
California from enacting global warming legislation."12
The District Court for the Eastern District of California ultimately rejected the
automobile  industry's  claims.  First,  the  court  found  that  EPCA  did  not
expressly preempt California from creating legislation like the Pavley Bill.  The
court noted the "preemptive force of [EPCA] extends very narrowly.""'3  Thus,
legislation enacted pursuant to the California waiver is not preempted, despite
greatly affecting fuel economy, "where the required increase in fuel economy is
incidental to the state law's purpose of assuring protection of public health and
welfare  under the  Clean Air  Act."'14   It follows,  therefore,  that  as  long  as
California's primary purpose behind global warming legislation is to promote
the public health and welfare rather than to regulate  fuel economy, courts will
not read the EPCA to preempt these regulations.
Furthermore, the court found no conflict preemption between EPCA and the
Pavley  Bill.  Since  this  legislation  would  "fulfill  both  EPA's  objective  of
'greatest  degree  of emission reduction  achievable  through  the  application of
technology...  and  EPCA's objective  of implementing the  'maximum  feasible
average fuel economy'  standards," the Pavley Bill can coexist with the EPCA.I5
The  Pavley  Bill,  in  fact,  furthers  EPCA  by  promoting  more  efficient  fuel
'0  See Central Valley Chrysler-Jeep, Inc. v. Goldstene, 529 F.Supp.2d  1151 (E.D. Cal. 2007).
See also DeShazo, supra note  103,  at  1513 ("Having  lost the battle to prevent California from
retaining the power to exceed federal standards, the auto industry sought to limit any remaining
potential for disparate state regulation.  To do this the industry has appealed not to Congress but to
the courts...").
1o9C entral Valley Chrysler, 529 F.Supp.2d at 1164 -65.
110 Id. at 1157 -58.
I Id. at 1165.
112 Id. In response, California argued the Pavley Bill does not focus on fuel economy, but,
rather, on tailpipe emissions which are clearly within its regulatory authority.  See DeShazo, supra
note 103.
13 Central Valley Chrysler, 529 F.Supp.2d at 1176
114 Id.
115 Id. at 1179.University of California, Davis [Vol. 32:1
economy  standards.  Finding no express or conflict preemption, the court then
turned to the automobile industry's foreign policy preemption claim.
The district  court rejected the argument that the Pavley Bill conflicts  with
foreign  policy.  Since  the  automobile  industry  failed  to identify  any  foreign
policy with which the Pavley Bill conflicted, the court found no foreign policy
preemption;  the automakers could only  show the United States had a general
policy to try to reduce greenhouse  gases by negotiating agreements with other
nations. 116  Since the Pavley Bill seeks to regulate only automobile standards for
cars sold within California's borders, it only affects the state's market.  As such,
the Pavley Bill does not interfere with any federal policy of reducing greenhouse
gas emissions  through  agreements  with  foreign nations. 17  In fact,  the court
determined the Pavley Bill's standards "are...  supportive of the United States'
policy because  they provide  market-based incentives  for exactly the  sorts  of
innovation envisioned by the G8 Summit Report."'"18
The Supreme Court has also agreed that regulation of greenhouse gases by a
state  does  not  impair  negotiations  with  foreign  nations  to generally  reduce
greenhouse  emissions." 9   The  Court  acknowledged  the  broad  authority
possessed by the President in the field of foreign policy, but noted that  such
"authority does not extend to the refusal to extend domestic laws."'120  While the
President can negotiate agreements  with foreign nations to reduce greenhouse
gases, he  does  not  have  exclusive  control  over  global  warming  legislation.
Thus, California's attempt  to exercise  the waiver provision  of CAA does not
conflict with foreign policy and is therefore not preempted.
Rejecting  the  argument  that  EPCA  preempts  the  Pavley  Bill  - including
express, conflict and foreign policy preemption - the court essentially suggests
that nothing should prevent California from enforcing the Pavley Bill.  Although
the Central Valley Chrysler court did not address the question of whether the
EPA should grant California's  waiver request,  given that the  EPCA does not
preempt  the proposed  regulations  and the  EPA has  historically granted all of
California's requests under CAA, it would seem that the state's request should
certainly be granted in this case.
116 Id. at 1183 - 89.  The court noted that in order for the plaintiffs in this case to adequately
show foreign policy preemption, they must be able to "show what the policy of the United States is
and precisely how California's AB 1493 Regulations (Pavley Bill), if granted waiver of preemption
by EPA and implemented, would interfere with the United States' foreign policy."
117 Id.
11  Id.
"  Mass. v. E.P.A.,  127 S.Ct. 1438, 1463 (2007).  In this case, the EPA claimed that it did not
have the authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions because "regulating greenhouse gases might
impair the President's ability to negotiate with 'key developing nations' to reduce emissions."
120 Kaswan, supra note 6, at 52 (citing Mass. v. E.P.A., supra).2008] A Periodo f Consequences
C.  CaliforniaR equests a Waiver Pursuant to CAA
After enacting the Pavley Bill, California requested a waiver from the EPA
under the CAA.121  The regulations set forth by CARB cannot be implemented
until the EPA grants a waiver from CAA's preemption provision.  As discussed
above,  the  EPA  must grant  California's  waiver  request  provided the  state's
proposed standards are at least protective as federal standards, California faces
"compelling and extraordinary conditions," and the EPA Administrator does not
find California to be acting in an arbitrary and capricious manner. 22 The Pavley
Bill certainly meets the requirements for a grant of waiver.
The Pavley Bill is the first legislation of its kind; the federal government had
not  yet  enacted  any  regulations  governing  greenhouse  gas  emissions  from
automobile  tailpipes.  Thus,  the  Pavley  Bill  could  not  be  found to  be  less
protective than any non-existent federal standards.  Second, California certainly
faces  "compelling and  extraordinary  conditions"  as the term  is interpreted by
courts.  Finally,  California's  determination  that  its  standards  are,  in  the
aggregate, at least as stringent as federal standards and that the state has a reason
for  enacting  its  own  regulations  should  not  be  deemed  "arbitrary  and
capricious."
Furthermore,  as  discussed above, EPCA does not preempt  the Pavley Bill.
Although the Pavley Bill affects fuel economy, its primary purpose is to regulate
greenhouse gases and reduce global warming. 23  Due to the fact that the Pavley
Bill meets all the requirements for the California waiver and is not preempted by
the EPCA, the EPA has no reason to deny the  state's request for waiver under
CAA.
Nonetheless,  the  EPA  initially  refused  California's  waiver  request  on the
ground that the agency believed it did not have authority to regulate greenhouse
gases.  In August 2003, the EPA signed a notice denying a petition to regulate
greenhouse  gas emissions from motor vehicles under CAA claiming "Congress
has not  granted  EPA  authority  under the  Clean Air Act to  regulate  [carbon
dioxide] and other greenhouse gases for climate change purposes."'124
121 Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 48, at 16.
122 Clean Air Act § 209(b), 42 U.S.C. § 7543(b) (2006).
'2  See, e.g., David R. Hodas, State Law Responses to Global Warming: Is it Constitutional to
Think Globally and Act Locally?, 21 PACE ENVTL. L. REv. 53, 74 -75 (2003) ("Thus, to the extent
that a particular state GHG statute is deemed to regulate motor vehicle emissions in a manner
inconsistent with the California car preemption waiver it might conflict with the Clean Air Act's two
car mandate.  For instance, California has recently enacted a statute limiting future greenhouse gas
emissions, which might be deemed an effort to regulate motor vehicle emissions beyond what EPA
currently allows under its approved versions  of the California car.  However, should California
petition EPA to approve a new version of the California car, which incorporates reduced carbon
dioxide emissions, EPA might be obligated to approve the application thereby waiving any Clean
Air Act preemption" (emphasis added)).
124  Richard Black, U.S. Government "Must Restrict C02 ",BBC NEWS, Apr. 9, 2005, available
at http://news.bbc.co.uk/l/hi/sci/tech/4424867.stni  The agency further "determined  that settingUniversity of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
The  Supreme  Court  disagreed  with  the  EPA's  contentions,  however,  and
found  greenhouse  gas  emissions  to  be  squarely  within  the  purview  of the
agency.'25  The Court  held that Congress  had  empowered the EPA  to enact
controls on greenhouse gases under CAA, even if such regulations might affect
fuel efficiency.126  Furthermore, the CAA specifically directs the EPA to protect
the public health; thus, the EPA has a duty to regulate greenhouse gas emissions
that threaten public  welfare.'27  This duty  exists regardless of the effect  such
regulations may have on fuel efficiency.128
The Court also found the EPA possessed a broad regulatory authority because
Congress  intended for the EPA to be able to respond to threats not known or
envisioned at the  time CAA was drafted:  "The broad language  of § 202(a)(1)
reflects  an  intentional  effort  to  confer  the  flexibility  necessary"  to  meet
unforeseen regulatory needs.'29  Even though Congress may not have considered
climate-change  legislation when it drafted the CAA, this fact does not preclude
the EPA from regulating greenhouse gas emissions.  The EPA should adapt and
evolve with the scientific community's understanding of environmental hazards
and regulate these dangers as Congress intended.
IV.  EPA's FIRST DENIAL TO CALIFORNIA IN FORTY YEARS
After the Supreme Court held, in Massachusetts v. E.P.A., that the EPA has
authority  to regulate greenhouse  gas emissions, California  renewed its request
for waiver under CAA so it could implement the standards created in the Pavley
Bill.
A.  FinalA gency Action
In  a  final  agency  action  issued  at  the  end  of  2007,  the  EPA  denied
California's  request  for a preemption  waiver for  the  Pavley Bill.  The  EPA
reasoned that because greenhouse gases have effects far beyond the borders of
California,  only  national  legislation  and global  agreements  can  satisfactorily
address global warming  issues.' 30 It distinguished the waiver request for the
Pavley Bill from previous waivers because:
GHG emission standards for motor vehicles is not appropriate at this time."
125 Mass. v. E.P.A. 127 S.Ct. at 1455 -56(2007).
126  Id.
127 Id.
128 Id.
129I d. at 1462 (Furthermore, the court expressly noted that "While the Congresses that drafted §
202(a)(1)  might not have appreciated the possibility that burning fossil fuels could lead to global
warming,  they did  understand  that  without  regulatory  flexibility,  changing  circumstances  and
scientific developments would soon render the Clean Air Act obsolete" and therefore crafted the
statute to avoid such obsolescence.).
130S ee Letter from EPA Administrator Johnson to Governor Schwarzenegger (Dec.  19, 2007)
available at http://ag.ca.gov/cms-attachments/press/pdfs/n 1514-epa-letter.pdf.2008] A Periodo f Consequences
[u]nlike other air pollutants covered by previous waivers, greenhouse gases
are  fundamentally  global in nature.  Greenhouse gases  contribute to the
problem of global climate change, a problem that poses challenges for the
entire  nation and indeed the world.  Unlike pollutants covered by other
waivers, greenhouse gas emissions harm the environment in California and
elsewhere, regardless of where the emissions occur.  In other words, this
challenge is not exclusive or unique to California and differs in a basic way
from the  previous and regional air pollution problems discussed  in prior
131
waivers. 
Ignoring  the  fact  that California  has  some  of the  worst  pollution  and air
quality in the nation, the EPA found that greenhouse gas emissions within the
state contribute to global environmental  problems.  Thus, the Administrator of
the EPA, Stephen Johnson, reasoned that since global warming problems extend
beyond California,  "so  too  must...  the  solution."'132   Furthermore,  because
greenhouse gas emissions affect people worldwide, the Administrator refused to
accept  California's  argument  that  it  faced  "compelling  and  extraordinary
conditions" and therefore denied the waiver. 33
In addition, when Administrator Johnson denied the waiver request, he stated
that California did not need the Pavley Bill because of the Energy Independence
and Security Act of 2007 ("EISA"), which President Bush had signed into law
earlier that  day.134   According  to the  Administrator,  the  Pavley Bill was not
needed  because the  EISA  tightened  fuel  economy  standards for automobiles
under EPCA.  Administrator Johnson ignored the fact that California petitioned
for waiver more than two years prior to the enactment of the EISA, and refused
to  recognize  that  the  Pavley  Bill  would  go  into effect  sooner  than  federal
requirements. 35   Instead,  without  citing  any  supporting  findings,  the
Administrator asserted the EISA would impose tougher requirements than any
state legislation.
131 Id.
132 Id.
133 Id. "In  light of the global  nature  of the problem of climate change,  I have  found that
California does not have a 'need to meet compelling and extraordinary conditions.'  Accordingly, I
have decided that EPA will be denying the waiver..."  See also Notice of Decision Denying a
Waiver of Clean Air Act Preemption, 73 Fed. Reg. 12156 (Mar. 6, 2008) ("1  have concluded that
section  209(b)  was  intended  to  allow  California  to  promulgate  state  standards  applicable  to
emissions from new motor vehicles to address pollution problems that are local or regional.  I do not
believe section  209(b)(l)(B) was intended to allow California to promulgate  state standards for
emissions from new motor vehicles designed to address global climate change problems; nor, in the
alternative,  do  I believe  that  the effects  of climate  change  in  California  are  compelling and
extraordinary compared to the effects in the rest of the country.").
131C alifornia Disputes EPA Claims Over Energy Laws  GHG Reductions, 19  CLEAN AIR
REPORT 1, Jan. 10, 2008, available at 2008 WLNR 464957.
135 Id. ("CARB and other state officials were 'stunned'  to hear Johnson's estimate, 'because
California's  standards go into effect earlier, take effect faster and are more aggressive, and at the
endpoint, they're more stringent.").University of California, Davis [Vol. 32:1
B.  Ninth Circuit Petitionf or Review
California promptly responded to the EPA decision:  on the first business day
of 2008,  officials filed  suit in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals,  asking the
court  to  overturn  the EPA's  rejection  of the  state  waiver  request.136   The
complaint attacked the EPA's decision on the ground  that the agency  did not
make a finding of "nationwide scope or effect" of the Pavley Bill as required by
the Clean Air Act.137  As of early September 2008, the Ninth Circuit has yet to
issue a decision.
California further alleged that its extraordinary and compelling needs entitled
it to a waiver under the CAA.  In addition to the general conditions of California
discussed in Part  II.A.2, supra, California claimed a compelling need because
motor vehicle  emissions contribute  so  heavily  to  greenhouse  gases.138   The
effects  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  from  automobiles  disproportionately
impacts  California:  the  state  has  over  thirty-two  million  registered  vehicles,
twice the number in any other state.'39  Not only do automobiles account for
thirty percent of greenhouse gas emissions in California, but they are the most
rapidly growing source of greenhouse gas.140  As a result, "the longer the delay
in reducing these emissions, the more costly and harmful will be the impact on
141
California."'
In addition to the state's compelling need for the Pavley Bill, California noted
the EISA, enacted under the EPCA, did not affect the state's ability to apply for
a waiver under CAA. In appealing EPA's ruling, California noted,
We  are  aware  that  Congress  has  enacted  the  Energy  Independence  and
Security Act of 2007 ...  But changes to EPCA do not affect EPA's authority or
duties under Section 202 of the Clean Air Act..  . As the Supreme  Court has
emphasized, EPA's statutory obligation to promote public health and welfare is
"wholly independent'  from EPCA's 'mandate to promote energy efficiency.,'' 42
Furthermore, when it enacted EISA,  Congress stated outright that it did not
136  Id.
137 Petition  for Review,  California v. E.P.A. (9th Cir. Jan. 2,  2008) (citing Clean Air Act §
307(b)(1),  42  U.S.C.  §  7607),  available  at
http://ag.ca.gov/cmsattachments/press/pdfs/nl514-epapetition-l.pdf.  The petition for review also
contained California's complaint to the EPA alleging the EPA "unreasonably delayed action on the
requested waiver.  The agency has had nearly  two years since CARB applied for the waiver to
review the application and supporting materials and to make a decision."  Complaint for Declaratory
and  Injunctive Relief, supra note 48,  at 4.  It  further asserted that because  CARB  submitted
application for waiver in December 2005, a reasonable time for decision had expired.  Id. at 56 -60.
138 Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 48, at 8.
139 Id. at 41.
140 Id. at 42 -43.
141 Id.a t 8.
142 Letter  from  Attorney  General  of the  Commonwealth  of Massachusetts  et  al.  to  EPA
Administrator Stephen L. Johnson, Jan. 23, 2008 (citing Mass. v. E.P.A., 127 S.Ct. at 1462).2008] A Periodo f Consequences
intend to modify the EPA's obligations under any other statute.43  As noted in
Part  IIB,  the  EPCA  does  not  preempt  legislation  enacted  pursuant  to  the
California  waiver.  Therefore,  the  EISA,  which  was  enacted  under  EPCA,
similarly  should not preempt any legislation California  seeks to enact pursuant
to the CAA waiver provision.  As long as California meets the requirements for
a waiver under the CAA, EISA's fuel economy standards should not affect the
Pavley Bill.
California  also  argued  the  EPA  Administrator  incorrectly  suggested  the
federal standards in the EISA affected California's waiver claim.  Administrator
Johnson's  statement  that federal  standards  surpassed proposed  standards was
plainly incorrect. 44  CARB found the Pavley Bill's regulation of greenhouse gas
emissions would reduce carbon dioxide emissions in California by 17.2 million
metric tons by 2016, and would result in a cumulative reduction of 33.4 million
metric tons. 45   In contrast, the  federal standards would  only achieve an  18.9
million metric ton reduction146
C.  Probable Outcome
Given the EPA's authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions,147 the Ninth
Circuit148 will likely overturn EPA's denial of California's waiver request for the
143 Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, Pub. L. No. 110-140, § 3, 121 Stat. 1492,
1498 (2007) ("Except to the extent expressly provided in this Act or an amendment made by this
Act, nothing in this Act or an amendment made by this Act supersedes, limits the authority provided
or responsibility  conferred  by, or  authorizes  violation  of any  provision  of law  (including  a
regulation), including any energy or environmental law or regulation.")
144 California Disputes EPA  Claims Over Energy Laws GHG Reductions, 19 CLEAN  AIR
REPORT 1, Jan. 10, 2008, available at 2008 WLNR 464957.
145  Id.
146 Id. Furthermore, when CARB factored in other states that adopted the Pavley Bill, the board
found  its standards would  cumulatively achieve a more  significant decrease  in greenhouse  gas
emissions.  "In assessing cumulative U.S. reductions, which includes more than a dozen other states
implementing  the California rules  between  2009 and 2016,  CARB  claims  its  standards would
achieve a 58-MMT  reduction compared with a 20-MMT  cumulative  reduction from the federal
standard.  The analysis also shows California's rules would equate to a 44 mpg CAFE standard by
2020" compared with only 35 miles per gallon by 2020 under the federal regulations.  Id.
147 See Mass. v. E.P.A., 127 S.Ct. 1438 (2007).
148 For purposes of this paper, I assume the case will ultimately be decided by the Ninth Circuit
Court of Appeals.  However,  it should be noted that the  EPA challenges  the Ninth  Circuit's
jurisdiction.  It filed a petition for review in the D.C. Circuit, citing Section 307 of the Clean Air Act,
which says EPA actions with "nationwide  scope or effect" must be filed in the D.C. Circuit.  In
response to this latest action by the EPA, California argues the letter sent by Administrator Johnson
to California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger  announcing an intent to deny the waiver constituted
a final agency action; this letter did not suggest these rules were of nationwide scope or effect.  The
EPA asserts that its letter to Governor Schwarzenegger did not constitute a "final agency action"
subject to judicial review.  Plaintiffs Aim to Set Precedent to Review EPA Rules Outside of D.C.
Circuit, 19 CLEAN AIR REPORT 7, Apr. 3, 2008.  The EPA also asked the D.C. Circuit to review its
denial of California's waiver request "as part of a related challenge to EPA's 'unreasonable delay' in
responding to California's waiver request, in a case the litigants had agreed to dismiss the same day
EPA filed the motion."  EPA Pushes Novel Bid to Allow Key Panel to Review GHG Waiver Case, 29University of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
Pavley Bill.  Given that California meets all the requirements for a preemption
waiver, the Pavley Bill represents the type of innovation Congress encourages,
and the EPA's precedent of granting the California waiver, the Ninth Circuit in
all likelihood will - and should - find the EPA's denial arbitrary and capricious.
.As long  as California  meets  all  the  requirements  for a waiver  set  out  in
Section 209 of the CAA, the EPA Administrator has no discretion to deny the
state's  request  for  waiver  of preemption. 149  The Pavley  Bill  fulfills  these
requirements  and thus, the EPA  improperly concluded that California did not
qualify for the waiver.  Although the EPA may deny  a request for waiver of
preemption, it can do so only in three limited circumstances,  none of which exist
in this situation.
First, California's determination that the Pavley Bill standards are at least as
protective as federal standards was not an arbitrary or capricious finding.  When
California requested the waiver, no comparable federal standards existed.  Thus,
during the two years  the petition for waiver remained pending, the EPA could
not  have  found California's  standards  to be less  protective than  non-existent
federal standards.  Even at the time the EPA announced its denial of California's
waiver request, California's  standards  remained  more protective  than  federal
standards:  the  Pavley  Bill  would  reduce  carbon  dioxide  emissions  by 33.4
million metric tons compared to a federal reduction of only 18.9 million metric
tons by the year 2020.150  California's finding that its standards, providing a 175
per  cent  greater  reduction  of  carbon  dioxide  emissions  over  the  federal
regulations,  are  at  least  as  protective  as  federal  law  was  therefore  neither
arbitrary nor capricious.
In addition, the EPA improperly asserted that California did not need separate
standards  to meet "compelling and extraordinary conditions."  .Throughout  the
history of CAA and California's requests for preemption waivers, both the EPA
and  courts  have  construed  this  term  broadly.'5'  California  has  the  highest
human  and  vehicular  population  in  the  nation,  unique  topography  highly
susceptible to global warming, and some of the worst ozone concentrations  in
the United States.  These conditions disproportionately affect the state as it must
concern itself with protecting a greater number of people and with preserving a
large coastline and forest areas.  Furthermore, the high number of automobiles in
the state results in more tailpipe emissions, and thus a higher concentration  of
INSIDE THE EPA 14, Apr. 4, 2008.  California opposed this action, saying the "unreasonable delay
case is moot because EPA has since issued its decision denying the waiver."  Id. This paper does not
discuss  the  merits  of the  EPA's jurisdictional  challenge,  but  instead  assumes  Ninth  Circuit
jurisdiction.  Even if the EPA wins its motion to transfer the case to the D.C. Circuit, the analysis of
the merits of the case would not change.  Some view the Ninth Circuit as more favorable  to
California, whereas the D.C. Circuit would act more favorably to the EPA; however, either circuit
will probably overturn the EPA's decision for the reasons stated herein.
119 See supra, Part ll.A.2.b.
1o  See supra, notes 142 -44 and accompanying text.
15'  See supra, notes 62 -66 and accompanying text.2008] A Periodo f Consequences
greenhouse  gases.  The state, therefore,  meets  the required  "compelling  and
extraordinary  conditions" as the term, in the context of Section 209(b)  of the
CAA, has been understood for the past fortyyears.
Finally, Administrator Johnson could not have denied California's request for
inconsistency reasons  because California's  standards  are in  line with Section
202(a)  of the CAA.152   Section  202(a)  encourages  the reduction  of any  air
pollutant  emitted  by  motor vehicles,  particularly  when  such  pollution  "may
reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare.' 53  Regulations
of vehicular  emissions should make  use of the best technology feasible, while
also taking into account the cost associated with applying such technology.' 54
In addition to meeting the requirements set forth in Section 209 of the CAA,
the Pavley Bill represents the type of innovation Congress intended to encourage
with  the waiver  provision.  By  enacting  Section 209,  Congress  expressed  a
specific desire for California to develop more stringent regulations with regard
to air pollution than federal regulations.  The Pavley Bill addressed greenhouse
gas emissions from automobile sources before the federal  government, and its
standards would reduce  more air pollution than the federal standards enacted
two years later.  The Pavley Bill thus falls in line with what Congress intended
California to enact through Section 209 of CAA.
Furthermore, even the EPA staff believed California deserved a preemption
waiver for the Pavley Bill; when the EPA Administrator denied the request, he
ignored advice from his staff.  For example, Margaret  Oge, head of the EPA's
Office of Transportation and Air Quality, prepared a memo stating "there is no
legal or technical justification for denying" California's request for a preemption
waiver. 55  She also "fear[ed] the credibility of the agency..,  will be irreparably
damaged"  if the  EPA  denied  California's  waiver.' 56  Other  internal  EPA
documents  and reports "indicate  that the overwhelming evidence  compiled by
the  professional  staff  at  EPA  with  expertise  in  the  matter  was  essential
157
ignored."'
Senator Barbara Boxer (D-Ca.) alleged Administrator Johnson "ignored the
unanimous advice of his staff.'lS In fact, according  to EPA internal  memos,
152C lean Air Act § 202(a), 42 U.S.C. § 7521 (2006).
153I d. at § 202(a)(1).
154I d. at § 202(a)(3)(A)(i)  ("regulations ...  shall contain standards which reflect the greatest
degree  of  emission  reduction  achievable  through  the  application  of technology  which  the
Administrator determines will be available for the model year to which such standards apply, giving
appropriate  consider to cost, energy, and  safety factors associated with the application of such
technology.").
155 EPA Memo Thickens Waiver Plot, FRESNO BEE, Feb. 28, 2008, at C4.
156 Id.
Id.
157 
151 Dan Friedman, GOP Seeks Probe of Alleged Lobbying by EPA Officials, CONGRESs DAILY,
Apr. 8, 2008, available at WLNR 6572000  (emphasis added).  Interestingly, both United States
Senators  from  California  questioned  Administrator  Johnson  regarding  his  decision  to  denyUniversity of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
EPA Administrator Stephen Johnson denied California's waiver request despite
warning  from  his  expert  staff  that  EPA  would  "'likely  lose  the  suit'  if
California challenged  the denial. EPA officials also told the Administrator that
California did, in fact, face compelling and extraordinary conditions sufficient to
justify a waiver.'59  Although it is unclear exactly why Administrator Johnson
chose to ignore this advice,'60 these internal memos suggest the entire EPA staff,
aside from the Administrator, agreed that California met all requirements for a
preemption waiver under the CAA.  The Ninth Circuit should certainly take into
account  the  EPA  staff's  widespread  agreement  that  there  was "no  legal  or
technical justification" for the denial.
Forty years of history, dating from the time Congress enacted the CAA, also
supports California's position.  Prior to the Pavley Bill, the EPA always, at least
partially,  granted  California's  waiver  requests.  This overwhelming  approval
rate suggests the court should carefully  scrutinize the  first and only  denial to
determine whether the EPA's shift away from its history of liberally granting all
waiver  requests  has  any justification.  EPA  staff members  also  pointed  to
precedent,  noting  the "long  history"  in which  EPA  has granted  California  a
waiver of preemption under CAA.'16  Administrator Johnson gave no reasonable
justification for his departure from precedent.
Aside from the Administrator's incorrect finding that California did not meet
the  requirements  for a  waiver,  the  Administrator  provided  additional  faulty
reasoning  for  his  denial  of the  waiver  request.  He  dismissed  California's
legislation as insufficient to provide a solution because greenhouse gases create
global problems;  in  essence,  he asserted that  global  problems  require  global
solutions.162   In  practice,  such  logic  leads  to  absurd  results.  Consider  a
hypothetical situation where the United States wanted to reduce greenhouse gas
California's  waiver  request  for  the  Pavley  Bill.  When  Senator  Diane  Feinstein  questioned
Administrator Johnson and asked "if any top staffer recommended denial, the head of the EPA
verbally ducked.  'I received hours of briefings from the technical and legal staff, with a wide range
of options-legally defensible options'  he  said.  'You're  not answering my question,'  Feinstein
responded.  'All I can do is believe what your non-answer means."' Frank Davies, EPA Head Ducks
Senators' Grilling Over Waiver: Boxer, Feinstein Try Different Tacks, End up Equally Stymied, SAN
JOSE MERCURY NEWS, Mar. 5, 2008, at 3A.
159 Barbara Boxer, Why is EPA Standing in the Way of State Law?, SACRAMENTO BEE, Jan. 27,
2008, at E5.
160 Some claim the EPA Administrator's decision was politically motivated.  See, e.g., Senator
Boxer Pursues GAO Investigation of EPA 's Waiver Decision on Global Warming Emissions From
Vehicles, U.S.  FEDERAL NEWS,  Feb. 8,  2008, available at 2008  WLNR 2544744  ("It was also
reported 'on November 2 that Vice President Cheney met with auto executives who 'delivered  the
message that they wanted the White House to oppose California's request for a waiver under the
Clean Air Act.'  The EPA Administrator admitted to the Committee at our January 24 hearing that
he had discussed this issue with White House officials.").
"6I See,  e.g.,  Associated  Press,  Internal EPA  Documents Discuss California Waiver, SAN
MATEO COUNTY TIMES, Feb. 27, 2008, available at 2008 WLNR 3894488.
162 See supra, notes 128 -30 and accompanying text.2008] A Periodo f Consequences
emissions,163 but other countries had not mandated such reductions nor had any
agreements  to  do  so.164  Would  the  United States'  proposed greenhouse  gas
emission reduction program have little to no impact unless all countries  enact
the same program?  Can one dismiss the United States'  proposed efforts as the
futile endeavor of one country?  Would the United States choose not to enact its
legislation based on the reasoning that the problem can only be addressed with
international  cooperation?  The answer to these questions is no. 65  While global
warming certainly requires global attention, a solution begins with the domestic
legislation of individual nations.
Similarly,  California  can  play  a leading  role  in  reducing  greenhouse  gas
emissions  even  where  no federal  legislation  exists.  Certainly,  a  nationwide
endeavor would better address global warming, but the contributions of any state
can  make  a  significant  difference  in  the  fight  against  global  warming.  A
solution must start somewhere and can begin with the efforts of just one state.
Furthermore, the effects of the Pavley Bill would extend beyond California, with
at least fourteen other states also adopting identical regulations. 166 Although the
federal government now has legislation that restricts greenhouse gas emissions
from automobiles, the Pavley Bill contains more stringent regulations and will
therefore have a greater impact in curbing global warming.
As  noted  above,  although  the  federal  government  should  certainly  be
applauded  for its  efforts to  reduce  greenhouse gas  emissions  from vehicular
sources, federal  legislation does not prohibit California from enacting its own,
163 This statement is based on another California environmental bill,  Assembly Bill 32, also
known  as  the California  Global  Warming Solutions  Act  of 2006.  This  bill seeks  to  reduce
greenhouse gas emissions to 2000 levels by 2010, to  1990 levels by 2020 and to 80% below the
1990 levels by 2050.  California Office of the Governor, Fact Sheet: Landmark Global Warming
Legislation, http://gov.ca.gov/index. php?/fact-sheet/4445/ (last visited Nov. 20, 2008).
164 A  situation  where  the United States is eager  to enact environmental  legislation,  which
requires  international  support  and  cooperation  seems  unlikely,  however,  given  it is  the  only
developed  nation which  has not  ratified  the  Kyoto Protocol.  Ratifying  the Kyoto  Protocol
essentially commits a nation to reducing greenhouse gas emissions or to engage in emissions trading.
Despite the United States' status as the world's top polluter, it has not expressed the intention to
ratify the Kyoto Protocol anytime soon.  See Jorge Chapa, Australia Ratifies the Kyoto Protocol!,
INHABITAT,  Dec.  5,  2007,  http://www.inhabitat.com/2007/12/05/australia-ratifies-the-kyoto-
protocol/ (last visited Nov. 20, 2008).
165 If all countries take the position of the EPA Administrator, environmental problems would
worsen  as  states  would  not  enact national  global  warming  legislation  unless  it  could  take
international effect.  A nation could argue that since global problems require global support, efforts
of individual states would be futile.  Such reasoning would prevent nations that do want to reduce
greenhouse gases from protecting the environment.  Nations that choose to enact global warming
legislation should do so regardless of whether other countries have created similar environmental
legislation.  While  it  may be  true  that  global  warming  threats  are  best addressed  through
international resolutions,  nations can  still try to solve these problems  through  legislation  at a
domestic level prior to engaging in any cooperative efforts with other countries.  Each nation can
independently contribute to achieving solutions to the problem of global warming regardless of the
actions of other countries.
'66 See supran ote 103 and accompanying text.University of California,D  avis [Vol. 32:1
more stringent, regulations under the  CAA.  Allowing  both federal  and state
legislation  to  coexist  reflects  the  commitment  to  cooperative  federalism
Congress  envisioned  for  the  CAA  and  other  environmental  statutes.  This
modified and cooperative federalism model created by CAA has  worked well
for the past forty years; it has allowed other states that are most threatened by
environmental problems  the opportunity  to enact  more stringent  requirements
that have often then been adopted by Congress.  The EPA therefore should not
limit  California's  innovations.  Given  Congress'  express  approval  of
California's innovation and the fact that all efforts to reduce greenhouse gases
may  curb  global  warming's  detrimental  effects,  the  Ninth  Circuit  should
overturn the EPA's denial of California's waiver request.
CONCLUSION
Federal  legislation  and state  innovation  are  both necessary  to best combat
environmental problems.  Cooperative  federalism in this field provides  a base
level of regulation while also allowing states to test more stringent requirements.
Innovation and experimentation best solve problems created by global warming
since the  federal approach  can often  learn from a state's model or adopt  state
legislation that has proven both feasible and successful.  The EPA's denial  of
California's  waiver  request  for  the  Pavley  Bill  prevents  such  cooperative
federalism and should be overturned.
Even if the Ninth Circuit upholds the EPA's decision, or perhaps even before
a court can  rule  on  California's petition  for review,  Congress  may  overturn
Administrator Johnson's  ruling by statute.167  A number of bills introduced  in
both houses of Congress would either require  the EPA to review its  denial or
grant California a preemption waiver.  For example, Senators Feinstein (D-CA)
and  Snowe  (R-ME)  introduced  the  Greenhouse  Gas  Endangerment  Finding
Deadline  and  California  Waiver  Reconsideration  Act168 to  direct  the  EPA
Administrator  to  reconsider  its  denial  by  no  later  than  June  30,  2009.169
Similarly, Representatives  Welch (D-VT) and Sherman  (D-CA) co-sponsored
the Right to Clean Vehicles Act170 which would outright grant California's CAA
waiver request.17   Either of these bills could  overturn  the EPA's denial  and
allow California - as well as other states - to enact the Pavley Bill.
167 Senator  Boxer  (D-CA)  also  expressed  the expectation  that  "the  next  president  would
overturn the EPA decision because Democrats Barack Obarna and Hillary Clinton and Republican
John McCain support California's waiver request."  Frank Davies, InternalE PA Documents Discuss
California Waiver, SAN MATEO COUNTY TIMES, Feb. 27, 2008, availablea t 2008 WLNR 3894488.
168 S. 2806, 110th Cong. (2008).
169P laintiffs Open to EPA Pact Over Schedule for GHG Risk Finding, 29 INSIDE THE EPA, Apr.
4, 2008, available at 2008 WLNR 6343984
170 H.R. 5560, 110th Cong. (2008).
171 New House Bill Seeks to Overturn EPA Decision on California Auto Standards Waiver,
CONG. DOCUMENTS, Mar. 6, 2008.2008]  A Periodo f Consequences  213
Regardless of the form in which California (hopefully) obtains its preemption
waiver for the Pavley Bill, the state should continue to take advantage of Section
209 of CAA.  Since the enactment  of CAA, California's  standards  have often
been adopted by other states and,  at times, by the federal government.  The
California  waiver  created  a  number  of  popular  pieces  of  environmental
legislation  and  has  generally  reflected  a  successful  model  of  cooperative
federalism.  As such, allowing California to continue  experimenting with new
ideas  is  of vital  importance  to  achieving  national,  and  global,  emissions
reduction goals.