 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY 
Copyright, Exhaustion, and the Role of Libraries 
in the Ecosystem of Knowledge
ARIEL KATZ* 
CONTENTS 
I.   INTRODUCTION ........................................................................... 82 
II.   LIBRARIES PREDATE COPYRIGHT ................................................. 84 
III.   THE PLAUSIBILITY OF DIGITAL EXHAUSTION ............................... 88 
  A.  Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons: Life Beyond s 109(a) ........ 88 
  B. Exhaustion Beyond Distribution .......................................... 92 
IV.   THE LIMITS OF PRIVATE REORDERING ......................................... 95 
  A.  Exhaustion: Limits on Contract and License Override ....... 95 
  B.  Towards a Digital Restraint of Trade Doctrine................... 99 
V.   DIGITAL EXHAUSTION AND THE CASE OF LIBRARIES .................. 103 
  A.  Why Do Libraries Even Exist? ............................................ 103 
  B.  Libraries Mitigate a Web of Market Failures .................... 104 
  C.  Technology Contingent, Endemic, and Strategic  
    Impediments to Access .........................................................105 
    1.  Technology Contingent Impediments ............................ 106 
    2.  Endemic Impediments ..................................................... 107 
    3.  Strategic Impediments ................................................... 109 
  D.  Price Discrimination and Impediments Thereto ................ 110 
  E.  Alternatives to Direct Price Discrimination ....................... 115 
  F.  Indirect Price Discrimination: Bundling, Sharing, and  
    Libraries ............................................................................... 117 
VI.   CONCLUSIONS ............................................................................ 121 
* Ariel Katz is an Associate Professor, Innovation Chair–Electronic Commerce, Faculty of 
Law, University of Toronto. Many thanks to Guy Rub, Margot Kaminski, Peter Shane, 
Matthew Marinett, Pietro Cimino, and the participants of the I/S Symposium on The 
Future of Libraries in the Digital Age for their helpful comments and suggestions. 82  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
I.INTRODUCTION
American book and journal publishers sold 2.7 billion units in 
2014, generating $27.98 billion in net revenue.1 Meanwhile, libraries 
in the United States circulate almost twice that amount, engaging in 
over 4.42 billion circulation transactions a year,2 most of which are for 
free. Presumably, most of the works that libraries circulate are under 
copyright, and the Copyright Act grants to the owner of the copyright 
the  exclusive  right  “to  distribute  copies  or  phono  records  of  the 
copyrighted work to the public by . . . lending.”3 Nevertheless, libraries 
continue to circulate such a vast number of works, without seeking 
permission from the owners of the copyright or paying any royalties, 
because the first-sale doctrine, now codified in section 109(a), allows 
them  to  do  that.  Moreover,  libraries  benefit  from  the  first-sale 
doctrine not only when they circulate materials, but also when they 
acquire them. The first-sale doctrine makes it easier for libraries to 
build their collections because those who sell  them lawfully made 
copies do not need to obtain the copyright owners’ permission to do 
so. Thus, distributors and resellers of in-print books or out-of-print 
books, and owners of new books or used ones, can all sell, give, or lend 
them  to  libraries  without  worrying  about  copyright  law.4  This 
ecosystem, where market-based remunerated transactions constitute 
only  a  subset  of  a  much  larger  number  of  non-market  and  non-
remunerated transactions, has existed for generations—probably ever 
since publishers published books and libraries circulated them—and 
publishers have been doing just fine. 
But this ecosystem is currently under pressure. Rumor has it that 
the first-sale doctrine is dying.5 According to the rumor, the first-sale 
1 Marisa Bluestone, U.S. Publishing Industry’s Annual Survey Reveals $28 Billion in 
Revenue in 2014, ASS'N OF AM. PUBLISHERS, http://publishers.org/news/us-publishing-
industry%E2%80%99s-annual-survey-reveals-28-billion-revenue-2014 
[https://perma.cc/526T-8PA8]. 
2 Brief for Am. Lib. Ass’n et al. as Amici Curiae Supporting Petitioner at 3, Kirtsaeng v. 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351 (2013) (No. 11-697). 
3 17 U.S.C. § 106(3) (1976). 
4 See Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351, 1366 (2013). 
5 The analysis and critique of the “death prognosis” is based on Ariel Katz, Digital 
Exhaustion: North American Observations, in RESEARCH HANDBOOK ON ELECTRONIC 
COMMERCE LAW 137 (John A. Rothchild ed., 2016). 2016]  KATZ  83 
doctrine, forged in the era of the physical copy and limited to the 
distribution of physical copies, will lose its prominence in the brave 
new  digital  world,  where  works  in  digital  formats  are  no  longer 
distributed and enjoyed as particular identifiable objects.6 The first-
sale doctrine may not disappear altogether, but history may relegate it 
to the geriatric departments of culture and knowledge, together with 
yellowing used books, dusty records, and crumbling films.  
This  “death  prognosis”  further  relies  on  the  proliferation  of 
contractual  and  licensing  conditions  that  purport  to  prohibit  one 
buyer from transferring what she purchased to another, even if such a 
transfer were otherwise technically possible and legally permissible.7 
If those restrictive conditions are enforceable (and many assume they 
usually  are),  then  the  first-sale  doctrine  may  be  legally  alive,  but 
practically dead.  
If the death prognosis is accurate, it implies a rather dim future for 
libraries—at  least  as  we  know  them.  Libraries  may  not  disappear 
altogether,  but  will  slowly  function  less  as  libraries  and  more  as 
archives. Or perhaps some of their functions will be taken over by 
commercial enterprises (imagine iTunes, Spotify, or Netflix for books 
or journal articles), or might require separate licensing arrangements. 
For this shift to happen, two propositions must be true. First, as a 
legal matter, it must either be the case that the that the first-sale 
doctrine applies only to physical copies and not to digital copies, or 
that the doctrine does apply to digital copies, but contractual and 
licensing limitations on the doctrine are unquestionably enforceable. 
Second, if commercial enterprises were to replace libraries, then, as an 
economic matter, business models that perform the functions that 
libraries currently perform must be viable.  
In this paper, I challenge both of these propositions. First, as a 
legal  matter,  the  rumor  of  the  doctrine’s  demise,  while  taken  for 
granted  by  many  commentators,  is  far  from  being  a  foregone 
conclusion. Notwithstanding views to the contrary, the Copyright Act 
does not preclude courts from applying the principle of exhaustion to 
the  transfer of digital  files.  Likewise,  the  general  enforceability of 
contractual and licensing limitations on the doctrine should not be 
taken for granted. Second, as an economic matter, many of libraries’ 
6 Aaron Perzanowski & Jason Schultz, Legislating Digital Exhaustion, 29 BERKELEY TECH. 
L.J. 1535, 1539 (2014). 
7 Id. at 1539-44. 84  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
core functions address endemic market failures that will continue to 
persist even if most content were digitized. Therefore, the erosion of 
the first-sale doctrine may not result in new business models that 
better serve the public while remunerating authors, but may instead 
result in a net loss for all.  
The  paper  begins  with  a  historical  reminder:  libraries  and 
universities predate copyright. In Part I, I note that the institutional 
role of libraries and institutions of higher learning in the “promotion 
of science” and the “encouragement of learning” was acknowledged 
even before the first copyright statutes were enacted. This history is 
important for charting the future direction of copyright law because it 
constitutes part of the context in which copyright law was born and it 
helps illuminate the goals copyright was created to achieve. In Part II, 
I establish the plausibility of digital exhaustion. I explain why the 
first-sale doctrine is only one manifestation of a broader principle of 
exhaustion, which is not necessarily limited to the distribution right 
and is capable of broader application. In Part III, I explain why not all 
licensing  or  contractual  restrictions  on  downstream  uses  are 
enforceable. In Part IV, I show how the social functions of libraries 
justify the development of the law in the direction argued for below.  
II.LIBRARIESPREDATE COPYRIGHT
Libraries and universities predate copyright. The institutional role 
of libraries and institutions of higher learning in the “promotion of 
science”  and  the  “encouragement  of  learning”  was  acknowledged 
before legislators decided to grant authors exclusive rights in their 
writings.  Beginning  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  universities  of 
Cambridge and Oxford (the only two English universities at the time) 
were entrusted “with the special privilege and authority of printing 
within their respective Universities, and of selling or causing to be 
sold throughout his Majesty's dominions or elsewhere all manner of 
books and works of whatever description, not prohibited by public 
authority,  and  whether  the  same  may  be  or  not  contained  or 
mentioned in any other Royal Charter or Grant to any other Printer”.8 
Not only were universities permitted to print and sell books regardless 
of any exclusive rights granted to others,9 but subsequent legislation 
also required publishers to deliver the best quality copies of every 
8 The Universities of Oxford & Cambridge v. Richardson, 31 ER 1260 (1802). 
9 DAVID MCKITTERICK, A HISTORY OF CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS xii (1992). 2016]  KATZ  85 
newly printed or reprinted book for the use of the public libraries of 
the universities.10 
Moreover, when the Statute of Anne, the first copyright act, was 
enacted in 1709, it included both a provision clarifying that it did not 
affect any right that the universities have had, or could claim to have, 
to the printing or reprinting of any book,11 and an expanded duty to 
deliver books to the libraries of the universities and other institutions 
in England and Scotland.12 The act also established a mechanism to 
control the prices of books if found to be “too high and unreasonable”, 
and it included the vice chancellors of the two universities among the 
group of public officials that could set the maximum price for which a 
book could be sold.13 In Cambridge University v. Bryer, the court 
10 See, e.g., Licensing Act, 1662, 5 Statutes of the Realm 428 1625-1680 (An Act for 
preventing the frequent Abuses in printing seditious treasonable and unlicensed Books and 
Pamphlets and for regulating of Printing and Printing Presses, 13 & 14 Car. 2, e. 33, ss. 16, 
17 (1662)).  
11 Statute of Anne, s IX (“Provided, that nothing in this act contained shall extend, or be 
construed to extend, either to prejudice or confirm any right that the said universities, or 
any of them, or any person or persons have, or claim to have, to the printing or reprinting 
any book or copy already printed, or hereafter to be printed.”). 
12 Statute of Anne, s V (“[A]nd it is hereby enacted, that nine copies of each book or books, 
upon the best paper . . . shall, by the printer and printers thereof, be delivered . . . for the 
use of the royal library, the libraries of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, the 
libraries of the four universities in Scotland, the library of Sion College in London, and the 
library commonly called the library belonging to the faculty of advocates at Edinburgh 
respectively . . . ”). 
13 Statute of Anne, s IV (“if any bookseller or booksellers, printer or printers, shall . . . set a 
price upon, or sell, or expose to sale, any book or books at such a price or rate as shall be 
conceived by any person or persons to be too high and unreasonable; it shall and may be 
lawful for any person or persons, to make complaint thereof to the lord archbishop of 
Canterbury for the time being, the lord chancellor, or lord keeper of the great seal of Great 
Britain for the time being, the lord bishop of London for the time being, the lord chief 
justice of the court of Queen's Bench, the lord chief justice of the court of Common Pleas, 
the lord chief baron of the court of Exchequer for the time being, the vice chancellors of the 
two universities for the time being, . . . who, or any one of them, shall and have hereby full 
power and authority, from time to time, to send for, summon, or call before him or them 
such bookseller or booksellers, printer or printers, and to examine and enquire of the 
reason of the dearness and inhauncement of the price or value of such book or books by 
him or them so sold or exposed to sale; and if upon such enquiry and examination it shall 
be found, that the price of such book or books is inhaunced, or any wise too high or 
unreasonable, then and in such case the said [officials], or any one or more of them, so 
enquiring and examining, have hereby full power and authority to reform and redress the 
same, and to limit and settle the price of every such printed book and books, from time to 
time, according to the best of their judgments, and as to them shall seem just and 
reasonable . . . ”). 86  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
explained that both measures demonstrated the legislature’s intent to 
encourage  learning  by  facilitating  access  to  books.  Price  controls 
aimed to ensure the accessibility of literature to persons desirous of 
purchasing books, and mandatory library deposit of books enabled 
literary persons to access books even if they may not be able to afford 
purchasing them.14  
While  today’s  copyright  statutes  no  longer  contain  these  exact 
statutory  provisions,  this  history  is  nonetheless  important.  First, 
because it constitutes part of the context in which copyright law was 
born and it helps illuminate the goals it was created to achieve.15 The 
public interest in gaining access to works has always been the main 
goal of copyright law,16 even if the means to achieve this goal might 
change over time.  
Second, as the case law discussed in the next Parts affirms, the 
copyright statute should not be interpreted as if it were written on a 
legal clean slate, but against the backdrop of previously existing or 
recognized rights and interests. Just as the statute presumably retains 
the substance of the common law rights of individuals,17 it should also 
presumably preserve the ability of public institutions to pursue their 
recognized mandate, unless there is a clear indication of legislative 
intent to the contrary.18  
Third,  in  countries  such  as  Canada  or  the  United  States,  this 
history  might  also  affect  the  ability  of  federal legislation  to  enact 
copyright laws that impact the ability of libraries and educational 
institutions to pursue their mandates. While the Constitutions of both 
countries empower the federal legislature to enact copyright laws, 
principles of federalism limit the extent of these powers inasmuch as 
14 Univ. of Cambridge v. Bryer, 16 ER 317, 321 (1812). 
15 Id. (noting that even though the specific price-setting provision had been repealed, it was 
part of an entire Act, which shows that and facilitating access to works was one of the 
objectives of the legislation).  
16 See, e.g., Feist Pubs., Inc. v. Rural Tel. Svc. Co., Inc., 499 U.S. 340, 349 (1991) (“The 
primary objective of copyright is not to reward the labor of authors, but ‘to promote the 
Progress of Science and useful Arts.’”). 
17 Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351, 1353 (2013). 
18 Id. at 1374. 2016]  KATZ  87 
they intrude into subject matter that falls within provincial or state 
jurisdiction.19  
None of these considerations, of course, can directly determine the 
question of digital exhaustion—after all, one could search the law 
books in vain and would not find any case law predating the copyright 
statutes that explicitly recognizes a right to reproduce digital copies of 
books in order to transfer them to others. At the same time, however, 
one would equally fail to find a common law right to prohibit such 
reproductions, because there was no common law right to prohibit the 
reproduction of books at all. Ultimately, the question is whether the 
existing  copyright  statute  prohibits  such  reproductions,  and  in 
answering this question history and the common law base lines could 
matter.  
But  even  if  these  considerations  seem  to  offer  only  a  limited 
doctrinal  utility, they  still  carry  considerable moral  and rhetorical 
force. They remind librarians that the various acts that constitute 
“librarying” are not mere legal crumbs they were permitted to collect 
to the extent they fell off the copyright table. Rather, they reiterate 
that copyright law was never intended to hinder librarying, and that 
the public interest in the various social and cultural interactions that 
libraries facilitate was preserved and etched into the copyright system 
from its very beginning.  
This history, combined with the line of exhaustion cases, discussed 
below, teaches that the interpretative task in construing the scope of 
owners’  exclusive  rights  ought,  among  other  things,  to  consider 
whether,  to  the  extent  that  a  copyright  owner’s  proffered 
interpretation  interferes  with  the  freedoms  of  libraries  and  their 
patrons, the legislature intended to impose such a limitation. In a 
similar vein, the Supreme Court of Canada recently held that the 
traditional balance between authors and users should be preserved in 
the digital environment, and that, absent evidence of legislative intent 
to the contrary, courts should interpret the Copyright Act “in a way 
that avoids imposing an additional layer of protections and fees based 
19 In Canada, for example, laws in relation to “property and civil rights”, or “education” fall 
under exclusive provincial jurisdiction. Thus, copyright legislation that unduly restricts 
what people can do with objects or devices that embody works of authorship (or how 
educational institutions carry out their mandate) might be unconstitutional. See, e.g., 
Jeremy F. de Beer, Copyrights, Federalism, and the Constitutionality of Canada’s Private 
Copying Levy, 51 MCGILL L.J. 735 (2005–2006) (discussing “property and civil rights”); 
Ariel Katz, Spectre: Canadian Copyright and the Mandatory Tariff - Part II, 28 IPJ 39, 
92–93 (2015) (discussing “education”). 88  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
solely on the method of delivery of the work to the end user. To do 
otherwise would effectively impose a gratuitous cost for the use of 
more efficient, Internet-based technologies.”20  
These principles of statutory interpretation do not immediately 
solve  the  question  of  digital  exhaustion,  but  they  do  clarify  the 
baselines for the debate and the burdens of proof: libraries do not 
need to prove that the current copyright legislation intended to allow 
them to continue pursuing their mandate in the digital realm. Rather, 
copyright  owners  have  to  prove  that  the  legislature  intended  to 
prevent  libraries  from  so  doing.  To  the  extent  that  a  broad 
construction  of  the  reproduction  or  distribution  rights  (and  a 
corresponding narrow construction of the first-sale doctrine) diminish 
the capacity of libraries to pursue their public mandate, and adapt it to 
the  digital  realities,  these  principles  provide  a  juridical  basis  for 
rejecting such a construction.  
III.THE PLAUSIBILITY OF DIGITAL EXHAUSTION
A.Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons: Life Beyond s 109(a)
In Capitol Records v. ReDigi,21 the U.S. District Court for the 
Southern District of New York adopted the view that the first-sale 
doctrine would not apply whenever the resale of a work in digital 
format requires a reproduction of the work. The holding had two 
prongs:  first,that  transferring  a  digital  file  from  one  medium  to 
another  constitutes  a  reproduction  within  the  meaning  of  the 
Copyright Act, even if there is no multiplication of copies;22 second, 
that the first-sale doctrine affords protection only against assertions of 
the distribution right but not against violation of other rights.23 The 
court also declined to entertain any interpretation of the Act that 
could  allow  digital  first-sale.  It  held  that  the  Act  unambiguously 
precludes  any  such  outcome,  and  concluded  that  an  alternative 
interpretation would amount to an amendment of the Copyright Act, 
20 Entm’t Software Ass’n v. Soc’y of Composers, Authors & Music Publishers of Canada, 
[2012] 2 S.C.R. 231 ¶ ¶ 8-9 (Can.). 
21 Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc., 934 F. Supp. 2d 640 (S.D.N.Y. 2013). 
22 Id. at 648. 
23 Id. at 655. 2016]  KATZ  89 
which is “a legislative prerogative that courts are unauthorized and ill 
suited to attempt.”24  
Yet, eleven days before the court handed down its decision in 
ReDigi, the Supreme Court decided Kirtsaeng, which casts doubt on 
the District Court’s unequivocal decision. Kirtsaeng did not involve 
digital exhaustion. The question before the Court in that case was 
whether the first-sale doctrine applied to copies made abroad and 
imported into the United States without the consent of the copyright 
owner. The majority held that it did, and their reasons are relevant to 
digital  exhaustion  as  well.  The  majority,  per  Justice  Breyer, 
emphasized that the first-sale doctrine does not owe its origin to the 
statute, and that Section 109 (and its predecessor in Copyright Act of 
1909) merely codifies the common law refusal to permit restraints on 
alienation, which harkens back at least to the early 17th century.25 This 
recognition, combined with the presumption that unless the contrary 
is evident “‘[s]tatutes which invade the common law…are to be read 
with a presumption favoring the retention of long-established and 
familiar principles,’”26 led the majority to reject an interpretation that 
would limit the scope of the first-sale doctrine to copies made in the 
United States.27 Likewise, Justice Kagan, in her concurring opinion, 
emphasized that the doctrine has played an integral part in American 
copyright law even prior to its codification.28  
Justice  Ginsburg’s  dissent  is  equally  instructive.  She  did  not 
disagree with the majority’s general characterization of the doctrine 
and  its  non-statutory  origin,  and  explained  that  the  doctrine 
“recognizes that a copyright owner should not be permitted to exercise 
perpetual  control  over  the  distribution  of  copies  of  a  copyrighted 
work.”29  Nevertheless,  she  was  convinced  that  in  1976  Congress 
intended to exclude copies made abroad from the ambit of Section 
24 Id. 
25 Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351, 1361-63 (2013). 
26 Id. at 1363 (quoting Isbrandtsen Co. v. Johnson, 343 U.S. 779, 783 (1952) (omission by 
the Court)). 
27 For a survey of earlier cases applying exhaustion principles in the U.S., see Aaron 
Perzanowski & Jason Schultz, Digital Exhaustion, 58 UCLA L. REV. 889, 912-22 (2011). 
28 Kirtsaeng, 133 S. Ct. at 1372 (Kagan, J., concurring). 
29 Id. at 1374 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). 90  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
109(a). She concluded, however, that the first-sale doctrine would still 
apply  to  such  copies  after  the  copyright  holder  authorized  their 
importation. Even though she could not anchor this proposition in the 
statutory language, she reasoned, based on the statutory history, that 
the term “distribute” in Section 106(3) already incorporates the first-
sale doctrine. Acknowledging that this interpretation means Section 
109(a)’s  codification  of  that  doctrine  adds  little  to  the  regulatory 
regime,  she  insisted  that  the  section  is  not  redundant, because  it 
prevents  courts  from  deviating  from  the  doctrine  in  a  way  that 
increases copyright owners’ control over downstream distribution30 
and in some specific instances even expands the doctrine’s scope.31 
Therefore, even though the doctrine’s application to the importation 
of  copies  made  abroad  divided  the  Court,  it  appears  (practically) 
unanimous that the first-sale doctrine has life beyond the words of 
Section 109(a).32  
Kirtsaeng affirmed that the basis of the first-sale doctrine is not 
statutory. The upshot of the opinions of both Breyer and Ginsburg is 
that people can resell, lend, or give away lawfully made books - not 
because Congress created a limited exception to the copyright owner’s 
distribution right, but because Congress had never intended to allow 
copyright owners the power to do so. 
Justice Ginsburg wrote that it was appropriate for the Court in 
Bobbs-Merrill  v.  Straus  (the  1908  case  articulating  the  first-sale 
doctrine), to hold that “Congress did not intend to permit copyright 
owners ‘to fasten . . . a restriction upon the subsequent alienation of 
30 Id. at 1387 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). 
31 Id. at 1387 n.20. Section 109 expands the scope of exhaustion beyond that recognized in 
Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339 (1908). Bobbs-Merrill held that the copyright 
owner could not control sales beyond the first authorized sale. Id. at 350-51. Section 109, 
however, makes it lawful for the owner of a lawfully made copy to resell it, regardless of 
whether a previous authorized sale had taken place. See John A. Rothchild, Exhaustion of 
Intellectual Property Rights and the Principle of Territoriality in the United States, in 
RESEARCH HANDBOOK ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY EXHAUSTION AND PARALLEL IMPORTS 
226, 228 n.4 (Irene Calboli & Edward Lee eds., 2016). 
32 I say “practically unanimous” because Justice Scalia joined Justice Ginsburg’s dissent, 
but did not join this part of her decision. He did not, however, provide any reasons 
explaining his disagreement. Justice Ginsburg’s interpretation explicitly resorted to the 
doctrine’s pre-codified form in order to give the doctrine meaning not anchored in the 
codifying text, and the opinions of Justice Breyer and Justice Kagan are not inconsistent 
with this view.  2016]  KATZ  91 
the subject-matter of copyright’”33 even though the statute then did 
not include any such explicit limitation. Consequently, it would have 
been legitimate for the court in ReDigi to do the same.  
The  line  of  patent  exhaustion  cases  following  Bobbs-Merrill 
supports the conclusion that the first-sale doctrine is only a species of 
a broader principle of exhaustion, and, as such, it is not necessarily 
limited to the distribution right. In Henry v. A.B. Dick Co.,34 the Court 
declined  to  extend  the  holding  of  Bobbs-Merrill  to  patent  law, 
emphasizing that Bobbs-Merrill dealt only with a copyright owner’s 
exclusive right to “vend”, not with a patentee’s exclusive right to “use” 
the  invention.35  But  five years  later,  in  Motion  Picture  Patents v. 
Universal,  the  Court  reversed  Henry  and  held  that  the  sale  of  a 
machine  embedding  a  patented  invention  exhausts  that  patent 
owner’s exclusive right to “use” the invention, just as it exhausts the 
exclusive right to “vend” it.36 Indeed, the fact that Congress has never 
codified the principle of exhaustion in patent law provides additional 
evidence that the source of the doctrine is not statutory.37   
The significance of Kirtsaeng (and the line of previous exhaustion 
cases) lies in clarifying the baseline for understanding the scope of 
exhaustion  as  developed  by  the  Court’s  jurisprudence:  copyright 
owners’ exclusive rights are a creature of statute, but users’ liberty of 
transferring ownership or possession of copies of books to others is 
not. Users can exercise this liberty not because Congress has chosen to 
exempt it from what otherwise would be prohibited, but because it 
never intended to limit it in the first place. These holdings reflect an 
established legal principle: Under the common law, every person is 
free to dispose of their possessions or carry on their business as they 
please in the absence of positive law limiting those freedoms. The 
legislature could limit those freedoms, but courts should not construe 
statutes  to  have  such  a  limiting  effect,  unless  the  legislature  has 
communicated its intent to depart from common law principles with 
33 Kirtsaeng, 133 S. Ct. at 1386 (quoting Bobbs-Merrill Co., 210 U.S. at 349–50). 
34 Henry v. A.B. Dick Co., 224 U.S. 1 (1912). 
35 Id. at 46. 
36 Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Co., 243 U.S. 502, 516 (1917). 
37 While it could be argued that this is no longer true with respect to copyright, where 
Congress codified the doctrine, Kirtsaeng, as discussed above would not support this 
proposition.   92  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
irresistible  clarity,38  and  statutory  grants  that  derogate  from  the 
common law rights of others ought to be construed narrowly.39 
B.Exhaustion Beyond Distribution 
Exhaustion’s death prognosis rests on the proposition that the 
first-sale doctrine limits only the scope of the distribution right and 
therefore becomes inapplicable the moment that a transfer of a work 
in a digital format requires its reproduction. Accepting this premise, 
the  defendant  in  ReDigi  developed  technology  that  allegedly 
permitted  users  to  transfer  digital  files  without  multiplying  them, 
arguing that reproduction occurs only if copies are being multiplied. 
The  District  Court  rejected  that  view  and  held  that  reproduction 
occurs  whenever  a  work  is  embedded  in  a  new  material  object, 
regardless of whether additional copies were made or not.40  
The  Disctrict  Court’s  interpretation  is  questionable.  It  ignored 
dicta of the Supreme Court referring to the reproduction right as the 
right to multiply copies,41 and it refused to follow an earlier case, by 
another district court, involving transfer of ink from one medium to 
another where the court held that no reproduction occurred in the 
absence  of  multiplication.42  Instructively,  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Canada  held  that  reproduction  indeed  requires  multiplication  of 
38 Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. of Canada v. T. Eaton Co., [1956] S.C.R. 610 (Can.); United 
States v. Texas, 507 U.S. 529, 534 (1993). 
39 See, e.g., THEODORE SEDGWICK, A TREATISE ON THE RULES WHICH GOVERN THE 
INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF STATUTORY AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 291-92 
(John Norton Pomeroy ed., 2d ed. 1874). See also Ariel Katz, Intellectual Property, 
Antitrust, and the Rule of Law: Between Private Power and State Power, 17 THEORETICAL 
INQUIRIES L. 633 (2016). 
40 Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc., 934 F. Supp. 2d 640, 640 (S.D.N.Y. 2013). 
41 See, e.g., Stephens v. Cady, 55 U.S. 528, 530-31 (1852); Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 
U.S. 339 (1998); Globe Newspaper Co. v. Walker, 210 U.S. 356, 362 (1908); Bong v. Alfred 
S. Campbell Art Co., 214 U.S. 236, 246 (1909); Caliga v. Inter Ocean Newspaper Co., 215 
U.S. 182 (1909); Henry v. A.B. Dick Co., 224 U.S. 1, 46 (1912); Fox Film Corp. v. Doyal, 286 
U.S. 123, 127 (1932). 
42 ReDigi Inc., 934 F. Supp. 2d at 650 (discussing C.M. Paula Co. v. Logan, 355 F. Supp. 
189, 190 (N.D. Tex. 1973). 2016]  KATZ  93 
copies, not merely new fixation, relying, among other things, on the 
same American case that the court in ReDigi rejected.43 
Nevertheless, the premise that reproduction necessarily renders 
the first-sale doctrine inapplicable is false, because it presupposes that 
when Congress codified the doctrine articulated in Bobbs-Merrill it 
intended to confine the principle to the distribution right and preclude 
its application to other rights. Without a clear indication that this was 
Congress’ intent, it is open for the courts to apply the principle of 
exhaustion to the various exclusive rights in the copyright bundle, not 
only to the distribution right. Therefore, the principle may encompass 
situations where reproduction is incidental to the transfer of a digital 
file.  
The evolution of exhaustion in patent law illustrates the point. In 
Henry v. A.B. Dick Co., a divided U.S. Supreme Court had initially 
declined to apply its copyright exhaustion holding from Bobbs-Merrill 
in the area of patent law, emphasizing the differences between the 
statutes.44 But this holding was short lived. The following year, the 
Court held that the exclusive right to vend had the same meaning 
under the patent and the copyright statutes, and that the scope of the 
right was the same; if the sale of a book exhausts the exclusive right to 
vend it, so does the sale of a patented machine.45 Shortly thereafter, 
the Court overruled Henry and applied the exhaustion principle not 
only to the exclusive right to “vend” the patented article, but also to 
the right to “use” it.46 Taken together, those decisions support the 
following propositions: (a) there are no major differences between the 
exhaustion of copyrights and the exhaustion of patents; (b) exhaustion 
of a patent is not limited to the right to sell it; (c) therefore, exhaustion 
43 See Théberge v. Galerie d’Art du Petit Champlain Inc., [2002] 2 S.C.R. 336 (Can.) (the 
dissent interpreted the reproduction right exactly as the court in ReDigi did). 
44 Henry, 224 U.S. at 46 (explaining that while the copyright statute only grants an 
exclusive right to multiply and sell, the patent statute provides more extensive rights “to 
make, use, and vend the invention or discovery.”). Notably, when Henry was decided, 
Congress had already codified the first-sale doctrine in the Copyright Act of 1909, but the 
fact that Congress only codified the exhaustion of the copyright owner’s right to vend, but 
not other rights, let alone any of the exclusive rights of patentees, played no role in the 
majority opinion.  
45 Bauer & Cie v. O'Donnell, 229 U.S. 1, 17-18 (1912). As noted in note 44 with respect to 
Henry, the fact that exhaustion of the vending right under copyright law had been codified 
but Congress had not codified any of the rights of patentees also played no part in this case. 
46 Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Co., 243 U.S. 502, 516 (1917). 94  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
of copyright may also not be limited to the distribution right. The 
codified “first sale” doctrine may be limited to the distribution right, 
but  the  un-codified  principle  of  exhaustion,  of  which  it  is  only  a 
subset, is not so limited.  
Moreover,  as  Perzanowski  and  Schultz  demonstrate,  American 
courts have applied the principle of exhaustion more broadly than as a 
limitation on the distribution right,47 and as I discuss elsewhere, the 
logic  of  exhaustion  has  animated  various  Canadian  copyright 
decisions  that  narrowed  the  construction  of  the  reproduction  and 
public performance rights, respectively.48 
The most recent patent exhaustion case from the U.S. Supreme 
Court, Bowman v. Monsanto,49 may help draw some of the limitations 
on the broad application of the exhaustion principle. In that case, the 
Court held that the exhaustion doctrine in patent law does not permit 
a farmer to reproduce patented seeds through planting and harvesting 
without the patent holder’s permission. The Court distinguished this 
case  from other  exhaustion cases on  the  grounds  that  it  involved 
multiplication and replication of the patented item, and not merely its 
reuse. At the same time, the Court emphasized that the ruling does not 
imply a broader rule whereby multiplication would necessarily negate 
exhaustion, giving, as an example, instances where reproduction is a 
necessary but incidental step in using the item for another lawful 
purpose.50  In  the  case  at  hand,  the  defendant  could  not  rely  on 
exhaustion because he planted patented soybeans solely to make and 
market replicas of them, thus depriving the company of the reward 
patent law provides for the sale of each article.  
The same logic can apply to distinguish between situations where 
reproduction is merely a necessary and incidental step in the transfer 
of  a  digital  copy  of  a  work  from  one  user  to  another—where 
exhaustion should apply—from instances where a user who purchases 
a single copy reproduces and distributes multiple copies in a way that 
directly competes with the sale of additional copies by the copyright 
47 Perzanowski & Schultz, supra note 27, at 912–22. 
48 Katz, supra note 5, at 152-56.  
49 Bowman v. Monsanto, 133 S. Ct. 1761 (2013). 
50 Id. at 1769 (referring to 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1) ("[I]t is not [a copyright] infringement for 
the owner of a copy of a computer program to make . . . another copy or adaptation of that 
computer program provide[d] that such a new copy or adaptation is created as an essential 
step in the utilization of the computer program")). 2016]  KATZ  95 
owner. In the first case, the incidental reproduction does not change 
the quantity of copies that are available in the market and can be 
enjoyed at any particular time—the quantum of simultaneous uses 
remains  entirely  dependent  on  the  number  of  copies  that  the 
copyright owner has chosen to sell. Conversely, in the second case, the 
reproduction  increases  the  number  of  such  copies  beyond  the 
quantum chosen by the copyright owner.  
In sum, the first prong of the death prognosis—the premise that 
there can be no digital exhaustion because the transfer of digital file 
involves their reproduction—is false. The principle of exhaustion can 
be applied, and has been applied, broadly and is not limited to the 
distribution right.  
IV.THE LIMITS OF PRIVATE REORDERING
A.Exhaustion: Limits on Contract and License Override
The premise that license restrictions and contracts can override 
exhaustion constitutes the second prong of the death prognosis of the 
first-sale doctrine. Those who take this premise for granted do it at 
their  own  peril,  because  principle  and  legal  precedent  suggest 
otherwise. Over a period of ten years, beginning with Bobbs-Merrill in 
1908 and ending with Boston Store in 1918, the same Court decisions 
that established the doctrine of exhaustion also restricted the ability of 
IP owners to evade it using various techniques, including notices, 
license restrictions, and contracts.  
With respect to notices, Bobbs-Merrill made it clear that copyright 
owners cannot restrict the rights of buyers and expand the scope of 
their own rights by merely printing a notice in the book.51 It might 
seem straightforward that if a copyright owner lacks the power to 
control sales beyond the first authorized sale, it cannot assume this 
power by the mere act of posting a notice, but when the Court decided 
Bobbs-Merrill,  the  competing  view  seemed  at  least  as  plausible. 
Indeed, the same year the U.S. Supreme Court decided Bobbs-Merrill, 
the High Court of Australia was divided on the question of whether a 
patentee’s  exclusive  right  to  “vend”  the  patented  article  conferred 
upon  it  the  power  to  maintain  the  resale  price  of  the  patented 
51 Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339, 350 (1908). 96  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
articles.52 The majority opinion in Nat’l Phonograph Co. of Austl. v. 
Menck was remarkably similar to that of the U.S. Supreme Court in 
Bobbs-Merrill. However, on appeal, the Privy Council reversed and 
decided that “the general doctrine of absolute freedom of disposal of 
chattels  of  an  ordinary  kind  is,  in  the  case  of  patented  goods, 
restricted  when  the  patentee  attaches  conditions  which  the  buyer 
becomes aware of at the time of sale.”53 The scope of exhaustion, 
under that view, depended entirely on the IP owner’s preferences. In 
the absence of an indication to the contrary, the patentee is presumed 
to have exhausted her right, but the right of buyers to dispose of what 
they  had  purchased  could  be  taken  away  by  mere  notice  of  the 
patentee’s intention to restrict it. Any person having notice of such 
restrictions could be liable for infringing the patent if she violates 
them. 
The majority of the U.S. Supreme Court in Henry followed the 
Privy Council decision in Menck.54 But shortly thereafter the Court 
overruled Henry in the concurrently decided cases of Motion Picture 
Patents and Straus v. Victor Talking Machine Co.55 In those cases, the 
Court held that the rights of a patentee under the patent statute did 
not include the power to impose restrictions on the use of a patented 
machine through license agreements or license notices. The Court, in 
these two decisions, also rejected the patentees’ attempts to avoid the 
consequences  of  exhaustion  by  describing  the  transactions  they 
entered into with users not as “sales” of the patented machines, but as 
leases or licenses to use them.56 
The logic that animates the premise that license restrictions can 
override  exhaustion  is  eerily  similar  to  the  logic  that  patentees 
promoted a hundred years ago. Back then, patentees claimed that 
since  they  had  an  exclusive  right  to  “use”  the  invention,  any  use 
required  their  permission.  This,  in  turn,  enabled  them  to  grant 
permission  subject  to  conditions  that  allowed  them  to  exercise 
52 Nat’l Phonograph Co. of Austl. v. Menck (1908) 7 C.L.R. 481, rev’d, Nat’l Phonograph Co. 
of Austl. v. Menck (1911) 12 C.L.R. 15 (PC) (appeal taken from Austl.). 
 
53 Nat’l Phonograph Co. of Austl., 12 C.L.R. at 21, 24. 
54 Henry v. A.B. Dick Co., 224 U.S. 1, 1, 42-43, 49 (1912). 
55 Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Co., 243 U.S. 502, 515 (1917); Straus v. 
Victor Talking Machine Co., 243 U.S. 490, 501 (1917). 
56 Id. 2016]  KATZ  97 
ongoing  control  over  how  devices  that  embodied  their  inventions 
could be used, even after they parted with them.57 They also argued 
that they could maintain control over the use of the machines they 
sold by describing the transactions as leases or licenses rather than 
sales.58 Today, copyright owners advance a similar logic by arguing 
that downloading or installing a digital file requires a license,59 and 
that  describing  these  transactions  as  licenses  rather  than  sales, 
overcomes  exhaustion.60 Because they have no obligation to grant 
anyone license, and can refuse to grant one altogether, it must follow, 
pursuant  to  this  logic,  that  they  are  entitled  to  grant  restrictive 
licenses, including those that prohibit users from doing otherwise 
permissible  activities.  However,  the  Court  rejected  that  logic  and 
lower courts should decline the invitation to apply it.   
In  sum,  by  1917,  the  Court  affirmed  conclusively  that  the  IP 
statutes did not confer upon the owners of patents and copyrights the 
power to control how the products embodying their inventions or 
works could be used or resold after they parted with them. Therefore, 
they could not arrogate to themselves such powers by purporting to 
reserve them through licensing restrictions. The Court emphatically 
rejected the notion that exhaustion was no more than a default rule 
that IP owners could reverse by providing notice of their intent to 
restrict it. Rather, the Court understood exhaustion as an integral 
component of the general legal order, which Congress did not intend 
to modify, and which IP owners were incapable of altering.61  
The plaintiffs in this line of cases alleged that when the various 
defendants violated the restrictive terms they purported to impose on 
users,  these  defendants  were  liable  for  copyright  or  patent 
57 See, e.g., Motion Picture Patents Co., 243 U.S. at 519 (Holmes, J., dissenting: “I suppose 
that a patentee has no less property in his patented machine than any other owner, and 
that in addition to keeping the machine to himself the patent gives him the further right to 
forbid the rest of the world from making others like it. In short, for whatever motive, he 
may keep his device wholly out of use . . . So much being undisputed, I cannot understand 
why he may not keep it out of use unless the licensee, or, for the matter of that, the buyer, 
will use some unpatented thing in connection with it.” Internal citation omitted). 
58 Id. at 515; Straus, 243 U.S. at 501. 
59 And under some views even executing it. See MAI Sys. Corp. v. Peak Computer, Inc., 991 
F.2d 511 (9th Cir. 1993). 
60 See, e.g., Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010). 
61 See Katz, supra note 39, at 681. 98  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
infringement. The defendants prevailed in those cases because the 
Court held that the IP statutes did not confer the power to restrain the 
defendants from the acts complained about. Since the defendants did 
not  infringe  the  IP  rights,  the  plaintiffs  were  not  entitled  to  any 
remedy that otherwise could be available to them had the IP rights 
been infringed. Therefore, these cases did not answer the question of 
whether contracts that contain the same or similar restriction could 
be relied on to limit exhaustion. In fact, in Bobbs-Merrill the Court 
noted there was no contract claim before it62 and emphasized that it 
was only dealing with the question of whether the copyright statute 
conferred the power to restrict subsequent sales and not with whether 
a contract restricting the same would be enforceable.63  
This,  according  to  some,  indicates  that  nothing  in  the  Court’s 
jurisprudence supports the proposition that contractual restrictions 
on exhaustion will not be enforceable- implying that as long as the 
contract  is  otherwise  valid,  courts  will  enforce  the  restrictions.64 
However,  in  reality  one  can  infer  very  little  from  the  Court’s 
unsurprising failure to decide an issue that was not properly before 
it.65  The  Court’s  subsequent  decisions  provide  more  than  solid 
indications that while some contractual limitations might be valid, 
others would not.66  
Three years after Bobbs-Merrill, the Court in Dr. Miles Medical 
Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co.67 held that contracts to maintain the 
resale price of proprietary medicines were invalid both at common law 
as unreasonable restraint of trade, and also under the Sherman Act.68 
The following year, the majority in the short-lived Henry v. A.B. Dick 
case  held  that  Dr.  Miles  was  inapplicable  to the  sale  of  patented 
62 Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339, 346 (1908). 
63 Id. at 350. 
64 See, e.g., John F. Duffy & Richard M. Hynes, Statutory Domain and the Commercial 
Law of Intellectual Property, 102 VA. L. REV. 1, 10 (2016).  
65 Ariel Katz, Aaron Perzanowski & Guy A. Rub, The Interaction of Exhaustion and the 
General Law: A Reply to Duffy and Hynes, 102 VA. L. REV. ONLINE 8, 15 (2016).  
66 Katz, supra note 39, at 695-96. 
67 Dr. Miles Med. Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co., 220 U.S. 373 (1911).  
68 Id. at 409. 2016]  KATZ  99 
goods.69 However, as noted, the Henry decision was short lived, and 
the vigorous dissent written by Chief Justice White became the view of 
the majority five years later.70 A year later in Boston Store of Chicago 
v. American Graphophone Co.,71 the Court discarded any remaining 
doubts  that  the  general  common  law  rules  regarding  contractual 
restraints on trade apply to the sale of patented articles or copyrighted 
works in the same way as they apply to other chattels.72  
Dr. Miles in subsequent years stood for the proposition that resale 
price maintenance constituted a per se antitrust violation: that is, a 
practice categorically prohibited, without inquiry into its actual effect 
on  competition.  In  2007,  the  Court  overruled  this  aspect  of  that 
decision.73  However,  the  more  general  propositions  that  contracts 
purporting to exert downstream control over the sale or use of goods 
could be invalid at common law as unreasonable restraint of trade, 
and that the grant of a patent or copyright does not include the power 
to make contracts in derogation of that general law, remain valid.74 
Thus,  the  Court  held  that  as  a  matter  of  federal  antitrust  law  a 
restrictive contract will not attract antitrust liability unless it has been 
proven to restrain competition in a relevant market, but the contract 
may still be invalidated as unreasonable restraint of trade under the 
law of the relevant state.75 
B.Towards a Digital Restraint of Trade Doctrine
Noting  that  contracts  attempting  to  limit  exhaustion  could  be 
invalidated under the common law doctrine of restraint of trade does 
not imply, of course, that all such contracts would be invalid. The key 
question is whether the restraint is reasonable.  
69 Henry v. A.B. Dick Co., 224 U.S. 1, 49 (1912). 
70 See supra Part II(B).  
71 Bos. Store of Chi. v. Am. Graphophone Co., 246 U.S. 8 (1918). 
72 Id. at 25. 
73 Leegin Creative Leather Products v. PSKS, Inc., 551 U.S. 877 (2007). 
74 Katz, supra note 39, at 693. 
75 Cf. Erie R.R. Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64 (1938). 100  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
Generally,  a  reasonable  restraint  would  be  one  that  is  merely 
ancillary to an otherwise legitimate contract and where it is “inserted 
only  to  protect  one  of  the  parties  from  the  injury  which,  in  the 
execution of the contract or enjoyment of its fruits, he may suffer from 
the unrestrained competition of the other.”76 If the restraint is not 
necessary for achieving the goal of the contract, or if it exceeds what is 
necessary  to  achieve  that  goal,  it  is  void.77  Moreover,  even  if  the 
restraint  is  no  greater  than  is  needed  to  protect  the  promisee’s 
interest, it might still be void if the harm to the promisor and the 
likely injury to the public outweigh the need of the promisee.78 
Like the first-sale doctrine itself, which the Court described as “a 
common  law  doctrine  with  impeccable  historic  pedigree”,79  the 
aversion to contracts in restraint of trade is one of the common law’s 
oldest and best-established doctrines.80 As a venerable common law 
rule, the doctrine of restraint of trade provides a heft of legal history 
along with flexibility and capacity to adapt to the realities of the digital 
realm.  It  also  provides  a  useful  framework  for  distinguishing 
situations  where  contractual  limitations  on  exhaustion  could  be 
justified  from  those  where  they  would  not.  Providing  a  thorough 
analysis of various contractual restraints and their validity would go 
beyond  the  scope  of  this  essay  (and  post  Erie  Railroad  Co.  v. 
Tompkins,81 the question might have to be decided as a matter of state 
law rather than federal law), but a few examples could illustrate the 
direction. 
Supporters of narrow exhaustion rules (and of extended freedom 
to contract around them) often argue that allowing copyright owners 
to control the downstream use of their works would allow them to set 
different  prices  for  different  users.  Without  the  power  to  price 
discriminate, they argue, the copyright owner might elect to set a high 
uniform price, resulting in a lower quantity of distributed copies and 
76 U.S. v. Addyston Pipe & Steel Co., 85 F. 271, 282 (6th Cir 1898). 
77 Id. 
78 RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS § 188 (1981). 
79 Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351, 1363 (2013).  
80 RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS CHAPTER 8 INTRO. NOTE (1981). 
81 Erie R.R. Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64 (1938). 2016]  KATZ  101 
the exclusion of consumers with a lower willingness or ability to pay.82 
If so, then greater control over downstream uses could be efficient; 
efficient both in the static sense of reducing the deadweight loss that 
may result from the grant of copyright, as well as efficient in the 
dynamic sense of allowing copyright owners to earn a higher profit, 
potentially increasing the incentive to create (even without improving 
static efficiency).83 
Elsewhere,  I  have  discussed  why  the  economics  of  price 
discrimination  are  more  complicated  than  the  above  account:  its 
benefits are not as straightforward, and exhaustion does not seriously 
threaten these benefits, when they exist.84 Even if copyright law does 
not allow publishers to control the resale of digital copies, publishers 
have options. They can still sell digital copies subject to reasonable 
post-sale contractual “sticks” to discourage resale, or offer “carrots” to 
induce the retention of copies if the speed and ease of digital resale 
proves detrimental.85 As long as (i) publishers’ inability to control any 
downstream  use  proves  detrimental  to  the  incentivizing  goals  of 
copyright law, (ii) they adopt limited contractual restraints that are 
narrowly tailored to counter this detrimental effect, and (iii) those 
restraints  do  not  impose  a  greater  harm  on  the  access  and 
dissemination goals of copyright law and on the freedoms of users, 
such contractual restraints could be held valid. At the same time, it is 
easy to see how restraints that are neither limited in time or scope, nor 
otherwise tailored narrowly to address a specific legitimate purpose, 
can do more harm than good, and should be invalidated.  
Opponents  of  digital  exhaustion  also  argue  that  unlike  used 
tangible copies that ordinarily wear out through use and repeated 
transfers from one user to another, digital copies remain pristine and 
perfect substitutes for the original. With the ease, speed, and global 
reach  of  Internet  transmission,  allowing  digital  exhaustion  might 
threaten copyright owners’ profits on a level not experienced before.86 
82 See, e.g., Kirtsaeng, 133 S. Ct. at 1390 n.27 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). 
83 Katz, supra note 5, at 145; see also, Ariel Katz, The First Sale Doctrine and the 
Economics of Post-Sale Restraints, 2014 BYU L. REV. 55, 77 (2014) [hereinafter First Sale 
Doctrine]; Guy A. Rub, Rebalancing Copyright Exhaustion, 64 EMORY L.J. 741, 775 
(2015). 
84 First Sale Doctrine, supra note 83, at 55; Katz, supra note 5, at 145-46, 164-66. 
85 Katz, supra note 5, at 165. 
86 Id. at 164 (and cited references therein). 102  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
Moreover,  digital  exhaustion  sometimes  invokes  the  specter  of 
facilitating unbridled piracy because nothing prevents people who sell 
their digital copies from simultaneously retaining them.87 
These arguments rely on a series of plausible, but certainly not 
inevitable or incontrovertible, empirical predictions. They discount 
the myriad types of reasonable contractual restrictions that publishers 
could utilize, as well as the fact that publishers are better positioned 
than resellers  to develop various strategies to compete with  those 
resellers. For example, they can offer price-match guarantees, or they 
can discourage resellers by threatening to increase the supply of new 
copies, or they can offer bundles of work at a discount, and so on. 
Large and sophisticated resellers might offer their own inducements, 
but  the  copyright  owner’s  control  over  the  release  of  new  copies 
provides publishers with a strategic advantage over the reseller whose 
supply of used copies will always be depended on and affected by the 
actions of the copyright owner.88  
The specter of piracy-run-amok ignores the simple fact that as a 
matter of law a person who sells his copy but makes and retains 
another may still infringe copyright, and that as a practical reality, 
people who wish to evade the law do not need to masquerade as 
complying with first-sale rules when they can obtain illegal copies 
much  more  easily  elsewhere.89  Moreover,  even  though  it  may  be 
difficult to distinguish between a legitimate resale of a work in digital 
format and the sale of an illicit copy, law-abiding buyers of used works 
might  prefer  buying  from  reputable  intermediaries  ensuring  the 
legitimacy  of  the  transaction.90  Therefore,  the  ways  in  which 
recognizing digital exhaustion might increase the incidence of illicit 
copying  are  far  from  obvious.  In  fact,  legitimizing  second-hand 
markets for digital copies will allow individuals unable or unwilling to 
purchase new copies legitimately to buy used copies, which in turn 
reduces the demand for pirated copies. Such sales might not enrich 
copyright owners directly, but may benefit them indirectly, because 
consumers who know that they can resell the goods that they buy are 
87 Id. 
88 Id. at 165. 
89 Id. 
90 See, e.g., Digitally Delivered Goods Policy, EBAY, 
http://pages.ebay.com/help/policies/downloadable.html [https://perma.cc/297U-K4PS].  2016]  KATZ  103 
more willing to buy them in the first place.91 Moreover, the history of 
copyright teaches us that dire predictions about the devastating effects 
of digital and other technologies are frequently raised but have rarely 
materialized.92 It’s true that the boy who cried wolf was eventually 
right, but it is also true that after repeated false alarms, the rational 
person becomes skeptical. 
But more importantly, even if digital exhaustion presents new and 
different challenges for publishers, the arguments against it tend to 
focus on the short-term benefits that may accrue to copyright owners 
if the doctrine could be eliminated, or on the challenges facing them if 
maintained. But these arguments critically ignore exhaustion’s long-
term benefit to the public, and the harms to the public that will result 
from eliminating or narrowing it.  
V.DIGITAL EXHAUSTION AND THE CASE OF LIBRARIES
The social benefits of exhaustion and the harms that may result 
from eliminating or restricting it are not limited to libraries, although 
libraries provide an excellent case for demonstrating them. How we 
assess those benefits and harms depends on our understanding of the 
role and function of libraries, and how libraries interact with, and 
impact upon, the commercial market activities of publishers. In this 
Part, I discuss why libraries exist, the various market failures that they 
mitigate, and why many of those market failures will likely persist 
even  with  the  advent  of  more  advanced  business  models  for  the 
dissemination of works in digital formats. 
A. Why Do Libraries Even Exist?
I  opened  this  Article  by  highlighting  the  interesting  fact  that 
libraries engage in more transactions than publishers. I also noted 
that this ecosystem, where market-based remunerated transactions 
constitute only subset of a much larger number of non-market and 
non-remunerated transactions, has existed for generations—probably 
ever  since  publishers  began  publishing  books  and  libraries  began 
91 See e.g.,  Rub, supra note 83, at 782. 
92 Am. Broad. Companies v. Aereo, Inc., 134 S. Ct. 2498, 2517–18 (2014) (Scalia, J., 
dissenting). 104  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
circulating them. How did this happen, and why has this equilibrium 
persisted? 
One possible answer is that this is a historical error which the law 
has failed to rectify; instead of relying on publicly funded institutions 
(bureaucratic,  slow  to  adapt,  facing  no  market  discipline,  and  no 
incentive  to  innovate),  we  could  have  let  publishers  (and  other 
commercial intermediaries) take their place. Not only will commercial 
enterprise develop business models providing the same social benefits 
that we ascribe to libraries, but they could also do it in more efficient 
ways. Moreover, by monetizing the billions of transactions that are 
currently  free,  a  market-based  provision  of  library  services  will 
generate more profit for authors and publishers and therefore will 
increase the incentive to create new works. But as long as the law 
allows libraries to provide those free services and taxpayers continue 
to subsidize the libraries providing them, publishers cannot compete. 
Under this view, libraries should be privatized, or, at the very least, 
copyright law should be reformed to prevent libraries from providing 
their free services.  
If this answer makes you jubilant, you can stop reading here. 
However, if you suspect that libraries provide services and play some 
roles that the market actors cannot or would not, then you may wish 
to continue reading.     
B. Libraries Mitigate a Web of Market Failures
All but the most extreme market-fundamentalist economists could 
easily  explain  that  libraries  constitute  one  of  several  institutional 
responses to the market failures inherent in the copyright ecosystem. 
Therefore, libraries operate in a space that commerce does not and 
will not occupy, and the services that libraries provide supplement 
rather  than  compete  with  services  that  publishers  and  other 
commercial intermediaries could offer. If so, then the legal rules that 
facilitate the functioning of libraries (such as exhaustion) are efficient 
at  least  insofar  as  they  permit  beneficial  activities  that  otherwise 
would not exist. Those rules might still be efficient even if libraries 
and commerce might compete at the margins (e.g., if some readers 
choose to borrow a book from the library even if otherwise they would 
buy  it),  so  long  as  overall  the  social  benefit  from  activities  they 
facilitate outweighs whatever harms they cause. However, like any 
type of cost-benefit analysis, the conclusion that libraries increase 
efficiency by mitigating market failure is contingent on the types of 
market failures that exist in any specific context. As technology and 2016]  KATZ  105 
business methods evolve, so may the existence or severity of different 
market  failures.  The  cost  of  some  market  transactions  might  be 
prohibitively high under existing technologies, but new technologies 
or different organizational structures might reduce those costs and 
make  it  possible  for  new  business  models  to  emerge.  If  so,  then 
recalibrating  the  respective  roles  of  market  and  non-market 
institutions in the copyright system might be warranted.  
Note how this framing might imply that libraries be permitted to 
provide only those services that publishers would not provide, and 
that by default, commercial (and copyright-dependent) models ought 
to  be  preferred  over  non-commercial  models  or  models  that  are 
otherwise not based on copyright and exclusion. But this would be 
erroneous  because  copyright  itself  is  an  imperfect  solution  to  a 
perceived market failure. Therefore, there is no a priori reason to 
privilege  copyright-based  models  over  other  models  for  providing 
access to information. In fact, if services can be provided in ways that 
do not require incurring the social costs of copyright exclusion, a 
strong case can be made in their favor.   
C. Technology Contingent, Endemic, and Strategic Impediments to 
Access
Consider the most typical of the activities of libraries: the lending 
of books. Some readers might prefer borrowing a book from a library 
to buying because its price exceeds their willingness or ability to pay, 
or because the book is out of print or otherwise not available for 
purchase in the relevant market (e.g., a book in a foreign language). In 
both cases, the fact that people borrow the book demonstrates that 
there is demand for the book that commercial market players (i.e., 
publishers or other commercial intermediaries) fail to supply. But why 
do publishers forego what seems like considerable missing business 
opportunities,  and  why  do  libraries  occupy  that  space  instead? 
Understanding  what  causes  the  mismatch  between  demand  and 
supply by commercial entities is crucial for evaluating the respective 
roles of publishers, libraries, and the laws that regulate their activities.  
Impediments to universal access to books can be classified into 
three  general  categories:  technologically  contingent  impediments, 
endemic  impediments,  and  strategic  impediments.  Technologically 
contingent impediments reflect the cost of printing, distributing, and 
storing  the  book  (production  costs).  They  also  include  the  costs 
associated  with  running  the  business  models  under  which  those 
activities are pursued. Improvements in the costs of production may 106  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
result in an increase in market-based provision of access. Endemic 
impediments to market provision reflect the public good nature of 
information and the inherent difficulties in determining the value of 
acquiring it. As a result, technological improvements are less likely to 
affect them. Lastly, strategic impediments result from the exercise of 
market power by publishers, which allows them to profit more by 
limiting  production  even  if  profitable  production  were  otherwise 
feasible. I address those categories in more detail below. 
1.Technology Contingent Impediments
Production costs affect how many books will be produced and 
sold;  for  any  given  demand  curve, higher  production  costs  would 
entail  fewer  books  that  will  be  produced  and  sold,  and  lower 
production costs will result in more books will be produced and sold. 
This suggests that when production costs are high, more people will 
depend on libraries for access, and when production costs decrease, 
the resulting lower prices will lead more people to buy their own 
copies instead of borrowing them from a library. For example, before 
the invention of the printing press, books were so expensive that not 
only were they beyond the reach of all but the wealthiest people, even 
if they were available in libraries, they were often chained to library 
desks and could not be borrowed.93 The printing press, by reducing 
the cost of printing, made books more affordable and their supply 
increased  accordingly.94  With  further  technological  improvements, 
production costs decreased and supply increased.  
However, the decline in the production costs (and prices) of books 
also means that libraries could purchase and lend even more books. 
The volume of such library transactions raises the question of why 
publishers  (or  other  commercial  intermediaries)  don’t  seize  the 
opportunity and offer their own for-profit library alternatives? The 
question already betrays an answer: the volume of library transactions 
may be high, but many of those transactions may not be profitable 
inasmuch as the cost of providing them exceeds the money that users 
might be able or willing to pay for them. Libraries, in this regard, 
resemble  other  business  models  based  on  the  sharing  of  existing 
assets,  such  as  the  rental  of  homes  or  cars.  Just  as  a  car  rental 
93 See generally JOSHUA GANS, INFORMATION WANTS TO BE SHARED (2012). 
94 Id.  2016]  KATZ  107 
company allows people to drive a car even if they do not buy it, a 
library allows readers to borrow and read a book that they do not wish 
or cannot afford buying. The difference, however, between libraries 
and publishers or other commercial entities, is that, unlike libraries, 
these commercial entities will only provide sharing and other library 
services if those services could be profitable. Publicly funded libraries 
could offer those services even when they are not.  
If this explanation provided the full answer to why libraries exist, 
it would be highly contingent on the technology of providing those 
services.  New  technologies  and  innovative  business  models  may 
reduce  production  costs  and  create  opportunities  to  profit  from 
providing access to books. Technological advancements that reduce 
the costs of producing and selling books will tend to increase the sale 
of books and reduce the demand for and incidence of borrowing. 
Other technological changes may not only result in greater sharing, 
but might also induce entry of other players into the sharing space. 
Imagine, for example, an Uber-like service for book sharing, where 
instead of searching the catalog of the local library, people can search 
an online catalog of books that their neighbors are willing to lend 
them. 
Likewise, changes in production costs can affect the incidence of 
borrowing out of print books. Assuming that the demand for older 
books  is  lower  than  the  demand  for  newer  books,  and  that  the 
distribution  and  printing  costs  remain  the  same,  publishers  will 
rationally prefer using their limited resources for producing newer 
and  more  profitable  books.  Publishers  will  not  print  older  books 
unless  the  expected  revenue  from  their  sale  exceeds  the  cost  of 
producing them. However, lower production costs might change the 
value proposition of older books: more of them might be printed and 
sold, and relatively fewer might be borrowed from libraries.  
2.Endemic Impediments
Some impediments to market provision of access to books are 
more endemic and less contingent on the technology of production. 
Efficient  market  provision  requires  that  actors  have  enough 
information on the costs and benefits of transacting, and that they 
fully internalize those costs and benefits. If buyers cannot determine 
the benefit of entering a transaction, or if some of the costs and 
benefits are borne by others (what economists call “externalities”), 
then  market  equilibrium  will  not  reflect  the  social  optimum. 
Therefore, a lack of information, together with externalities, may lead 108  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
to market failure, and the creation of further endemic impediments to 
efficient  market  provision  of  access  to  books  which  technological 
advances cannot easily cure. 
Books  and  other  information  goods  present  both  of  these 
problems. First, readers cannot fully ascertain the value of reading a 
book before they read it, and oftentimes even long after. In some 
cases, a book that seems promising turns out to be disappointing. In 
other  cases,  the  value  of  what  the  reader  learns  today  may  only 
materialize fully when connected with knowledge obtained later, or 
when shared with other people. These unknowns present a pricing 
problem for readers and publishers. Readers struggle to determine 
whether the benefit from reading the book justified the cost of buying 
it, (and therefore forego at least some transactions for which the price 
seems  too  high  ex  ante).  Publishers,  facing  readers  with  varying 
preferences, may find it difficult to determine an optimal market price 
(and therefore set a price that, for some readers at least, would be too 
high). Moreover, externalities compound these problems. A reader 
can  only  expect  to  internalize  some  of  the  social  value  of  the 
knowledge she acquires, but not all of it. This is especially so when the 
reader acquires this information in order to share it with others (e.g., 
a teacher, researcher, a worker, or a manager). This is one aspect of 
knowledge being a public good. The benefits that accrue to others are 
positive  externalities,  which  a  reader  will  rationally  ignore  when 
deciding  whether  to  pay  for  a  book.  In  a  similar  vein,  a  profit-
maximizing publisher will decide what to publish and at what price to 
sell it only on the basis of what maximizes its profit today or in the 
near future, and not on the basis of what maximizes social welfare in 
the long run.95  
Public libraries that provide free or heavily subsidized access to 
books reduce the social cost of these market failures and partially 
mitigate those endemic impediments to access. By allowing readers to 
access books for free, they improve the net benefit for the reader and 
thus increase readership towards the socially optimal level. Moreover, 
since  their  mandate  reflects  the  long-term  benefits  of  their 
communities and their funding depends on the public, public libraries 
95 See, e.g., Brett Frischmann, Spillovers Theory and Its Conceptual Boundaries, 51 WM. & 
MARY L. REV. 801, 812–13 (2009–2010). 2016]  KATZ  109 
are  more  capable  of  providing  access  to  books  in  a  way  that 
approximates society’s long-term benefits.96  
3.Strategic Impediments
The third type of impediments to access is strategic and reflects 
publishers’  choices  to  limit  access  to books  in  order  to  maximize 
profit. I refer to these impediments as strategic because unlike the 
previous  two  types  of  impediments,  which  are  exogenous  to 
publishers’ decisions, strategic impediments are fully dependent on 
publishers’  choices.  Strategic  impediments  result  from  and  reflect 
publishers’ market power, which allows them to increase profit by 
reducing output below the technologically feasible, and economically 
viable, level.  
Copyright  is  one  of  the  key  factors  affecting  the  price  and 
availability of books. By limiting competition from other producers of 
the same book, the publisher can set the price at a supra-competitive 
level  and  earn  a  higher  profit  by  reducing  the  quantity  of  copies 
available. As a result, people who are willing to pay a price that is 
higher than the cost of production but lower than the monopoly price 
are  excluded  from  the  market.  This  deadweight  loss  is  not  an 
unforeseen consequence of copyright, but an acknowledged cost of 
granting it.97 If copyright works as intended and drives the prices of 
books above the cost of their production, then the resulting unmet 
demand  is  independent  of  the  technology  of  production  and 
distribution. In other words, copyright, by design, leads to artificial 
scarcity, and therefore as long as there is copyright, institutions that 
mitigate the resulting deadweight will serve a purpose.98  
In addition to limiting the supply and raising the price of printed 
books, copyright may also allow publishers to strategically limit or 
prevent the supply of older books. Since in many cases the marginal 
reader may regard an old book as a close substitute for a new book, 
96 The funding of libraries might still be lower than the optimal because the taxpayers that 
ultimately fund them might still prefer spending public money on purposes with more 
tangible and shorter-term benefits, and on those that benefit members of the immediate 
community over those that benefit society at large.  
97 Ariel Katz, Making Sense of Nonsense: Intellectual Property, Antitrust, and Market 
Power, 49 ARIZ. L. REV. 837, 841 (2007). 
98 Wendy J. Gordon, Intellectual Property As Price Discrimination: Implications For 
Contract, CHI.-KENT L. REV. 1367, 1388 (1998). 110  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
increasing the supply of older books might have the same depressing 
effect on the price of new books as printing a larger quantity of the 
new  book.  Therefore,  many  older  books  are  out  of  print  and 
unavailable not only because the cost of supplying them relative to the 
demand  for  them  makes  their  production  non  economical,  but 
because  copyright  allows  publishers  who  hold  large  portfolios  of 
copyright to strategically choose which books to continue producing, 
and which books to suppress.99    
Therefore, when impediments to market based provision of access 
to books are strategic, libraries may reduce the resulting deadweight 
loss by facilitating access to those books. Libraries can do this because 
copyright  law  permits  libraries  to provide  certain  forms of  access 
without the copyright owner’s permission.  
D.Price Discrimination and Impediments Thereto
The copyright explanation is incomplete, however, because while 
copyright  allows  publishers  to  price  books  at  a  supra-competitive 
level, copyright law also allows copyright owners to implement price-
discrimination schemes that could generate even higher profits.100 If 
the copyright owner could charge the higher monopoly price to those 
who are willing to pay it, and set a lower price for those who are not, 
then not only will the copyright owner be able to earn even higher 
profits (meaning greater incentive to invest in the first place), it would 
be achieved with no, or at least smaller, deadweight loss. In cases 
where a monopolist could charge every user a price that corresponds 
to that user’s ability or willingness to pay, the monopolist will produce 
the same quantity that will be available under perfect competition 
while earning much higher profits.101  
In  order  to  price-discriminate,  the  seller  must  have:  (i)  some 
market power (i.e., power to set the prices above the marginal cost of 
production,  which  copyright,  by  preventing  other  producers  from 
producing the same book, usually confers); (ii) an ability to have 
99 See generally Paul J. Heald, How Copyright Keeps Works Disappeared, 11 J. EMPIRICAL 
LEGAL STUD. 829. 
100 See, e.g., Gordon, supra note 98. 
101 James Boyle, Cruel, Mean, Or Lavish - Economic Analysis, Price Discrimination and 
Digital Intellectual Property, 53 VAND. L. REV. 2007, 2025–26 (2000); see also Rub, 
supra note 83, at 766. 2016]  KATZ  111 
sufficient information about users’ preferences and willingness and 
ability to pay combined with the ability to sort them out accordingly; 
and (iii) an ability to prevent arbitrage: that is, to prevent a user who 
purchased the good at a lower price from reselling it to another user 
who would otherwise be willing to pay a higher price to the copyright 
owner.  
Digital technologies promise greater potential for profitable price-
discrimination  insofar  as  they  can  improve  the  ability  to  gather 
information on users and offer a more finely-tuned array of products, 
services,  and  prices  to  match  heterogeneous  demand.  From  this 
perspective,  exhaustion  could  be  seen  as  presenting  a  serious 
problem: it reduces the copyright owner’s power to prevent arbitrage 
because it makes it lawful for a person who purchased a book at a 
lower price to resell it to another reader who would otherwise be 
willing to pay a higher price. Further, it facilitates secondary markets 
of used books that can be sold in competition with the higher-price 
offerings  of  the  publisher.  In  addition,  by  permitting  resale 
transactions that do not require the copyright owner’s permission, 
exhaustion  interferes  with  the  copyright  owner’s  effort  to  collect 
information on its users. Those who believe that  ubiquitous price 
discrimination creates a strong incentive to create and disseminate 
new works are inclined to endorse the view that (a) exhaustion should 
not apply to the transfer of digital files, and (b) even if it did apply, 
copyright owners should be able to circumvent it using technological 
means, license restrictions, or contracts. In the same vein, they might 
tend  to  see  the  library  (and  its  reliance  on  exhaustion)  as  an 
institution that might have mitigated the market failures of yore, but 
whose continued existence is obsolete at best, and at worst represents 
a threat to the growth of new business models.  
Earlier critics of these views assumed that this model of ubiquitous 
price discrimination is indeed possible, though some of them have 
questioned  whether  it  is  also  desirable.102  They  questioned,  for 
example, the overly optimistic, and sometimes simplistic, assumptions 
that proponents of the ubiquitous price-discrimination vision make,103 
and highlighted that the move from one regime to another is not 
necessarily value neutral104 and may influence the type of works that 
102 See, e.g., Julie Cohen, Copyright and the Perfect Curve, 53 VAND. L. REV. 1799 (2000); 
Gordon, supra note 98. 
103 Cohen, supra note 102, at 1809-10. 
104 Boyle, supra note 101, at 2027. 112  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
are created and used.105 Others have noted that price discrimination 
does not necessarily result in greater output, and might result in less 
access, rather than more.106 
I would like to add to this debate by focusing on the type  of 
information that would be necessary to implement ubiquitous price 
discrimination, whether gathering it is possible, and why publishers 
might strategically choose not to implement the vision of ubiquitous 
access-maximizing  price  discrimination,  even  if  they  could.  This 
discussion will reveal that there are some endemic impediments to 
efficient price discrimination, as well as some strategic reasons why 
publishers might refrain from implementing it, even if they could. 
This discussion will also provide important insights about why some 
of the roles of libraries are economically indispensable, while other 
roles are politically crucial.  
In order to implement a system of efficient and ubiquitous price 
discrimination  that  achieves  the  optimistic  vision  for  which  its 
proponents  advocate,  publishers  should  be  able  to  amass  large 
amounts of information on users, which users might have very little 
incentive to supply, good reasons to keep private, or at least disclose 
strategically (i.e., to provide information they believe the publisher 
will interpret as signaling low willingness or ability to pay). However, 
even if users were willing to candidly provide full information, the 
information would still be incomplete, because users themselves may 
not know what they will learn from reading a book they have not read, 
or  what  utility  they  might  derive  from  it.  Moreover,  even  if  the 
publisher were willing to take the information that the user provides 
at face value (which they should not) before setting a price, a rational 
publisher would still need to interpret the information. But the more 
idiosyncratic the individual user’s preferences and intended use are, 
the more difficult and prone to error is the task of setting a “correct” 
individual price.  
Furthermore,  many  limitations  on  copyright  permit  users  to 
engage in activities that benefit not only the users themselves, but also 
third parties and society at large. These users, however, can expect to 
internalize only part of the social benefits arising from their activities 
and will not take into account the positive spillovers conferred on 
105 Glynn S. Lunney, Jr., Copyright’s Price Discrimination Panacea, 21 HARV. J.L. & TECH. 
387, 448 (2007–2008). 
106 See e.g., Guy A. Rub, Contracting around Copyright: The Uneasy Case for Unbundling 
of Rights in Creative Works, U. CHI. L. REV. 257, 268 (2011). 2016]  KATZ  113 
others. For example, a reader may buy a book and then decide to write 
a critique of it; or the book may inspire her to write additional works. 
If that reader has to pay for the right to criticize the book or for the 
right to be inspired by it, her willingness to pay will reflect only the 
private value that she might expect to derive from these activities, but 
not the value that her activities will generate to others.107 Copyright 
owners ignore those positive spillovers as well and would be especially 
reluctant to permit uses that might harm their own interests. Or, 
copyright owners might strategically exploit situations of hold-up to 
extract  the  highest  licensing  fees  possible.  Consequently,  even  if 
publishers could implement mechanisms that provide access to all 
readers, the terms of those transactions will not result in a socially 
optimal equilibrium.108 
Strategic reasons might also deter publishers from implementing 
less-than-perfect  price  discrimination.  As  noted  above,  publishers 
may  choose  to  keep  older  books  out  of  circulation  for  strategic 
reasons, rather than cost-related reasons. In addition, while digital 
technologies provide tools that could be used for more effective price 
discrimination,  they  also  create  unique  strategic  challenges.  For 
example,  large-scale  printing  technologies  typically  involve 
considerable set up costs, which compel the publisher to determine in 
advance the number of copies in each print run. Printing additional 
copies would entail incurring the set up costs again (as well as the 
opportunity cost of printing this book rather than another book), and 
the publisher will only incur them if it expects that the demand for the 
additional run will generate enough profit to cover those costs. Even 
though the information embodied in the book is non-rivalrous, the 
book  itself  is  rivalrous and  the  limited  quantity  of  printed  copies 
forces the buyer to reveal how much she values the book (or at least 
she values getting a copy of the book more than other potential buyers 
against whom she is bidding).  
This is not the case with fully digital books, such as e-books, where 
the marginal cost of producing another copy or authorizing another 
use is close to zero, and where communicating with any potential user 
is easy. These features entail that once the publisher produces a digital 
copy of a work, it effectively has the capacity to supply the entire 
107 Frischmann, supra note 95. 
108 First Sale Doctrine, supra note 83, at 107-08. 114  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
demand for it.109 As a result, selling or licensing a digital book to one 
person does not diminish the opportunity to sell it to another. Since 
users are no longer bidding over a resource with finite quantity, there 
are fewer reasons for them to reveal how much they are willing to pay, 
and greater reasons to stall and pretend to be a marginal consumer 
further down the demand curve, who values the work just slightly 
above the marginal cost of its production. Having built the capacity to 
supply the entire demand, the publisher cannot credibly threaten not 
to sell or to sell to someone else and should, in theory, be willing to 
accept any price above zero. The key difference between the printed 
book and the e-book in this regard is that the traditional technology of 
printing  results  in  scarcity  (at  least  temporarily),  which  allows 
publishers to reliably commit to selling the book at prices that exceed 
marginal  costs.  In  contrast,  there  is  no  equivalent  technological 
impediment to producing another e-book instantly.110 Paradoxically, 
the very conditions that make the online provision of digital goods so 
amenable  to  ubiquitous  price  discrimination  can  also  make  it 
unattractive for publishers to so discriminate.111  
If  we  assume  that  publishers  can  implement  perfect  price 
discrimination  (not  near  perfect,  but  perfectly  perfect)  then  we 
assume away these challenges. So let’s imagine, that sophisticated big 
data tools will allow publishers to create a precise profile of every user 
that will not only determine that user’s precise preferences, but also 
predict their social utility with perfect accuracy, without being tricked 
by any attempt to pretend to have a lower willingness to pay. And if we 
take  the  promise  of  perfect  and  ubiquitous  price  discrimination 
seriously, we should also contemplate harnessing the power of the 
state to ensure that the collected data is both complete and accurate, 
and  that  attempts  to  undermine  the  system  by  not  providing 
publishers full and accurate disclosure of all necessary data or through 
arbitrage will not be tolerated. In other words, accomplishing the 
optimistic  vision  of  ubiquitous  price  discrimination  might  involve 
109 This may also be true for digital print-on-demand.  
110 This type of pricing challenge is reminiscent of the pricing challenges that monopolists 
selling durable goods face. See generally R.H. Coase, Durability and Monopoly, 15 J.L. & 
ECON. 143 (1972); Barak Orbach, The Durapolist Puzzle: Monopoly Power in Durable-
Goods Markets, 21 YALE J. ON REG. 67 (2004). 
111 This might explain, at least in part, publishers’ reluctance to embrace e-books and why 
the resorted to various techniques, some of them illegal, in their attempt to prevent the sale 
of cheap e-books. See United States v. Apple Inc., 952 F. Supp. 2d 638 (S.D.N.Y. 2013). 2016]  KATZ  115 
intrusive  surveillance  mechanisms  that  can  seem  decidedly 
Orewllian.112 One may notice that a capitalist’s ideal of ubiquitous 
price  discrimination  resembles  the  utopian  socialist  “from  each 
according to his ability, to each according to his needs”, not only in 
their  outcome,  but  also  in  the  means  that  might  be  necessary  to 
accomplish them.113 
The dependency of ubiquitous price discrimination schemes on 
intrusive  surveillance  demonstrates  that  historically  libraries  have 
offered not only access to books, but have also endeavored to provide 
access under conditions that guarantee readers’ privacy and freedom 
from  surveillance.  To  the  extent  that  readers  value  the  ability  of 
reading  without  being  watched,  libraries  offer  them  a  service  for 
which the market cannot, or may not, easily substitute. Moreover, 
because readers cannot internalize the entire social benefits that stem 
from an environment that enables this kind of free inquiry, they may 
rationally  waive  their  privacy  in  return  for  more  immediate  and 
tangible commercial offerings. Therefore, to the extent that society has 
an  interest  in  preserving  an  environment  that  promotes  free, 
anonymous, and private inquiry, libraries and the legal rules that 
enable their operation are worth keeping, even if the market could 
otherwise provide seemingly comparable services.114  
E.Alternatives to Direct Price Discrimination
If amassing the data required for implementing perfect or near-
perfect price discrimination now seems impossible, or if we consider 
the necessary conditions for it undesirable, then publishers could still 
resort to other forms of price discrimination. They could offer a menu 
of  options  for  accessing  works,  catering  to  readers  with  different 
112 Christina M. Mulligan, Personal Property Servitudes on the Internet of Things, 50 GA. 
L. REV. 1121 (2016). See also Boyle, supra note 101, at 2034 (“Perfect price discrimination 
requires more information about customers than can be revealed by mere self-selection 
and more information-gathering (to prevent illicit arbitrage, lending, or gifts). Do we really 
want to commit ourselves to a regime that will offer companies major assistance in the 
form of state power, assistance that will yield them big bucks, but only if they monitor their 
customers superlatively well? This seems like a rather perverse set of incentives.”). 
113 But with a major difference, as Oren Bracha reminded me: proponents of ubiquitous 
price discrimination tend to conflate the concepts of “needs,” “willingness to pay,” and 
“ability to pay.”  
114 See generally Julie E. Cohen, A Right to Read Anonymously: A Closer Look at 
“Copyright Management” in Cyberspace, 28 CONN. L. REV. 981 (1996). 116  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
preferences and letting readers reveal their preferences by choosing 
the version that suits them best (economists often refer to this as 
second  degree  price  discrimination).  Alternatively,  publishers  can 
offer a single version of the work, but charge prices on the basis of 
easily observable characteristics that serve as a proxy for willingness 
or ability to pay (economists often refer to this as third degree price 
discrimination).  
Publishers have used these methods for years. For example, the 
difference  in  price  between  hard  cover  and  paperback  typically 
exceeds the difference in the cost of production, and their sequential 
release serves as a method for second-degree price discrimination: 
eager  and  more  affluent  readers  may  rush  to buy  the hard cover 
edition, while less eager or less affluent readers might wait for the 
paperback. The higher durability of hard cover books may also make 
them more appealing to libraries because it reduces the wear and tear 
that  may  result  from  the  circulation  of  the  copy  among  different 
readers, and libraries might be willing to pay a premium for this 
additional functionality. Discounts offered to students and seniors 
(which presumably earn less and have lower ability to pay) are a 
common  form of  third  degree  price  discrimination, because  those 
characteristics can be easily observed or at least verified.  
While perfect price discrimination could, in theory, maximize both 
access and profit, other types of price discrimination could increase 
profit  (otherwise  publishers  wouldn’t implement  them  voluntarily) 
without resulting in full or even greater access, compared to the level 
of access under uniform pricing, let alone when the role of non-market 
access (e.g., through libraries) is counted. Therefore, even considering 
only the narrow economic question of how many people gain access, 
imperfect  price  discrimination  is  not  a  priori  preferable  to  other 
mechanisms.  
There  are  three  additional  techniques  that  have  enabled 
publishers  to  indirectly  accomplish  outcomes  equivalent  to  those 
under direct price discrimination: the first is through the bundling of 
content, the second is through permitting or tolerating sharing of 
content among users, and the third is through a combination of both. 
As  the  next  section  shows,  publishers  employ  these  techniques 
routinely, and in many cases, libraries form part of the ecosystem that 
enables them.  2016]  KATZ  117 
F.Indirect Price Discrimination: Bundling, Sharing, and Libraries
The bundling of content in a single object (e.g., an issue of a 
newspaper or a magazine) or in a license that pertains to different 
works (e.g., subscription to a bundle of cable channels, or a database 
of journal articles, or a streaming services such as Netflix) allows the 
content provider to achieve the effect of price discrimination without 
needing  to  know  how  different  consumers  value  different  works. 
Bundling achieves this result because, even though readers’ tastes, 
preferences, and willingness to pay with respect to individual works 
will vary significantly, their willingness to pay for a bundle tends to 
average out.115  
For example, imagine two brothers, Jacob and Esau. Both like to 
be  informed  about  what  is  going  on  in  the  world,  but  they  have 
somewhat  different  interests  and  preferences:  Jacob  spends  more 
time  on  op-eds  than  on  news,  while  Esau  does  the  opposite.  In 
addition, Jacob likes to read articles on food and style, while Esau 
prefers stories about hunting and adventures (though he will not miss 
a recipe for good lentil stew). If the publisher of Canaan Times could 
determine exactly how much each of them is willing to pay for each 
article, it could maximize profit by setting such individual prices and 
selling individual articles accordingly- but obtaining such information 
is nearly impossible.116 However, the price that each of them is willing 
to pay for a bundle that includes various articles tends to average out, 
regardless of the variance in their respective preferences for individual 
articles. Therefore, bundling the different article in an issue of the 
newspaper makes it easier for the publisher to predict how consumers 
will evaluate a collection of works, without needing to know how they 
value any individual work.117 
The publisher can combine this strategy with other indirect forms 
of price discrimination. For example, if Esau, the farmer and hunter 
who never went to university, is less affluent than his erudite brother, 
115 See Yannis Bakos & Erik Brynjolfsson, Bundling Information Goods: Pricing, Profits, 
and Efficiency, 45 MGMT. SCI. 1613 (1999). See also GANS, supra note 93, at 27. 
116 News articles, and most other copyrighted works are experience goods, meaning that 
buyers cannot ascertain their quality before buying them. This makes per-work per-user 
pricing even more challenging. 
117 See, e.g., Ariel Katz, Commentary: Is Collective Administration of Copyrights Justified 
by the Economic Literature?, in COMPETITION POLICY AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
(Marcel Boyer et al. eds., 2009).  118  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
then offering the bundle at a discount to members of the Hunters and 
Farmers Association could increase the publisher’s profit.  
Now,  suppose  that  Esau,  after  settling  in  Edom,  prefers  The 
Edomite to the Canaan Times as his main source of information, but 
is still interested in reading the Canaan Times occasionally. At the 
same time, the educated Jacob, who generally prefers the Canaan 
Times, enjoys reading stories from The Edomite now and again. Each 
of them would be happy to subscribe to both newspapers, but the full 
price of a subscription to The Edomite exceeds Jacob’s marginal utility 
from reading that newspaper—and vice versa with respect to Esau 
paying for a subscription to Canaan Times. If the publisher of The 
Edomite offered Jacob a substantial discount on a subscription, Jacob 
would buy it, and Esau would do the same with respect to the Canaan 
Times. However, the cost of determining what the prices should be 
and of maintaining a system for such differential pricing exceeds what 
each of the publishers could gain from implementing it.  
Moreover,  their  inability  to  afford  subscribing  to  another 
newspaper does not really prevent the brothers from reading articles 
from the other newspaper because they often share them: once a 
month Jacob sends the used issues of the Cannan Times to Esau, and 
Esau  does  the  same  with  his  used  issues  of  The  Edomite.  And 
occasionally, they might even scan selected articles of special interest 
and email them to each other so that they can be read much sooner; 
or, they simply email links to articles from the online edition of the 
newspapers (their respective lawyers advised them that the first-sale 
doctrine  allows  them  to  mail  the  used  issues  to  each  other,  that 
reproducing and emailing the occasional article will likely qualify as 
fair use under the circumstances, and that emailing a hyperlink does 
not normally give rise to any copyright concerns). 
Although this arrangement may not be as convenient as being fully 
subscribed to a second newspaper, the brothers find this solution 
satisfactory. Moreover, each of them also realized that this sharing 
allows them to maintain their otherwise complicated relationships, 
and that by being able to share their newspapers with each other their 
respective subscriptions became more valuable to them: so much so, 
that even though both of them were hit by the Great Recession and 
had to reduce their expenses, the brothers—unlike some readers who 
cancelled their subscriptions (and had to be induced with significant 
discounts to re-subscribe)—retained their respective subscriptions.  
When the publisher of the Canaan Times decided to charge for full 
access to its online edition, limit the number of articles that non-
subscribers could access, and offer an online-only subscription that 2016]  KATZ  119 
costs less than full or print-only subscription, Esau considered buying 
the online-only subscription, but the price was still too high for him. 
Jacob, however, was happy to upgrade his subscription and get the 
full print-plus-online version, and share his login credentials with his 
brother.  
Not only did the various ways in which the brothers legally shared 
newspaper articles not hurt the publishers, they probably benefited 
them financially because the unpaid sharing increased each of the 
brothers’ willingness to pay for the content they paid for, and allowed 
the publishers indirectly to achieve an outcome similar to those under 
direct price discrimination without incurring the costs that setting up 
direct  price  discrimination  schemes  demand.  Moreover,  these 
beneficial outcomes are possible because copyright law permits them.  
Publishers  routinely  sell  or  license  content  in  ways  that  are 
consistent with the economics of bundling and sharing as a means of 
indirect price discrimination. For example, the traditional method of 
distributing scientific articles has been bundling them in issues of 
journals, which, in turn, are distributed mainly to subscribers. This 
method involves two levels of bundling: allowing readers to access all 
the articles bundled in a single issue, and allowing subscribers to 
access  all  the  issues  within  the  subscription  period.  Digital 
technologies enabled even greater levels of bundling, where users gain 
access to even the larger bundles available through large databases of 
journal articles.  
Common  practices  are  also  consistent  with  the  economics  of 
indirect price discrimination via sharing. The market for academic 
monographs and specialized reference books tend to be small (relative 
to, say, novels or magazines). It consists of readers with varying and 
idiosyncratic types of uses who might be interested in reading the 
book or sections of it in highly unpredictable ways over long periods of 
time. Moreover, the utility that users derive is often uncertain, and not 
easily internalized by the reader (e.g., in the form of pleasure or by 
charging  a  client).  While  developing  an  effective  direct  price 
discrimination scheme for this type of literature seems dauntingly 
difficult, if not impossible, publishers can still deploy at least two 
types of indirect price discrimination. Many of these books are sold 
primarily to libraries who allow readers to share them, either through 
lending or through photocopying of excerpts. A library is willing to 
pay a higher price than most of its patrons would be willing to pay 
because  it  provides  patrons  a  valuable  service,  and  its  continued 
funding depends on satisfying the needs of its patrons. In essence, the 
library  internalizes  the  preferences  of  its  patrons  and  allows  the 120  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
publisher to set a higher price for the book without worrying about 
trying to determine the preferences of individual readers. Effectively, 
these  books  are  meant  to  be  shared  and  publishers  price  them 
accordingly.  In  addition  to  libraries,  select  individuals  who  need 
permanent access to those books or otherwise prefer the benefits that 
are incidental to full ownership of a copy of a book might also be 
willing to pay the typically high price of those books.  
These  observations  go  some  way  towards  explaining  why  the 
present  ecosystem,  where  market-based  remunerated  transactions 
constitute only a subset of a much larger number of non-market and 
non-remunerated transactions, has existed for generations, and why 
there is no a priori reason why it could not continue to exist with 
respect to digital content.  
These observations do not imply that the legal rules that facilitate 
sharing  (including  exhaustion  and  fair  use)  necessarily  benefit 
copyright owners in every instance. Sharing benefits copyright owners 
unambiguously only when no unpaid use substitutes for paid uses, or 
when the additional profit that result from greater willingness to pay 
for  sharable  content  outweighs  the  losses  from  substitution. 
Moreover,  the  legality  of  sharing  makes  it  more  difficult  for  the 
publishers to implement direct price discrimination schemes that, if 
practicable, would be even more profitable. When users’ gain merely 
offsets  this  forgone  profit  for  publishers  it  has  no  effect  on  total 
welfare, but the prospect of gaining this additional profit could, at the 
margin,  influence  a  publisher’s  decision  whether  to  invest  in  a 
particular  project  or  not.  Arguably,  if  lower  expected  profit 
discourages publishers from investing in otherwise profitable projects, 
readers  are  harmed  as  well.  If  so,  then  it  might  be  tempting  to 
conclude  that  copyright  owners  should  be  granted  the  power  to 
control all sharing; if they expect that the benefits from sharing will be 
greater than the losses of sharing they will rationally allow it, but if the 
sharing  interferes  with  their  ability  to  implement  profitable  price 
discrimination schemes they will disallow it. For libraries, this implies 
that publishers should be able to fully control what libraries do and to 
what extent.   
As tempting as this view might be, however, it is only attractive if 
one  assumes  that  the  interests  of  publishers  and  the  interests  of 
society are constantly aligned. As noted in the earlier discussion, they 
are  not.  Even  if  we  assume  that  technology  could  eliminate  all 
technological impediments to efficient market based access to books, 
it cannot eliminate all of the impediments that are endemic to the 
nature of information goods. Moreover, granting copyright owners 2016]  KATZ  121 
control over all forms and types of sharing provides no guarantee that 
they will exercise it in benign welfare enhancing ways, rather than in 
ways that strategically maximize profit while reducing overall welfare. 
And once we add the liberal values of democracy and freedom into the 
welfare  equation,  the  inescapable  conclusion  is  that  perfect  price 
discrimination  (even  if  technically  feasible)  may  not  be  welfare 
maximizing,  because  its  accomplishment  requires  a  legal 
infrastructure that is inimical to those very values.   
This analysis suggests that if the copyright ecosystem has a public 
purpose, then some of the functions that libraries perform are not 
only fundamental but also indispensable for attaining this purpose. 
Therefore, the legal rules (such as exhaustion and other limitations on 
copyright)  that  allow  libraries  to  perform  these  functions  are  as 
integral to the copyright system as copyright itself.118  
VI.CONCLUSIONS
In this Article I presented and challenged the view that the first-
sale doctrine, or exhaustion, applies only to the transfer of tangible 
copies of works from one person to another- but not to the transfer of 
digital files. Under this view, the first-sale doctrine merely exists as a 
statutory exception, and one that limits only the copyright owner’s 
distribution right, but not other rights. It protects defendants who can 
show that their acts fall within the bounds of the statutory exception, 
but any incongruence with the statutory exception would be fatal to 
their defense. This view, in turn, depends on certain assumptions 
about the meaning of the several exclusive rights, the meaning of the 
first-sale doctrine, and what the interaction among them entails. I 
demonstrated that none of these assumptions is self-evident. The law 
on digital exhaustion is anything but settled, and is capable of being 
interpreted differently. As a “first sale” doctrine it may limit only the 
distribution right, but its statutory presence might merely affirm a 
broader principle of exhaustion—one of several principles in copyright 
law  that  limit  the  copyright  owner’s  powers.  The  principle  of 
exhaustion  can  apply,  and  at  times  has  been  applied,  beyond  the 
distribution right.  
I also showed that copyright owners’ ability to escape exhaustion 
by characterizing transactions as “licenses” rather than “sales”, or by 
using contracts to exercise downstream control is hardly a foregone 
118 Compare CCH v. LSUC, [2004] S.C.C. 13 (Can.). 122  I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY  [Vol. 13:1 
conclusion. Established precedent and sound legal principle indicate 
that  while  the  law  recognizes  some  scope  for  contracting  around 
exhaustion, courts will not necessarily uphold any private reordering 
of the respective legal entitlements of copyright owners and users. 
How  those  principles  will  apply  to  digital  exhaustion  is,  at  most, 
unsettled. I argued that the doctrine of restraint of trade provides a 
well-known  (albeit  somewhat  neglected)  legal  framework  for 
distinguishing  between  those  limitations  on  exhaustion  that  are 
reasonable and justified and those that are not.  
While  these  observations  and  conclusions  apply  to  exhaustion 
generally,  they  apply  most  demonstrably  in  the  case  of  libraries. 
Libraries  occupy  a  privileged  space  in  the  copyright  system. 
Historically, libraries predate copyright, and the institutional role of 
libraries  and  institutions  of  higher  learning  in  the  “promotion  of 
science”  and  the  “encouragement  of  learning”  was  acknowledged 
before legislators decided to grant authors exclusive rights in their 
writings.  The  historical  precedence  of  libraries  and  the  legal 
recognition  of  their  public  function  cannot  determine  every 
contemporary copyright question, but this historical fact is not devoid 
of  legal  consequence.  History  is  part  of  the  legislative  history  of 
statutes,  and  it  constitutes  part  of  the  context  that  informs  the 
interpretation  of  current  statutes.  Specifically,  if  one  proffered 
interpretation of the Copyright Act threatens to seriously curtail the 
function of libraries, courts should require a clear indication that this 
was the intended goal of the legislation before  adopting it. Taken 
together, the first parts of this Article demonstrate that the conclusion 
that the current legislation does not allow digital exhaustion is at least 
questionable, if not false.  
Looking forward, whether digital exhaustion should be preserved 
or permitted depends, in the case of libraries, on understanding their 
function, and how they might be impacted by digital technologies. In 
analyzing  the  role  of  libraries  in  facilitating  non-market  access  to 
books, I identified three types of impediments to efficient market-
based  access:  technology  contingent  impediments,  endemic 
impediments, and strategic impediments. I noted that technological 
changes might only lead publishers to develop market-based models 
of access that are technology contingent, but market-based models 
aren’t likely to displace the role of libraries when libraries address 
endemic or strategic impediments. More specifically, I explained why 
digital technologies and the abolition of exhaustion would not result 
in perfect price discrimination, and that exhaustion has not and will 
not  prevent  publishers  from  continuing  to  implement  indirect 2016]  KATZ  123 
methods  of  price  discrimination.  Since  giving  publishers  greater 
powers to implement imperfect modes of price discrimination will not 
necessarily  lead  to  superior  outcomes  relative  to  the  current 
ecosystem, there is no a priori reason to assume that eliminating 
digital exhaustion will increase social welfare. In fact, because profit-
maximizing publishers will prefer models that increase their private 
returns while ignoring the long-term effects on society, the prudent 
assumption is that eliminating digital exhaustion will not increase 
social  welfare.  Libraries,  institutionally  designed  to  consider  the 
collective long-term benefits of access to knowledge would therefore 
continue to play an indispensable role in providing access to works in 
digital formats, and policy-makers should insist that strong evidence 
be presented before they are willing to discard this assumption.  
As long as the copyright ecosystem has a public purpose, then 
some of the functions that libraries perform are not only fundamental 
but also indispensable for attaining this purpose. Therefore, the legal 
rules (such as exhaustion and other limitations on copyright) that 
allow libraries to perform these functions remain, and will continue to 
be,  as  integral  to  the  copyright  system  as  the  copyright  itself. 