Copyright and Research in Google Book Search
by Benjamin J. Keele
Many researchers—even trained professionals—often use the Google search engine
to begin searches for information. Google’s many products enable researchers to search
public websites, scholarly articles, and even patents. One vast area of information not
yet thoroughly indexed by Google is print books. Google Book Search (also at times
referred to as Google Books, Google Print and Google Library Project) is the com-
Benjamin Keeleis a ref- pany’s effort to digitize and index the world’s print literature.
erence librarian at the
William and Mary Law
Library, where he pro-
vides research assistance
and teaches legal Google’s digital corpus is remarkable and valu- that would provide free access to the digital
research. He earned his able, but due to copyright law Google cannot books, although there would be a fee for printing
law degree from the simply give or sell access to all these books. This from the database. Libraries could also purchase
Indiana University
article will briefly review the history of Google subscriptions to provide access beyond the dedi-
Maurer School of Law
Books, including the litigation and proposed set- cated terminals. Revenue would be shared
and his master of library
science degree from the tlement. Then the article will discuss how copy- between Google and a new Books Rights Registry.
Indiana University School right affects the scope and functionality of The registry would be a royalties-collecting non-
of Library and Google Books. profit organization charged with distributing roy-
Information Science. He
alties to publishers and authors and seeking out
and is co-author of the
Google Books Litigation the rights holders of orphan works—books for
forthcoming Librarian’s
Copyright Companion, In December 2004, Google announced plans to which the rights holders are unknown.
Second Edition. His scan and index the text of millions of print books. Google would also be permitted to make fur-
research interests are Books were borrowed from major research ther uses of the digital books, in addition to sell-
copyright, privacy law,
libraries and scanned. Publishers could also make ing digital copies and online subscriptions. As it
and scholarly communi-
agreements with Google to include digital copies does for indexed web content and email in its
cations.
of their books. The full text was made available of Gmail service, Google would display relevant ads
books in the public domain due to expired copy- next to the book content. The digital corpus
rights. Only snippets—a few sentences relevant would also let Google further refine its search
to the search terms—were made available from algorithms, making it more competitive in the
books that possibly were still under copyright search market. Finally, Google would provide a
protection. A publisher can consent to Google copy of the digital corpus to two universities that
providing greater access to its books.1 would provide computational access to nonprofit
In September and October 2005, authors and researchers. This text-mining research would be
publishers of books digitized by Google sued the valuable to, among others, linguists, historians,
company for infringement of their copyright and computer scientists.4
privileges. Google asserted that digitizing books Rights holders who do not want their books
to make them searchable, show snippets, and dis- to appear in Google Book Search could direct
play relevant ads was not infringement because it Google to remove them. The system is opt-out.
was fair use.2After years of negotiating, in Unless Google hears otherwise, it would be able
October 2008 the parties announced a proposed to digitize books, include them in the digital col-
settlement of the class-action lawsuit.3 lection and display 20 percent of each book’s con-
Under the first proposed settlement, Google tents. This default rule is especially important
would have a license to digitize and display up to because it gives Google access to orphan works
20 percent of virtually every book in the world. for which it would be difficult to locate every
Full text of books would be accessible through rights holder and negotiate for permission.
individual purchase or institutional access. The sweeping proposed settlement drew a
Libraries would receive public access terminals number of objections, most notably from the
46 VIRGINIA LAWYER |  October 2011  |  Vol. 60 |  LAW LIBRARIANS www.vsb.orgCOPYRIGHT AND RESEARCH IN GOOGLE BOOK SEARCH
Department of Justice, which expressed concerns own copyrights but have no knowledge of them.
about antitrust. Since the settlement would give For some books, the trail has gone so cold there
Google retroactive cover for digitizing millions of may be no way to definitively say who holds the
books, possible competitors would have to mimic copyrights. Even if after a diligent search a rela-
Google by scanning books and hoping to get a tively small percentage of books are truly
similar settlement—a significant liability risk. orphans, in a universe of millions of books a frac-
Google is the only company that is digitizing tion is still a large number. The settlement would
books on such a large scale. Microsoft scanned have let Google commercialize these orphan
books for a time, but later bowed out. Having the books without identifying and negotiating with
settlement apply only to Google would present a rights holders. The Book Rights Registry, funded
major barrier to any possible competitors. through revenues shared by Google, would han-
After the Department of Justice recom- dle that chore.
mended against approval of the first settlement, The publisher and author parties likewise
the parties produced an amended settlement to would rather avoid the expense of tracking down
address some of the concerns. While the original rights holders, and including the orphan works
settlement would have included books from any would increase the value of the institutional data-
country, the amended settlement includes books bases from which they would derive some rev-
from only the United States, Canada, Australia, enue. Money earned from the unclaimed works
and the United Kingdom. A fiduciary to represent would be entrusted to an unclaimed works fidu-
the interests of rights holders for unclaimed ciary that would hold the funds in escrow for ten
books would also be added, and the pricing mod- years, after which the money could be donated to
els under which Google could monetize the digi- charities.6If the works were claimed in that time,
tal books were further defined. then the money can be paid to the rights holders.
These amendments did not comfort the If a new settlement were opt-in, then
Department of Justice and class members, who unclaimed works would not be available for
objected. Objectors claimed that the settlement Google to index or provide through institutional
gave Google an end run around copyright law by subscriptions. The first amended settlement had
permitting it to reproduce books and distribute already excluded most foreign works, so further
copies without express permission of the rights limiting the database to books in the public
holders—especially those who owned the rights domain or permitted by their rights holders
to orphan works. The settlement provisions would make the database much less valuable than
addressing orphan works would impose a solu- it would have been under the original settlement
tion where Congress would normally act, but had agreement. 
thus far failed to. There was concern that Google The parties will now have to decide whether
would still gain a market position so dominant such a settlement is worthwhile. Other options
that competition would be impossible and that are dropping the litigation or proceeding to trial.
libraries and researchers would become depen- Either way, without orphan works legislation
dent on Google for access to digital book from Congress, it appears that a monolithic col-
content.5Due to the objections, in March 2011, lection of digital books is unlikely to be available
Judge Denny Chin of the U.S. Court of Appeals soon. In the meantime, Google has proceeded
for the Second Circuit rejected the amended set- with scanning books and offering snippet views,
tlement. Chin suggested that an opt-in system, as it has from the beginning.
rather than an opt-out one, would be more
acceptable.  Research in Google Books
Chin’s decision places the parties in a difficult Even though copyright law has placed limits on
position, because the opt-out system made the what Google can do with its digital copies of
settlement attractive to both sides. Google would books, Google Books is still a valuable research
incur significant transaction costs analyzing each tool. Google has two groups of sources for its dig-
book to determine if it is still under copyright ital books: libraries and publishers. Books from
protection and who holds the copyright. For libraries are scanned, while books from publishers
books that may be more than seventy years old, might be scanned or supplied as digital files. The
this can be a challenge. Paperwork has been lost, full text of each digitized book is indexed and
publishers have dissolved or merged with others, searchable, but for some books Google only has
and authors have died. There are probably many bibliographic information, such as title, author,
successor companies and heirs that technically and publisher. Searching in Google Books is simi-
LAW LIBRARIANS  |  Vol. 60 |  October 2011  |  VIRGINIA LAWYER 47COPYRIGHT AND RESEARCH IN GOOGLE BOOK SEARCH
lar to searching in Google’s standard Web search the orphan works problem is legislatively
engine. Researchers type in search terms and see addressed, it will be difficult for Google to expand
what Google’s algorithms find, or use Boolean its full-text coverage of books from this period.
operators to further limit the search. An advanced Another limit on Google Books is its spotty
book search interface lets researchers search for quality control. Partly due to the large scale of its
books by title, author, publisher, or even operations, some scans are fuzzy or skewed, and
International Standard Book Number. One can major metadata issues have been found. Some
browse books by subject, although the subjects books have been marked with incorrect publica-
are general enough that using them alone would tion dates or subject headings, for example.7
be unwieldy. For example, the subject “law” has Google automatically runs optical character
about forty-five million results. Using that subject recognition software to make the scans search-
heading and adding the search terms “copyright” able, but the software makes mistakes and
and “fair use” reduces results to seventeen thou- humans do not review the transcriptions for
sand hits, of which at least the first few dozen are errors. Google Books generally works well, but
relevant books. For researchers already familiar researchers should not assume that its contents
with using Google to search the Web, searching in are thoroughly edited and they should be pre-
Google Books will require relatively little practice. pared to do more research if an anomalous
Once one finds relevant books, there are result is found.
three levels of view. For books that are not pro- Google Books is an ambitious project to
tected by copyright or for which Google has make print books accessible online. Copyright
rights holder permission, the full text is accessible. concerns have slowed the project’s progress.
Public domain books can be downloaded as Depending on how one views copyright, the law
PDFs. Rights holders can also opt for a limited has prevented universal access to much of the
view, in which certain pages or chapters, but not world’s printed literature, or preserved authors’
the entire book, are viewable for free. For books and publishers’ proper rights to control and bene-
that are copyrighted and for which Google has no fit from their creative works. Either way, Google
permissions, a snippet view shows a few sentences has given researchers, authors, publishers, and
that contain the search terms. One cannot print Congress reason to reconsider how copyright can
pages from the Google Books interface. fulfill its constitutional purpose to “promote the
For most books, Google links to book ven- progress of science and the useful arts.”viiiIn the
dors from which paper copies can be purchased meantime, Google Books is a relatively intuitive
and a link to the book’s WorldCat record so a and familiar way to search and access books. Its
copy in a library can be located. Public domain contents are not perfect, but  researchers should
and rights-holder-authorized books can also be think of Google Books when looking for books
added to a Google eBooks library. Through this on legal and nonlegal topics.
service one can purchase ebooks that are stored
on Google’s servers and accessible through a com- For Further Information
puter and other ebook reader devices. • Official Google Book Search website:
Google maintains that its scanning and http://www.google.com/googlebooks/about.html
indexing efforts are fair use, but it does not con-
tend that it may make the full text of a copy- • Official Google Book Settlement website:
righted book freely available without rights http://www.googlebooksettlement.com/
holder permission. Google Books provides full-
text access to books that are very old (and thus • American Library Association website on
have expired copyrights) or relatively new (and Google Books: http://wo.ala.org/gbs/
have active rights holders to grant permission).
This makes Google Books a great source for old • The Public Index, a project at New York Law
books that may be difficult to borrow from a School to monitor the Google Book Settlement:
library. Books published between 1923 (the year http://thepublicindex.org/
before which virtually all copyrights have expired)
and the last few decades are less likely to have
more than snippet view. For those volumes
Google Books will be mostly useful as a tool to
find bibliographic information and links to
libraries and booksellers with a paper copy. Until
48 VIRGINIA LAWYER |  October 2011  |  Vol. 60 |  LAW LIBRARIANS www.vsb.orgCOPYRIGHT AND RESEARCH IN GOOGLE BOOK SEARCH
Endnotes: 5 More detailed reviews of objections to the settlement can be
1 Kate M. Manuel, The Google Library Project: Is Digitization for found in Jonathan Band, Guide for the Perplexed Part IV: The
Purposes of Online Indexing Fair Use Under Copyright Law?, CRS Rejection of the Google Books Settlement,
Rep. R40194, at 1 (2009). http://www.arl.org/bm~doc/guideiv-final-1.pdf (Apr. 1, 2011),
2 For analyses of the merits of Google’s fair use claim, see Hannibal and Pamela Samuelson, Academic Author Objections to the Google
Travis, Google Book Search and Fair Use: iTunes for Authors, or Book Search Settlement, 8 J. ONTELECOMM. & HIGHTECH. L.491
Napster for Books?, 61 U. MIAMIL. REV.601 (2006), and Melanie (2010).
Costantino, Fairly Used: Why Google’s Book Project Should Prevail 6 Pamela Samuelson, The Google Book Settlement as Copyright
under the Fair Use Defense, 17 FORDHAMINTELL. PROP. MEDIA& Reform, 2011 WIS. L. REV.480, 524.
ENT. L.J.235 (2006). 7 Geoffrey Nunberg, Google’s Book Search: A Disaster for Scholars,
3 Much of this description of the settlement agreements is drawn CHRON. HIGHEREDUC., Aug. 31, 2009, available athttp://chroni-
from Pamela Samuelson, Google Book Search and the Future of cle.com/article/Googles-Book-Search-A/48245/; Norman Oder,
Books in Cyberspace, 94 MINN. L. REV.1308 (2010). Google, ‘The Last Library,’; and Millions of Metadata Mistakes, LIB.
4 Google has already launched its Books Ngram Viewer, which lets J., Sep. 3, 2009, available athttp://www.libraryjournal.com/arti-
one search a set of digital books for the occurrence of words and cle/CA6687562.html.
phrases over time. More information can be found at 8 U.S. CONST.art. I, sec. 8, cl. 8.
http://ngrams.googlelabs.com/info and in Jean-Baptiste Michel, et
al., Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized
Books, 331 SCIENCE176 (2011).
LAW LIBRARIANS  |  Vol. 60 |  October 2011  |  VIRGINIA LAWYER 49