Foreword 
{0.1} This Report, "The Role of Certification Authorities in Consumer Transactions," is a 
work product of the Internet Law and Policy Forum. The Forum has been established by 
a consortium of companies from Europe, the Americas, and Asia in order to provide a 
neutral venue in which commerce, government and the stakeholders in the Internet 
community may gather to develop solutions to the challenging law and policy questions 
of the Internet. Further information on the Forum may be obtained on the Internet 
atwww.ilpf.org.  
{0.2} This Report was prepared by the Forum's Working Group on Certification Authority 
Practices. This Report has been prepared pursuant to the announced Work Plan and 
procedures of the Working Group on Certification Authority Practices. These materials 
are available from the Internet Law and Policy Forum at http://www.ilpf.org/work/ca.html. 
The Terms of Reference and the Work Plan are attached to this Report as Appendix 8. 
Pursuant to the Work Plan and the procedures of the Forum, the publication of this 
Report should not be considered to represent the views of any one or more of the 
Sponsors of the Forum or those companies or organizations nor should their 
participation necessarily be considered to endorse or recommend the contents of the 
Report in any manner. Any questions regarding this Report, the Forum or the Working 
Group may be addressed to info@ilpf.org or by contacting the Forum's offices in 
Montreal: 
Internet Law & Policy Forum 
World Trade Centre 
Bureau 3280 
380, rue Saint-Antoine Oues, bureau 3280 
Montreal, Quebec H2Y 3X7 
Canada 
514.288.1966 (voice) 
514.288.1177 (fax) 
info@ilpf.org 
{0.3} The Working Group, and the companies and other organizations participating in 
the development of this Report, included the following: 
Working Group 
Bruce Hunter, General Electric Info. Services  
Hong Kong Telecommunications  
Colm Dobbyn, Mastercard Corporation  
Barbara Fox, Microsoft Corporation  
Peter Harter, Netscape Communications Corp.  
David Schellhase, Premenos Corporation  
John Makaryshyn, Telus Corporation  Andrew Konstantaras, VISA Corporation  
Jeffrey Ritter, ILPF Organizing Chair (ex-officio) 
Additional Participants 
CertCo 
CommerceNet 
DFN-CERT 
Entegrity Solutions 
IBM 
Institut Jozef Stefan 
Nortel Secure Networks 
OECD Committee on Consumer Policy 
Signet Systems 
UNINETT 
{0.4} Legal Rapporteur--Cooley Godward LLP, Palo Alto, California. The Cooley 
Godward team included Terrence P. Maher (Boulder, CO), Eric Schlachter (Palo Alto, 
CA) and C. Bradford Biddle (San Diego, CA), with assistance from Melissa Richards 
(Boulder, CO) and Janice Phillips (Palo Alto, CA).  
Technology Rapporteur--Manny Pasetes, Premenos Corporation. 
{0.5} Input on German law issues provided by Christopher Kuner and Dr. Matthias Karl 
of Gleiss Lutz Hootz Hirsch & Partners, Frankfurt, Germany. 
{0.6} A list of CAs invited to participate in the process of developing this Report is also 
included on Exhibit A. 
{0.7} The substance of this Report was completed in January, 1997, although portions 
have been updated since then. Except where otherwise specified, readers should 
assume that this Report is current through January 1, 1997. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY. 
{1.1} This Report represents a preliminary analysis of certain questions relating to legal 
issues involved in the emerging service business of certification authorities, particularly 
those arising in consumer transactions. The scope of this Report has been limited 
intentionally to focus on the selected legal environment in the United States, although 
additional information has been provided on German law, the directives of the European 
Commission and laws in other jurisdictions. In addition, this Report only addresses 
consumer transactions taking place in an "open system," where a CA provides services 
to any consumer desiring services without regard to the contractual obligations between 
the consumer or the merchant and any payment system. As a "pilot" project of the 
Forum, a more comprehensive analysis, though appropriate, was not within the scope 
of available resources. 
{1.2} This Report analyzes the complicated relationships between CAs, merchants and 
consumers. In the absence of specific "digital signature legislation," existing legal 
principles indicate that: 
* As between CAs and consumers who procure a digital certificate, the relationship is 
likely to be governed by existing contract laws. In particular, we believe that digital 
certificates will be treated as a service, not a good, and therefore the common law is 
likely to apply (instead of the Uniform Commercial Code or other rules covering 
"goods"). However, there are a number of reasons that the contracts formed between 
CAs and consumers will not completely resolve the matters that could arise from the 
relationship, and default rules will be needed. 
* As between CAs and merchants who receive the digital certificate from consumers, 
the CA/merchant relationship is likely to be governed by existing tort law, not contract 
law. In particular, the "negligent misrepresentation" tort is likely to provide the most 
applicable set of rules to govern the CAs' liability to merchants if the digital certificate is 
incorrect. 
{1.3} Within this context, we believe that a party's liability for losses arising from this 
structure should generally be connected to whether or not the party acted reasonably. 
As a result, generally if one of the parties acts unreasonably and the other parties act 
reasonably, the party acting unreasonably should bear the resultant loss. However, if all 
parties act reasonably and yet a loss is suffered, we believe that loss should be borne 
by the merchant. Further, if the consumer acts unreasonably, we believe that 
consideration should be given to limiting the consumer's losses, and any losses not 
covered by the consumer would then by borne by the merchant. In both cases, the 
merchant may be in the best position to take the necessary efforts to avoid the loss or, 
alternatively, to insure or otherwise spread the loss among all consumers. 
{1.4} This Report provides some suggested parameters on what behavior should be 
categorized as reasonable. As with other issues raised by this Report, additional study 
should be done on these parameters. 2. INTRODUCTION. 
(a) Summary of the Problem. 
{2.1} Despite its impressive size, scope and reach, the Internet has not yet become a 
predominant vehicle for consumer transactions. In part, consumers are reticent to use 
the Internet for commercial transactions due to perceived and actual security threats 
online. Merchants also have reasons to be concerned about online commerce -- the 
integrity, authenticity and nonrepudiability of electronic messages are not automatically 
ensured. 
{2.2} One possible way to improve the integrity, authenticity and nonrepudiability of 
electronic messages is to develop a robust public key infrastructure ("PKI," also referred 
to as Public Key Authentication Framework) -- and in particular, foster the use of digital 
signatures in commerce. Appendix 6 to this Report serves as a brief primer on digital 
signatures, certificates, and public key cryptography; we suggest that readers who are 
not familiar with these concepts review this Appendix prior to reading this Report. 
{2.3} One difficult problem encountered when using digital signatures is ensuring that 
the identity of a person who holds an encryption key pair is accurately known. Trusted 
third parties called Certification Authorities ("CAs", sometimes referred to as 
"intermediate systems" or "certifiers") offer a way to confirm that a public key belongs to 
the claimed owner. The CA does this by issuing a certificate which associates an 
individual with a particular public encryption key. 
(b) Focus of this Report. 
{2.4} This Report addresses the use of certificates in consumer transactions, and thus 
does not explore the issues raised by the use of certificates in a business-to-business 
setting. Even within the framework of consumer transactions, however, the scope of this 
Report is limited. The issues implicated by digital certificates are extensive and 
complex, and certificates are being used in increasingly novel and imaginative ways. 
We briefly highlight some of the issues we have not addressed, and some of the major 
assumptions we have made, in Appendix 1, and readers will benefit by reviewing that 
Appendix prior to reading the main body of this Report. 
{2.5} This Report focuses largely on what might be called the "open system" or "open 
loop" model. The open system model assumes that consumers will obtain a single 
"identity" certificate from an independent third-party CA and then use that certificate to 
facilitate transactions with potentially many different merchants. 
{2.6} There are several reasons why we focused on the open system model: 
{2.7} First, the open system model raises some extraordinarily difficult, and perhaps 
unprecedented, legal and policy questions regarding the rules that will govern a 
complex set of interrelationships between parties. By way of contrast, in closed systems, the relationships between the relevant parties may be governed by contract 
law and/or existing payment system legislation and regulation--both relatively well-
understood and predictable frameworks for analyses. However, if the applicable 
contract law or other laws fails in the closed system model, the default rules likely to 
apply are those discussed with respect to the open system model. 
{2.8} Second, nearly all legal efforts to date which address PKI issues implicitly assume 
an open system model. The "digital signature" laws that have been enacted to date in 
the United States are largely aimed at promoting development of a PKI based on this 
independent third-party CA model. Similarly, U.S. government efforts at promoting the 
development of a PKI assume an open system model, as do the Digital Signature 
Guidelines published by the Information Security Committee of the American Bar 
Association's Section of Science and Technology. References to these documents are 
available in Appendix 5. 
{2.9} Third, this project was initially conceived in Spring 1996. At that time, it appeared 
that industry efforts were being primarily directed towards developing open systems and 
therefore that open systems were going to be the prevailing business model. In fact, in 
the period during which this Report was written, the open system model has appeared 
to become an increasingly less viable business model. Instead, we believe that many 
consumer transactions which utilize certificates will occur in a "closed system" or 
"closed loop" model. A definition of closed systems and further discussion about the 
differences between closed and open systems can be found in Appendix 2. Closed 
systems primarily fall into two categories: systems where a payment mechanism serves 
to "close the loop" by forming contractual agreements with the relevant parties, and 
systems where certificates are used as an access control device to meter out usage of 
intellectual property or to limit access to proprietary resources. 
{2.10} Despite our growing doubt over the desirability and viability of the open system 
model in the context of consumer transactions, this Report focuses on some of the 
difficult legal and policy questions raised by this model. We do interject discussion of 
closed systems where we believe such discussion is illuminating. Furthermore, because 
the lines between the models we have identified are blurry, and because new business 
models continue to evolve in the marketplace, we believe that some of our discussion 
concerning open system models will also be applicable in other contexts. 
{2.11} This Report attempts to identify certain issues that are relevant to both entities 
participating in an open system-oriented PKI and to policymakers interested in shaping 
the continuing development of such an infrastructure. These issues include: 
  {2.12} What practices should be expected of a CA in connection with that CA's 
relationship with consumers who are the CA's customers? What limitations, if 
any, should be placed on that CA's ability to disclaim liability for failure to 
adequately perform these practices? 
  {2.13} What practices should be expected of consumers of CA services? Should 
potential liability for failure to perform these practices be limited in any fashion?   {2.14} What practices should be expected of merchants who rely on certificates 
issued by a CA? What legal relationship should a CA have to merchants who rely 
on a certificate but who have no other connection with the CA? Should a CA's 
potential liability to merchants be limited in any fashion? What mechanisms could 
potentially be used to limit liability? 
  {2.15} Which party in the relationship (CA, consumer, or merchant) is best able to 
assess and price against the risk of loss? 
(c) Goal of this Report 
{2.16} This Report is intended to be a concise, non-comprehensive summary and 
analysis of the emerging legal rules and business practices regarding CAs serving 
consumers in an open system. If successful, this Report will serve as a building block 
for further analysis of the issues and for the ultimate development of a set of legal and 
policy guidelines that may be consulted by both the public and private sectors. 
{2.17} Ultimately, this Report will be most helpful if it contributes to the process of 
developing sensible, uniform and predictable rules in this area. As noted throughout the 
Report, there is a strong likelihood that the participants in a PKI will be confronted by a 
patchwork quilt of unpredictable rules, making compliance -- and even the process of 
analyzing rules with a view towards compliance -- difficult. The lack of uniform and 
predictable rules is a major deterrent to the development of a PKI and the participation 
by a substantial number of players. We view the development of clear and predictable 
rules as an essential step in the development of a robust electronic marketplace. 
{2.18} This Report omits footnoting to enhance its readability by a wide range of 
audiences. Supplementary resources are listed in Appendix 5. 
{2.19} While the members of the Working Group all have a commercial interest in the 
development of electronic commerce through a PKI, this Report has deliberately 
attempted to avoid favoring, evaluating or endorsing any particular standards, vendor, 
product or business model. CAs and working group members have been invited to 
submit their own written comments to this Report. Any comments that were received are 
attached as Appendix 9. 
{2.20} This Report is for informational purposes only and is not intended to form an 
attorney-client relationship. Readers should seek professional legal counsel for advice 
regarding their specific situation. 
{2.21} In total, this Report consists of this document and the following appendices: 
Appendix 1: Scope and Assumptions of the Drafters of this Report. 
Appendix 2: Analysis of Open vs. Closed Systems 
Appendix 3: Survey of Laws Relating to Digital Signatures Appendix 4: Comparison of Current Business Practices of Selected Existing CAs 
(including a list of known CAs). 
Appendix 5 Bibliography of Selected Resources About Digital Signatures and CAs, 
including a list of passed and pending digital signature legislation and the location for 
obtaining electronic versions of some legal resources referenced in this Report. 
Appendix 6: Description of Digital Signatures 
Appendix 7: Analysis of existing CAs' compliance with existing legal systems (Note: this 
appendix is merely the structure for this analysis.) 
Appendix 8: Terms of Reference and Work Plan for the Working Group. 
Appendix 9: Written comments submitted by CAs and working group members. 
{2.22} As a pilot project of the ILPF, this Report by necessity does not address or 
analyze all of the interesting or difficult questions related to CAs. The Working Group 
believes that additional work should be done in this area to address these questions. 
 
3. BACKGROUND. 
(a) Glossary. 
{3.1} Discussions about PKI are notoriously burdened with acronyms and technical 
terms. The following is a non-comprehensive glossary of some of the key terms used in 
this Report. 
{3.2} Certificate or Digital Certificate. A digital certificate contains information about the 
consumer (including the consumer's public key) and is signed using the CA's public key. 
See Appendix 1 for a more complete description. 
{3.3} Certificate Revocation List ("CRL"). A list of all digital certificates from a specific 
certificate authority that have been revoked. 
{3.4} Certification Authority ("CA"). A certification authority provides to consumers a 
digital certificate that links a public key with some assertion about the consumer (e.g., 
the consumer's identity, the consumer's account at a financial institution, the credit 
payment card number, etc.). CAs may offer other services such as time-stamping, key 
management services and CRL services. 
{3.5} Certification Practices Statement ("CPS"). A statement of the CA's practices with 
respect to a wide range of technical, business and legal issues that may be used as a 
basis for the CA's contract with the entity to whom the certificate was issued (in this Report, normally the consumer). In an open system, the degree to which the CPS of the 
consumer's CA may provide a contractual basis governing the merchant's rights and 
obligations is unsettled. In a closed system, CAs will likely have the opportunity to enter 
into contracts with all parties to a transaction, and the CA's CPS will presumably be 
incorporated into such contracts. 
{3.6} Consumer. An individual procuring goods or services online. In an open system, 
the consumer is often referred to as a "subscriber" upon the consumer obtaining a 
certificate from its CA. This distinction might be confusing in situations where both the 
merchant and the consumer have digital certificates that are used to conclude a 
transaction. In such circumstances, both parties are "subscribers." 
{3.7} Merchant. An entity offering goods or services online that will receive a certificate 
as part of the process of completing the transaction with the consumer. In an open 
system, the merchant is often referred to as the "relying third party." 
{3.8} Private Key and Public Key. The use of digital signatures requires the creation of a 
pair of mathematically-related, large composite prime numbers. One of these numbers 
is arbitrarily called the public key and the other is called the private key. The private key 
is kept secure, while the public key is made publicly available. By definition, every 
public-private key pair is completely unique, so there is only one public key for every 
private key. 
(b) Model Internet Commerce Transaction Utilizing Digital Signatures. 
{3.9} Describing digital signatures and CAs proves to be a rather complex task. We 
have prepared the following diagram as a simplified way of illustrating the situation 
where the consumer delivers a certificate to the merchant as part of an online 
transaction. Readers should note that many complexities have been abstracted away 
from this diagram. This diagram also does not reflect the possible delivery of merchant's certificates to consumers to authenticate the merchant's identity.
 
 
{3.10} In summary, the process generally may work as follows: 
Step 1: Consumer generates a public and private key using a key generation system 
(either software or software combined with hardware) resident on the consumer's 
system. 
Step 2: Consumer provides a CA with identifying information and the consumer's public 
key. The CA provides the consumer with a certificate. 
Step 3: The consumer and the merchant enter into a relationship; the consumer delivers 
order information and possibly payment information (e.g., "allow me to read your online 
magazine and bill me at my home address" or "send me the following goods and debit 
account number 123456789" or "allow me to download your report in exchange for this 
contractual promise to pay you") digitally signed by the consumer using the consumer's 
private key, and the consumer's certificate signed by the CA's public key. 
Step 4: The merchant verifies the certificate (and any certificates of the CA or its CAs) 
and checks the certificate revocation list (if one exists) to confirm that the certificate has 
not been revoked. 
Step 5: The consumer and merchant complete the transaction. 
 (c) Why Use Certificates? 
{3.11} There are three primary goals that can be facilitated by a PKI: authentication, 
non-repudiation and message integrity. To varying degrees, certificates can play a role 
in fostering these objectives. A fourth goal of a PKI, confidentiality, raises issues outside 
the scope of this Report. 
{3.12} This Report focuses on the use of certificates to promote authentication. In this 
context, authentication means confirming the identity of a party. Merchants would desire 
authentication of consumers as a way to enhance the likelihood that they are dealing 
with the person who is in fact the true owner of the public key. This promotes merchant 
comfort that the transaction is legitimately placed and provides potential recourse in the 
event there is a problem. 
{3.13} Conversely, although not dealt with specifically in this Report, consumers will 
want certificates from merchants to authenticate merchant identity. Consumers would 
desire authentication of merchants as a way to enhance the likelihood that they are 
dealing with the merchant who is in fact the true owner of the public key. This promotes 
consumer comfort that the ordering information (including terms about payment 
mechanisms) is not being collected by a party who intends to abuse the ordering 
information. 
{3.14} Non-repudiation means that a person making a statement (such as a consumer 
placing an order) is not able to deny making the statement. If the mechanisms to 
authenticate identity work properly, the goal of non-repudiation would be facilitated; if 
identity is confirmed, there would be few grounds on which the consumer could say that 
the statement attributable to them was not actually made by them. While digital 
signatures may prove to be an excellent way to obtain non-repudiation, currently private 
keys are maintained in environments -- such as on hard drives or networks which are 
password protected -- where they could theoretically be expropriated with less effort 
than would be required to determine them through a brute force attack on the keys 
themselves. Hardware tokens, such as storing private keys on smart cards, would 
confirm that the user of a private key is the party authorized to do so; hardware tokens 
tied to biometric devices would provide even more assurance. 
{3.15} Merely providing authentication helps reduce fraud, at least by permitting 
recourse in the event there is a problem. Non-repudiation would further reduce fraud by 
preventing parties from fraudulently denying making a statement that was made. 
However, few existing systems currently completely eliminate fraud; at most the 
systems reduce fraud, and uneliminated fraud becomes part of the cost of doing 
business. 
{3.16} Finally, the public key listed in the certificates can be used to validate the 
message digest, which is a numerical representation of the document's contents to 
which the digital signature is attached. This tells the recipient of the message (and the 
certificate) that the contents have not been altered; it also could permit the sender to prove the contents of its message as sent. In both cases, message integrity gives 
comfort to consumers and merchants that the message contents can be relied upon. 
4. PROPOSED BUSINESS PRACTICES. 
{4.1} In a consumer transaction involving digital signatures in an open system (as 
discussed in this Report), there are three principal entities whose rights and 
responsibilities affect the transaction: the consumer, the CA and the merchant. Other 
entities may play an important role as well, such as software and hardware providers, 
timestampers, notaries who assist CAs in the authentication process, and other 
providers of ancillary services. 
{4.2} This section addresses, first, the question of what legal framework is most 
appropriate for analyzing the relationship between the three principal entities (CA, 
consumer and merchant) in an open system. The analysis in this section draws heavily 
from the extensive survey of existing laws found in Appendix 3, and readers may find it 
helpful to review that Appendix in conjunction with this section. In this section we 
conclude that the relationship between CA and consumer is most appropriately 
governed by contract, and generally endorse the proposition that CAs and consumers 
should be free to negotiate the terms of their relationship, subject to certain limitations. 
With respect to the relationship between CA and merchant, however, we assert that tort 
law may be the best framework on which to analyze allocating duties and liabilities. We 
suggest that attempting to bind merchants to contract terms incorporated by reference 
into certificates may be untenable as a matter of basic contract law, is economically 
inefficient and is contrary to sound public policy. 
{4.3} Next we address our thesis that participants in a PKI must be obligated to act 
reasonably, and if a party acts reasonably that party should not bear a loss caused by 
another party's unreasonable behavior. This proposition prompts two questions. First, 
what constitutes "reasonable" behavior? Second, who bears the risk of loss if all parties 
act reasonably and yet a loss still occurs? We address each of these questions in turn, 
first highlighting some behaviors which we suggest could reasonably be expected of 
consumers, merchants, CAs and, more summarily, providers of ancillary services. Then 
we turn to the question of which party should bear the risk of loss in a "fault-free" 
situation. Acknowledging a long history of consumer protection legislation, we conclude 
that the liability of consumers should be limited even in a situation where the consumer 
has not acted reasonably. 
{4.4} This section outlines a framework for discussion and more comprehensive study. 
 
 
 (a) Tort v. Contract. 
(i) CA/Consumer Relationships. 
{4.5} We believe that the relationship between CAs and consumers is best governed by 
contract. In an efficient and competitive marketplace, consumers can choose CAs 
based on the CAs' performance, terms of service, cost and other parameters, which in 
most situations will be spelled out in a contract that the consumer can choose or reject. 
Therefore, within the limits of general contract enforceability, and acknowledging that 
there are perhaps a few provisions where the market may not be sufficiently efficient, 
generally we would expect that the relationship between CA and consumer will be 
contractual. 
{4.6} There are a large number of technical, business and legal issues a CA must 
confront, and therefore in some circumstances CAs will be tempted to develop long and 
extremely complex agreements. While there is no indication that the marketplace, 
working properly, will fail to reach the right result, it should be understood that significant 
burdens are being placed on consumers to analyze these contracts and still make 
rational choices. It is possible that consumers will be unable to properly distinguish 
between CAs because of this significant burden; in that case, it would be appropriate to 
evaluate alternatives to allowing contract law to govern the relationships between CAs 
and consumers. 
{4.7} Despite the appeal of allowing the CA/consumer relationship to be governed by 
contract, there are many obvious problems with contract formation that dictate that gap 
fillers or other principles are required. Consumers could be afflicted with incapacities to 
contract (such as minor status). Consumers could not speak the language in which the 
contract was written (see Transborder Issues below). The contract could be 
unconscionable or a contract of adhesion under applicable law. Finally, portions of the 
contract may contradict local laws and therefore be void for public policy. 
{4.8} Therefore, there is a compelling need for a default set of rules for this relationship, 
whether stated as default contract terms (such as the UCC) or as tort principles. These 
rules could be developed as a self-regulatory code, to be incorporated into the contract 
by reference, or by statutory law. It is unlikely that the electronic marketplace's need for 
uniformity and predictability will allow for less formalized alternatives. 
(ii) CA/Merchant Relationships. 
{4.9} It is less clear that the relationship between CAs and merchants should 
automatically be governed by contract. Merchants are seeking only the accuracy of 
information contained in a certificate (and, presumably, the performance of the 
underlying services necessary to verify such information). Imposing the obligation on 
merchants to review each "contract" they will be asked to enter into appears to impose 
significant transaction costs on the process. Not only may the merchant be dealing with 
multiple CAs, each with their own custom certification practices statements, but each CA may choose to amend a certification practices statement over time, requiring a 
merchant to check each certification practices statement for each certificate received. 
We note that it may be cost-effective for a CA to specifically negotiate a mutually-
executed contract with merchants who repeatedly use their services, but this may be an 
exception rather than the rule (but see Appendix 2, "Closed vs. Open Systems"). 
{4.10} In the absence of a specifically negotiated contract between CAs and merchants, 
the most efficient approach for allocating liability may be the existing negligent 
misrepresentation tort. It allows CAs to internalize the costs of their actions while not 
imposing large upfront transaction costs on the parties. Furthermore, it allows the CA to 
avoid liability by acting "reasonably" without allowing the CA to abuse the contract 
formation process by imposing excessive terms. However, CAs should be able to state 
their assumptions by qualifying what facts they are providing and what efforts the CA 
used to verify those facts. In this way, if the CA performed the services it promised to 
perform in a reasonable way, the CA should have no liability. If the CA acts negligently, 
the CA could incur liability to merchants. However, we recognize that this approach has 
limited applicability in civil law systems with tort law principles that are substantially 
different from those under United States law. 
(b) Obligation to Act Reasonably. 
{4.11} As a starting point for allocating losses, we believe each party has the duty to act 
reasonably. If a party fails to act reasonably, where the other parties have acted 
reasonably, then the party acting unreasonably should expect to bear the loss. 
Therefore, the discussion that follows focuses very much on reasonable behavior and, 
where possible, suggests standards that should be considered when determining if a 
party's behavior was reasonable. However, in acknowledging the important role 
consumers play in this process, we suggest that consideration should be given to the 
desirability of limiting consumers' losses even when the consumer does not act 
reasonably. Also, there are likely to be situations where all of the parties act reasonably 
and yet a party suffers loss -- these are dealt with in Section 4(g) below. We have not 
attempted to suggest loss allocations when more than one of the parties acts 
unreasonably. 
(c) Consumers. {4.12} We suggest that the following behavior by consumers 
constitutes reasonable behavior: 
{4.13} (i) Provide Accurate Information. Any consumer who provides false or 
incomplete information is acting unreasonably. Any consumer who fails to update 
information being certified is acting unreasonably. 
{4.14} (ii) Respond to Notices. In systems where the consumer is given the opportunity 
to verify or accept a certificate, the consumer should review the certificate within a 
reasonable period of time and take all reasonable efforts necessary to correct errors 
promptly. {4.15} (iii) Keep Private Key Secure. Consumers should use best efforts to keep their 
private key secure. Given that certificates may provide different levels of assurance 
regarding a consumer's identity, the consumer's efforts to keep their private key secure 
should increase with the extent of the certificate's assurance of the consumer's identity. 
Currently, however, many consumers would keep their private keys on a system which 
is accessible by entering a password which may be easier than the private keys 
themselves to determine via a brute force attack. Technologies such as hardware 
tokens (such as passcards or smart cards) or biometric devices would potentially 
increase the security of the private key's storage, but these technologies have not been 
universally deployed. 
{4.16} Furthermore, consumers should strictly follow all instructions provided by 
hardware, software, and other equipment providers. Accordingly, entities which provide 
hardware or software products should be expected to provide clear and concise 
instructions to consumers detailing the steps that the consumer must take in order to 
keep their private key secure. 
{4.17} (iv) Generate Keys Securely. If consumers generate their own key pairs, they 
must do so on a reasonably trustworthy system in a secure fashion. Again, it must be 
incumbent upon the suppliers of cryptographic hardware and software to clearly and 
succinctly convey to consumers the steps required to achieve this goal. 
{4.18} (v) Promptly Revoke a Compromised Key. If a consumer's private key is 
compromised, that consumer, upon learning of the compromise, must promptly take 
steps to revoke the corresponding certificate. 
(d) Merchants. {4.19} We suggest that the following behavior by merchants constitutes 
reasonable behavior: 
{4.20} (i) Require the Right Certificate. All parties would be best served by permitting 
the establishment of "classes" or types of certificates that represent different factual 
assertions by consumers and levels of assurances by CAs. Assuming that CAs 
establish classes of certificates that make different factual assertions, the merchant 
should be responsible for requiring the appropriate class of certificate. For example, if 
the CA offers a class of certificates which contain information which the CA expressly 
states contains only unverified information provided by the consumer, it is unreasonable 
for the merchant to expect the CA to warrant the accuracy of the information contained 
in the certificate. In contrast, if the CA offers a class of certificates which expressly 
states that the CA has used substantial efforts to verify identifying information of the 
consumer, it is generally reasonable for the merchant to expect the information 
contained in this certificate to be true. So long as merchants are required to select a 
class of certificates suitable for their requirements, presumably an efficient market will 
force CAs to offer classes of certificates which meet these needs. 
{4.21} It is possible that limited-purpose or specialized-purpose certificates will be 
issued by CAs. In these cases, it would be unreasonable for merchants to use the certificate for identity purposes if such purposes are contrary to the specified purpose of 
the certificate. We note that many physical space certificates, such as driver's licenses 
and social security cards, are currently used for identity despite the fact that such 
certificates were not designed for that use. 
{4.22} (ii) Verify Certificates. Similarly, it is unreasonable for the merchant to rely upon 
a certificate that by its terms has expired or to fail to verify the signature of the CA (and 
its CAs) unless the CA is self-certified. It is also unreasonable for a merchant to rely on 
a certificate that was designated for a different purpose (such as a certificate issued by 
a company for internal access control purposes). 
{4.23} (iii) Check the Applicable CRL. Although there are schemes being implemented 
where no CRL exists as part of the infrastructure, if a CRL exists, certificates that have 
been revoked will be noted in a CRL. In such a case, merchants should bear the risk for 
failing to check the applicable CRL. 
{4.24} We note that CAs are contemplating offering access to CRLs on a fee-for-service 
basis. Such an event would significantly alter the relationship between the parties by 
permitting CAs to impose contract terms on merchants and by providing financial 
disincentives for a merchant to check a CRL. We have not attempted to address this 
scenario. 
{4.25} (iv) Act on Other Information. If the merchant knows or should have known that 
the information contained in a certificate is incorrect, then it is unreasonable for the 
merchant to rely on the certificate. It is expected that reasonable due diligence efforts 
required of the merchant will increase with the size of the transaction and the scope of 
parties' "out-of-band" (i.e., non-Internet) relationship. 
(e) CAs. {4.26} We suggest that the following behavior by CAs constitutes reasonable 
behavior: 
{4.27} (i) Initial Consumer Authentication. There are many means for CAs to initially 
verify the identity of consumers. We believe that there are no minimum standards that 
should apply; rather, the CA should specify what methods it undertook to authenticate 
consumers and the CA will be acting unreasonably if it fails to properly perform those 
steps. At the most basic level, a CA should be able to provide a certificate based only 
on information provided by the consumer, so long as the CA clearly expresses that the 
information contained in the certificate was not verified by a third party. Alternatively, if 
the CA undertakes to authenticate identity using a rigorous system of checks, its failure 
to implement those checks properly will be unreasonable. (This is not to say that the CA 
should become the absolute guarantor of identity, but it should perform the duties it sets 
out for itself.) As described above, we expect that the market will be efficient enough 
that merchant demand will force the CAs to undertake meaningful obligations to 
authenticate consumers. {4.28} (ii) Trustworthy Systems/Key Management. CAs will handle much of their 
operations automatically and will be exposed to any number of computer-based risks, 
both internally and from outside threats. The losses attributable to system failures could 
prove to be diffuse and large. The problem could be particularly acute if the CA's private 
key was determined by third parties. A party who discovers the private key of a CA 
could produce an unlimited number of ostensibly valid but forged certificates. Moreover, 
if a CA's private key was compromised and the corresponding public key revoked, all 
certificates issued by that CA would be invalid. All of the consumers who utilized that 
CA would be forced to obtain new certificates. 
{4.29} Depending on the CAs' contractual relationships with consumers, it is possible 
that CAs will not be forced to bear the costs of system failures -- particularly if the 
individual costs borne by each consumer are so small that they are overshadowed by 
the transaction costs of seeking recourse against the CA. 
{4.30} However, despite the importance of ensuring proper system operation, it is not 
fair to expect perfect error-free operation. Given the dynamic evolution of the underlying 
technology, it does not make sense to codify specific minimum technology standards. 
Therefore, CAs should use reasonable efforts to make their systems trustworthy. In this 
context, the standards for reasonable efforts and trustworthiness will increase over time 
as technology improves. 
{4.31} The problem of key management is particularly vexing and it is imperative that 
CAs take every possible precaution when generating, storing, and using their private 
encryption key. Particularly in light of the dynamic technological environment in which 
keys are generated and managed, we cannot currently articulate specific behaviors that 
would constitute reasonable precautions in this regard. Additional study should be done 
to suggest what efforts by CAs would be reasonable to keep their private keys private 
and what duties CAs have if they discover their private key has been determined by 
third parties or is no longer private. 
{4.32} It may be appropriate for an industry standards setting body to form which can 
dynamically assess technological improvements and establish standards for reasonable 
deployment of technology to increase trustworthiness. If the industry does not develop 
such standards, it is likely that government regulation will be implemented to develop a 
licensing scheme. 
{4.33} At a minimum, we expect that CAs will freely disclose the steps they are taking to 
make their systems trustworthy. Systems often achieve trustworthiness only by being 
subjected to public scrutiny. 
{4.34} (iii) Administrative Duties. It is beyond the scope of this Report to deal with 
issues such as employee hiring and management, record keeping, bonding and 
insurance, and other ministerial functions. Although such issues could be critical to the 
successful operation of a PKI, we suggest that additional study should be done on these 
topics. {4.35} (iv) Certificate Revocation/Suspension. CAs will be expected to revoke 
certificates promptly upon notification from consumers. Revocation typically occurs by 
maintaining a CRL. This CRL must be made available in such a way that merchants can 
check the CRL easily prior to accepting a certificate. 
{4.36} It may not be fair for CAs to have obligations to independently verify certified 
facts on a continuing basis. While CAs should have a duty of inquiry if they receive 
information from a third party suggesting that a certified fact is incorrect, no independent 
efforts should be required unless the CA offers to do so as part of the terms of the 
certificate or in its agreement with consumers. 
{4.37} Because of the relative harm that can be caused by issuing a false certificate 
compared with failing to issue a certificate that should otherwise have been issued, it 
seems appropriate to give incentives to CAs to fail to issue certificates if there is any 
doubt. Therefore, we suggest that the CA should be exonerated under applicable 
principles for any losses that occur because the CA elected not to issue certificates if 
the CA has any good faith belief that the certificate should not issue (there could be a 
breach of contract for this failure depending on the agreement between the parties). 
However, it seems prudent to require the CA to promptly notify the consumer if the CA 
does not feel it is in a position to issue certificates so that the consumer may resolve 
any confusion. 
{4.38} (v) Publish a Certification Practices Statement. CAs should make available, in 
an easily accessible manner, a certification practices statement or similar document that 
clearly and succinctly states the practices which a CA employs in issuing certificates. A 
CA should follow the practices enumerated in its certification practices statement. 
{4.39} (vi) Make Its Certificate Available. A CA must make its own certificate regarding 
its public key available to parties who wish to verify the certificates of consumers. 
{4.40} (vii) Financial Responsibility. The question of how to ensure that a CA is able to 
bear the loss associated with its potential liabilities is beyond the scope of this analysis. 
We note, however, that a CA that fails to comply with its duties conceivably imposes 
significant losses on a large number of innocent parties. Ensuring that these parties 
could be compensated for their losses is an important public policy concern. Likewise, a 
CA that abruptly terminates its business could impose significant costs on its consumers 
and others. As a practical matter, it may be difficult to impose enforceable duties on an 
entity that is bankrupt or insolvent. 
{4.41} It is conceivable that, with adequate disclosure, the market will properly assess 
the risks associated with doing business with CAs that lack capacity to bear losses 
attributable to them. As a policy matter, this approach will still require mechanisms to 
ensure accurate disclosure. 
 (f) Third Party Suppliers. 
{4.42} Often overlooked players in the CA industry are third party providers of ancillary 
services, such as hardware, software, Internet connectivity, timestamping and 
authentication vendors. We suggest there should be consideration of the duties of CAs 
to exercise reasonable care in selecting suppliers. It may be that in some cases CAs 
should share liability with the third party providers, even though the CA itself did not 
specifically commit the action causing loss. Given that most third party suppliers will be 
in direct contractual privity with the CA, CAs should require meaningful covenants, 
warranties and indemnities from the suppliers in order to cover the situations where the 
CA is deemed responsible due to the third party's failed performance. 
{4.43} Where the situation was clearly outside of the CA's control, it may be appropriate 
to allocate loss to these third party suppliers. This loss may be governed by existing 
legal principles, such as those generally described in Appendix 3. However, given the 
wide range of possible suppliers, it is not possible to summarize rules that would 
generally apply to all of them. 
{4.44} Notaries or other authentication verification providers pose particularly difficult 
issues. A CA might disclose in its certification practices statement that one of its 
authentication methods is to rely on a written application from a subscriber that has 
been certified by a notary. If a notary certifies a false application, and the CA 
consequently issues a fraudulent certificate, should the notary or the CA bear any 
resulting loss? Certainly the fraudulent applicant should be primarily liable, but we 
suggest that, in this situation, merchants should also be able to recover from the CA, 
with the CA having a corresponding cause of action against the notary. It may be unfair 
to place the burden on a merchant to recover against a notary, who may be 
geographically distant from the merchant and potentially not subject to the jurisdiction of 
the merchant's local courts. Moreover, this allocation of risk will create incentives for 
CAs to exercise care when entering into relationships with notaries or other local 
authentication agents and potentially impose more rigorous authentication procedures 
than are typically required of notaries. 
{4.45} Other issues are raised by third party service providers who supply the hardware 
and software necessary to a PKI. Implementing the cryptographic algorithms and 
techniques that underlie digital signatures is not an easy task. As discussed above, 
providers of hardware and software should provide users of their systems with clear, 
concise instructions on how to their system secure which, if followed precisely, would 
permit consumers to achieve the promised level of security. 
{4.46} Some legal systems are spelling out specific rules that apply to these third party 
suppliers. For the more critical suppliers, this may be appropriate. 
 
 (g) Limitations of Liability When All Parties Act Reasonably. 
{4.47} Under the standards suggested above, it is entirely possible that all parties will 
act reasonably and yet a loss will be suffered. Allocating this loss could prove to be 
essential to the widespread use of digital signatures and for establishing a robust role 
for certification authorities to support consumer transactions. 
{4.48} In some ways, the Electronic Funds Transfer Act (discussed in Appendix 3) 
raises an interesting analogy. Credit card holders can behave entirely reasonably and 
yet their credit card number can be expropriated, resulting in losses. To limit credit card 
holder liability, the EFTA specifies that in most cases a holder will not be liable for more 
than $50 in losses prior to the holder reporting the expropriation of the number and for 
no losses incurred after reporting the expropriation. If a similar structure were made 
applicable to the digital signature context, we believe that consumers would be 
significantly more willing to adopt their use. Therefore, by analogy to EFTA and in 
accordance with our touchstone principle that a party that behaves reasonably should 
bear no risk of loss, we suggest that consumer liability be limited to a small dollar 
number, or to zero, if the consumer has behaved reasonably as outlined above. 
{4.49} In situations where the CA has behaved reasonably, we have suggested a 
number of reasons why CAs should not be liable for losses. Stepping back from the 
specifics, there is no doubt that the specter of liability for breach of contract and for 
negligence significantly deter the entry of CAs into the market. At this point there are no 
efficient markets for insurance to spread risk throughout the industry -- meaning that 
CAs face meaningful unquantifiable risks of large losses. Placing risk of loss on CAs 
when CAs act reasonably would likely make those risks untenable, posing a grave 
threat to the development of the CA industry. However, as insurance markets and 
pricing models become more refined, it may be appropriate to revisit CAs liability when 
all parties act reasonably, as they may ultimately prove the best party to spread the 
costs among the relevant players. 
{4.50} Having suggested that both consumers and CAs should have limited liability 
when they act reasonably, the risk of loss under this structure would fall on merchants. 
This would give merchants incentives to act "more than reasonably" if the underlying 
transaction is important to them. Since only merchants know how important the 
transaction is to them, placing the burden on merchants encourages them to scale their 
actions to their risk tolerance. In the consumer transaction context, merchants are also 
the ones being paid in the transaction by the consumer -- giving the merchant the 
opportunity to incorporate the business risk into their pricing models. By way of 
example, currently mail order and telephone-based merchants typically bear the risk of 
loss, as they are typically the party who can best allocate the net of loss among their 
customers. 
{4.51} Regardless of loss allocation mechanisms, the most important step towards 
fostering the growth of an industry will be the establishment of clear and predictable 
rules for the parties. While we expect that consumers should and will always have limited liability when they act reasonably, we expect that CAs and merchants will find a 
way to establish suitable pricing mechanisms under a regulatory and legal framework -- 
if the rules are predictable and clear. In light of the transborder discussions noted below, 
this is not a trivial problem. 
(h) Limiting Consumer Liability for "Unreasonable" Behavior. 
{4.52} In analyzing risk allocations between the parties, by way of analogy we note that 
EFTA provides consumers with liability limits even if consumers fail to act reasonably. 
EFTA's liability limitations apply both where the consumer acts reasonably and where 
the consumer does not act reasonably, although in the latter case the consumer will 
have to bear more risk. 
{4.53} We believe that consumer protection is an integral step in encouraging the use of 
digital signatures. We have suggested that, as a general rule, participants in a PKI 
should bear liability when they act unreasonably and should be free of liability when 
they act reasonably. However, consider the situation where a consumer fails to 
adequately protect his or her private key, resulting in fraud. If our touchstone principle -- 
that parties acting unreasonably bear the resultant loss -- applies, the consumer would 
bear potentially unlimited losses resulting from that fraud. We are concerned that 
unlimited losses could be a major disincentive for consumers to participate in the 
system. Thus, we suggest that consideration be given to limiting consumer liability even 
in the situation where a consumer does not act reasonably. 
{4.54} We do not suggest that EFTA should be reimplemented verbatim in a PKI. The 
consequences when a consumer does not act reasonably in the digital signatures 
context are arguably more significant than the consequences of consumer negligence in 
the credit card model. The success of a PKI depends upon the security of private keys. 
While we are not in a position to suggest specific dollar numbers associated with dollar 
caps, three principles are worth considering. First, like the EFTA structure, it may be 
appropriate to have tiered levels of dollar caps, depending on the severity of the 
consumer's actions. Second, the dollar caps should be high enough to encourage the 
consumer to act reasonably but low enough to avoid disincentivizing consumers from 
participating in the PKI. Finally, there should be no dollar cap for a consumer's 
intentional fraud. 
{4.55} If consumer and CA liability is limited, merchants will face potentially 
unreimbursed losses even when they act reasonably. Presumably merchants would 
take this risk into account in their risk-benefit calculus when choosing to rely on a digital 
signature. In a large dollar transaction, the merchant may choose to obtain out-of-band 
assurances. In a small dollar transaction, the merchant may simply choose to accept 
this risk of loss. 
{4.56} Insurance may eventually address the problem of unreimbursed losses. A private 
insurance market will not develop immediately, however, because there is not enough 
data to develop a pattern of loss experience and the existing legal framework is too unsettled to allow these losses to be predicted. In the meantime, the suggestions 
described above could provide parties participating in a PKI with a reasonable degree of 
certainty, enabling them to make rational economic choices but without abandoning the 
policy of consumer protection. 
(i) Implied Warranties. {4.57} This section discusses the existing framework of implied 
warranties and what the framework should be. Readers are referred to Appendix 3 for 
additional background information. 
{4.58} (i) To Consumers. CAs deliver certificates to consumers. Assuming the 
certificates are merely memorialization of services performed, they would be subject to 
an implied warranty of workmanship -- which, although a contract-based remedy, 
permits the consumer to sue for the CA's negligence. While CAs should be able to 
disclaim implied warranties in their contracts with consumers, prospective contractual 
disclaimers of negligence are difficult to institute and therefore the implied warranty of 
workmanship may persist. Therefore, we do not believe any "new" implied warranties 
are needed in the consumer/CA relationship. 
{4.59} (ii) To Merchants. We have asserted that no contractual relationship should be 
formed between CAs and merchants, in which case no implied warranties would be 
formed. However, as we have discussed, the tort of negligent misrepresentation 
appears to be an efficient mechanism to allocate losses between CAs and merchants. 
We would expect that, like any other situation, it will be difficult (and perhaps impossible 
in the absence of a contract) for a CA to prospectively disclaim this tort in advance. 
(j) CAs' Limitations of Liability for Breach of Contract/Negligence. 
{4.60} CAs may want to establish classes of certificates that, based on the different 
levels of effort exerted by the CA and differential pricing, have different dollar caps on 
liability. The rationale is entirely understandable -- a cheap certificate which contains 
unverified information provided by a consumer is not comparable with an expensive, 
extensively-verified certificate. With respect to consumers, while it makes sense for CAs 
to limit their liability for authorized certificates, it is unreasonable for a CA to unduly limit 
its liability for issuing unauthorized certificates. With respect to merchants, there is no 
contract formed between the merchant and the CA, so there is no basis for the CA to 
assert that such dollar caps should act as a bar on merchants' recovery for their 
damages under existing tort principles. However, in some circumstances, we could see 
how a court might find that stated dollar limits influenced whether or not reliance on the 
certificate was justified or reasonable. 
{4.61} Almost all CAs attempt to disclaim liability for consequential and similar types of 
damages. With respect to consumers, subject to existing limits on the ability to disclaim 
these liabilities, this should be a matter of contract. With respect to merchants, if there is 
no contract formed between the merchant and the CA, there is no contract-based 
principles for the CA to assert limits to liability (there may still be limitations on tort 
liability, such as limitations on the awarding of consequential damages). If a contract is formed with merchants, then principles of unconscionability should put strict limits on 
the powers of CAs to unreasonably limit their liability -- particularly for negligence. 
{4.62} Except in test or demonstration situations, it is usually unreasonable for a CA to 
disclaim all liability for direct damages or to establish a dollar cap so low as to effectively 
deny plaintiffs all meaningful monetary damage remedies. 
(k) Transborder Issues. {4.63} It is beyond the scope of this paper to comprehensively 
deal with the difficult issues of jurisdiction, venue, choice of law and conflicts of laws. It 
is certain that many consumer/CA/merchant relationships will be international in scope. 
These transborder relationships implicate complicated and arcane principles of law. 
{4.64} One certain result is that the putative contract relationship between CAs and 
consumers will be undermined by the possibility that the contract will not be in the 
consumer's native language. The cost of translating a consumer/CA contract into 
foreign languages is significant; localizing these contracts to reflect general local rules 
regarding contract formation adds even more. As discussed in Appendix 3, there are 
many other legal systems that prohibit the contractual assent to certain provisions. As 
lawsuits derived from these relationships mount throughout the world, it is likely that the 
various entities will find themselves subject to an inconsistent patchwork quilt of rules. 
This problem will be exacerbated by the likelihood that the CAs will be dragged into a 
multiple of far-flung jurisdictions to defend actions. 
{4.65} We believe a regulatory framework that fosters predictability will substantially 
minimize or eliminate this consequence. PKI and digital signatures have the potential to 
become an essential tool in electronic commerce. All of the respective players should 
invest in resolving issues raised by this Report by developing standards which can win 
acceptance in the marketplace while encouraging regulators that the needs of 
consumers are being protected. 
5. Next Steps. 
{5.1} This Report was undertaken as a "pilot project" of the Internet Law & Policy 
Forum; by its own terms of reference, the Report was limited in scope and not intended 
as a comprehensive discussion or treatment with respect to the role of certification 
authorities in open market consumer transactions under all legal systems. At the same 
time, in addition to a more comprehensive review of those systems, this Report has 
identified specific areas for action, through the venue of the Forum or other processes, 
which are recommended for consideration: 
{5.2} (a) Development of a clear definition of the distinction in legal analysis required 
between open systems and closed systems, where the parties are all putatively bound 
to each other by contract, including analysis of how loss allocations should be made in a 
closed system. {5.3} (b) Representative analysis of other legal systems, particularly those of emerging 
nations, regarding similar topics of law that might affect crossborder consumer 
transactions. 
{5.4} (c) Completion of the analysis of the extent to which existing CAs are complying 
with the legal systems being enacted. 
{5.5} (d) Analysis of the interplay between overlapping legal doctrines in a single 
jurisdiction. 
{5.6} (e) Standards for CAs' treatment of confidential or private consumer information. 
{5.7} (f) Extension of the analysis to other uses of certificates, such as in commercial 
transactions between merchants or as an access control device. 
{5.8} (g) Analysis of whether existing legislative schemes resolve the legal ambiguities 
existing under current law. 
{5.9} (h) Analysis of how loss allocations should be made in the situations where the 
merchant delivers a certificate to the consumer. 
{5.10} (i) Development of standards about what qualifies as a trustworthy system as 
used by CAs, particularly to address key management by CAs and the CA's duties if it 
discovers its private key has been determined by third parties. 
{5.11} (j) Development of standards for administrative duties of CAs, such as employee 
hiring and management, recordkeeping, bonding and insurance and other ministerial 
functions. 
{5.12} (k) Analysis of liabilities of third party providers to CAs (particularly notaries, 
timestampers, PKI hardware and software providers and other integral players in the 
process). 
{5.13} (l) Analysis of the effect of payment companies on the loss allocations between 
CAs, merchants and consumers. 
{5.14} (m) Allocations of loss when more than one party in a PKI acts unreasonably. 
{5.15} (n) Effect of charges for accessing CRLs on the rights and responsibilities of the 
parties. 
{5.16} (o) Ability of third party hardware and software providers to disclaim liability or 
warranties when providing resources used in a PKI. 
{5.17} (p) Establishment of appropriate dollar values and rules to cap consumer liability 
for acting unreasonably. Exhibit A 
Certification Authorities and Related Parties Invited to Participate:  
CertCo 
CommerceNet 
COST Computer Security Technologies 
DBS/Denmark 
DFN-CERT and DFN-PCA, Universität Hamburg, FB Informatik 
Entegrity Solutions 
GTE 
Harbinger Corporation 
IBM 
Institut Jozef Stefan 
MarketNet 
Nortel Secure Networks 
PGP 
Signet Systems 
SPYRUS 
Sun Microsystems 
Thawte Consulting 
UNINETT 
US Postal Service 
VeriSign, Inc. 
Parties that Provided Comments to this Report: CertCo 
COST Computer Security Technologies 
GTE 
IBM 
Institut Jozef Stefan 
MarketNet 
Nortel Secure Networks 
Signet Systems 
SPYRUS 
US Postal Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 1 
Scope And Assumptions 
The issues implicated by PKI are extensive and complex. We have not attempted to 
address all of these issues in this Report, although many of them warrant additional 
analysis. The following list represents some of the major assumptions that we have 
made: 
(a) We have not attempted to compare the desirability of centralized trust systems for 
PKI with other models for authenticating trading partners or improving the security of the 
Internet. Among these competing approaches to authentication are challenge-response 
identification; the "web-of-trust" model (found most prominently among users of Pretty 
Good Privacy); passcards and other hardware devices; biometric systems such as 
those developed by PenOp and Mytec Technologies; and Electronic Data Interchange 
over a value added network. There are strengths and weaknesses to each of these 
competing approaches that are currently being debated elsewhere. Conceivably some 
of these alternative models for authentication may be partially incorporated into a 
trusted third party (CA-oriented) PKI. 
(b) Throughout this Report, we have focused only on consumer transactions utilizing the 
services of commercial CAs. There is no intent to suggest that consumer transactions 
are the most important or even best application for digital signatures or that commercial 
CAs should preclude government CAs. However, in this pilot project, we have not 
attempted to address all possible scenarios. 
(c) We note that digital signatures and certificates are currently being deployed in a 
number of other interesting applications. For example, a number of vendors are using 
digital signatures and CA schemes as an access control device -- either as a device for 
metering access to intellectual property available on the Internet, or in the "Intranet" 
context, where certificates are used to regulate which employees are entitled to access 
proprietary resources. Another increasingly common use is authentication of the source 
and functionality of software distributed over the Internet. The issues involved in this 
context could be materially different than those found in the consumer commercial 
context, and we have not attempted to address them here. 
(d) Similarly, we note that some legislatures are authorizing the limited use of digital 
signatures for specified government purposes, such as the filing of court documents, tax 
returns or architectural design plans or for signing medical records. We do not attempt 
to address the issues regarding the use of digital signatures for these specified, limited 
purposes. 
(e) Throughout this Report we address certificates designed to confirm identity. In fact, 
certificates are capable of providing information about consumer attributes beyond 
simply that consumer's "identity" -- perhaps even on an anonymous basis. For example, 
a certificate could certify that a person was over 21 and therefore permitted to access materials restricted to people over that age without disclosing the person's name. 
Although certificates are likely to find substantial uses in these ways, we have not 
attempted to address these issues. 
(f) We have assumed that cryptographic devices sufficient to generate difficult-to-
determine key pairs will be widely available across international borders. Currently the 
distribution of these devices is controlled by a number of governments, and such 
regulation is the subject of substantial debate. Further, we do not address any issues 
related to the escrowing of keys. 
(g) Generally, we have assumed that consumers (and not other parties) will make the 
substantive decision about which CAs they will establish relationships with. However, it 
is possible that merchants or the payment systems (such as the credit card 
associations) will drive this decision by dictating which CAs' certificates they will accept, 
effectively forcing consumers to procure certificates from these CAs. Because it 
fundamentally alters the freedom of contract principles we have tried to support in this 
Report, lack of consumer choice over what CA is used raises a host of new consumer 
protection and other issues that we have not attempted to address here. 
(h) We have assumed that CAs, if given the opportunity, would enter into contracts with 
merchants rather than rely on the default non-contract rules (i.e., tort principles under 
common law or statutory rules). We make this assumption because of the incentives 
CAs will have to disclaim warranties to merchants, to exclude consequential and other 
party-specific damages, and to impose dollar caps on liabilities. It is possible that CAs 
would not want to enter into contracts with merchants if these objectives cannot be met 
(for example, if the waivers or exclusions are unconscionable or fail of their essential 
purpose). However, we believe that CAs hope and expect that their relationships with 
merchants will be governed by contract or possibly by statute. 
(i) We do not deal with issues related to agency law and actual or apparent authority. 
Certificates could at some point indicate a party's authority to act (see paragraph (e) 
above), but we do not address that here. 
(j) Ensuring the long-term validity of a contract signed with a digital signature may 
require the services of a third party commonly referred to as a timestamper, who can 
specify when the message containing the digital signature was sent. We have not 
attempted to address issues related to timestamping. 
(k) "Caching" occurs when remote information is duplicated and stored locally. It is likely 
that information being transmitted through the PKI will be cached both at the client level 
and at the proxy server level (internally in an organization or at their service provider's 
servers). This issue is mostly likely to be seen in the case of Certificate Revocation 
Lists, which merchants may cache (much like merchants used to keep hard copy 
printouts of revoked credit cards next to cash registers for real-time verification by 
cashiers). Caching creates the possibility that parties are knowingly or unknowingly 
relying on outdated information, and will also potentially implicate difficult issues under copyright law or other intellectual property rules applicable to databases. We have not 
attempted to address these issues, although there may be technological methods that 
minimize this problem. 
(l) CAs will acquire significant private information about its consumers. Not only will 
consumers directly submit personal information to the CA, but the consumer's conduct 
will leave a "digital trail" of information that, analyzed properly, would give insights into 
the consumer's affairs. We do not address the laws (or desirability of laws) relating to 
keeping this information confidential. We note, however, that the CA's disclosure of 
consumer information may be governed by the E.U.'s Directive on Data Privacy 
Protection (95/46/EC), among other rules. 
(m) We have not addressed the bandwidth, computer and other costs associated with 
the use of digital signatures. We assume that senders and recipients of digital 
signatures, certificates or other electronic messages do not bear any marginal costs 
attributable to sending or receiving these files. In practice, per-byte or per-message 
pricing could become standard, making the marginal costs of using or verifying digital 
signatures greater than zero. In addition, the computational power required to generate 
and process digital signatures is significant and will continue to increase as the length of 
public and private keys increases. Significant marginal costs attributable to computer 
processing or bandwidth are likely to alter the way that senders and recipients perceive 
and use digital signatures in ways we have not attempted to address. 
(n) We do not address evidentiary issues associated with digital signatures, such as the 
admissibility of digitally-signed documents, the appropriate evidentiary weight to be 
accorded such documents, and legal presumptions arising from the use of digital 
signatures. These issues can include whether a document signed with a digital 
signature satisfies the "writing" requirement under applicable statutes of frauds, whether 
an electronic record signed with a digital signature satisfies the best evidence rule, and 
so on. Though seemingly procedural, these issues can raise important public policy 
concerns. For example, some enacted U.S. state legislation creates a presumption that, 
under certain circumstances, the person who owns a particular key pair used to sign a 
document is the person who did in fact sign the document. Holding an individual 
presumptively bound by obligations entered into under their digital signature could be 
inequitable if the individual is the victim of the fraudulent use of such a signature. 
These issues could also be significant in non-US jurisdictions that have extensive 
statute of frauds. For example, Germany has a set of legal rules ("Schriftform") similar 
to the statute of frauds in other jurisdictions. There are thousands of German statutory 
law provisions that require certain declarations to be given in written form; in such 
cases, "written form" is defined by statute to mean a written signature made by pen on 
paper. Important examples of such provisions in German law are consent to the use of 
personal data under the Data Protection Law, covenants and transfers with respect to 
real estate, and the transfer of shares in a limited liability company. Presumably 
digitally-signed documents will not qualify as being in written form under these laws. (o) Generally, this Report does not address "cooling off" laws designed to give 
consumers the opportunity to reject transactions for some period of time following the 
execution of the contract. 
(p) There are multiple conventions for the technical specifications of certificates. This 
Report only addresses Standard X.509 of the International Telecommunications Union, 
although the analysis may apply to other certificate conventions. 
(q) Some visions of a PKI require that each participant obtain, register and use a unique 
"distinguished name." These naming conventions may implicate privacy concerns, 
agency law and even trademark law. We do not address issues related to naming in this 
Report. 
(r) In order to analyze the CA's digital signature attached to a certificate, the party 
receiving the certificate must obtain the CA's public key. Just as there are issues 
regarding whether a consumer's public key belongs to the person who claims it, there 
could be issues about whether the CA's public key belongs to the CA who claims it. To 
resolve this, some visions of the PKI assume that a CA will have the CA's certificates 
signed by another CA whom the public can trust that its public key belongs to this CA. 
This Report assumes that, if a chain of certificates is developed to allow CAs to include 
certificates regarding the CA's signature, the "root certificate" -- that is, the certificate of 
the public key of the CA at the top of this chain -- can be trusted, whether it is issued by 
a government or private entity. 
(s) We do not address the duties, if any, of higher-level CAs for the duties of CAs whose 
public keys are certified by the higher-level CA.  
(t) The mechanisms by which certificates are delivered to potential relying parties can 
vary. This Report assumes that a consumer who is identified in a certificate will present 
that certificate directly to the merchant who intends to rely upon it. The Report does not 
analyze the situation where certificates are stored in a database or directory maintained 
by a certification authority or other third party and accessed by merchants on an as-
needed basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 2 
Open Systems vs. Closed Systems 
{AP2.1} This Report focuses on an "open system" or "open loop" model of a PKI. The 
open system model envisions that consumers will obtain from an independent third-
party CA a single certificate which certifies that consumer's identity. Consumers will 
then use that certificate to facilitate transactions with potentially numerous merchants. 
{AP2.2} As discussed in the Report, the open system scenario implicates legal 
uncertainty and risk. This problem has attracted the attention of numerous state and 
national legislatures, and has been scrutinized by several private-sector legal groups. 
Nonetheless, the problem is far from being solved, and the open system model has not 
yet been implemented in the marketplace in any meaningful fashion. 
{AP2.3} "Closed system" or "closed loop" models offer an alternative way to implement 
a PKI. Closed systems may fall into two categories: systems where a payment 
mechanism serves to "close the loop," and systems where certificates are used within a 
bounded context. In a closed system, a contract or a series of contracts identify and 
define the rights and responsibilities of all parties to a particular transaction. 
{AP2.4} The existing credit card system provides a good example of how a payment 
system can "close the loop." A consumer can only use a credit card to purchase a good 
or service at a merchant who is authorized to accept such a payment device. The 
consumer's right to use the credit card for payment is based upon a contract between 
the consumer and the financial institution that issued him the credit card. The financial 
institution's right to issue the credit card is based upon a contract between the financial 
institution and a payment card company (e.g., Visa, MasterCard, JCB or Europay). 
Similarly, the merchant has a contractual relationship with another financial institution, 
which in turn has a contractual relationship with the same payment card company. 
Therefore, there is a closed loop of contracts that define each party's rights and 
responsibilities with respect to the transaction in question. 
{AP2.5} We describe this process because, by analogy, we think this process potentially 
could alleviate several or all of the legal problems of an open system. Particularly in the 
context of consumer transactions, it is very likely that merchants will have contracts with 
payment companies like credit card systems. Therefore, the CAs will have the 
opportunity to enter into agreements with payment companies that require payment 
companies either to pass CA-specified terms through to merchants or to share the risk 
with CAs. Solutions sponsored by payment companies (like SET) may help achieve the 
implementation of a closed system. While such a closed system would raise its own set 
of challenging legal issues -- such as determining the appropriate scope of existing 
payment systems legislation (e.g., the Electronic Funds Transfer Act) -- it would avoid 
many of the difficult risk allocation questions inherent in an open system. Future 
analysis should address how payment mechanisms would affect this Report's analysis. {AP2.6} A second type of closed system exists when certificates are issued and used 
only within a bounded universe. For example, the proprietor of an online "mall" might 
issue certificates to potential customers and to merchants. The proprietor, acting as a 
CA, has the opportunity to enter into contractual relationships both with consumers and 
with the merchants who will rely of the certificates. 
{AP2.7} Similarly, a merchant might issue certificates directly to its customers. The 
owner of an online magazine, for example, might mail diskettes containing certificates 
directly to subscribers of the paper version of the same magazine. Such certificates 
could be installed the subscriber's web browser and used to access the online 
magazine, and perhaps to order related merchandise. The magazine vendor would be 
well positioned to determine whether such certificates would be sufficiently trustworthy 
for the purposes for which they were being used. Again, such a scenario does not 
implicate the difficult risk allocation questions associated with the open system model. 
{AP2.8} We believe that there are pluses and minuses to both the open system and 
closed system models. Certainly, there is no intent to suggest that, because this Report 
focuses on open system models, open system models are superior to closed system 
models. Closed system models do have one significant advantage over open system 
models -- the legal issues related to transactions performed within closed systems are 
fewer and less ambiguous than in the open system environment, because closed 
system models raise few novel or esoteric issues under contract law. However, there 
are situations where the contracts governing the parties will fail, in which event the legal 
issues raised by the parties' relationships will be governed by the default rules, which 
are not well-understood but are addressed in this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 3 
Existing Legal Systems 
{AP3.1} This Appendix analyzes selected legal systems and highlights how their 
existing rules and principles might affect the CA service industry. The analysis is 
complicated by several factors. First, due to the global nature of the Internet, CAs may 
operate on a global scale, and thus potentially be subject to the varying laws of many 
different jurisdictions. Second, even within a particular jurisdiction, legal systems may 
overlap. For example, a transaction between a merchant and a consumer using a digital 
signature may simultaneously be subject to contract law and related consumer 
protection legislation; tort law; legislation addressing payment issues; and to specific 
"digital signature legislation." Nonetheless, we believe a survey of a selected number of 
existing legal systems serves to illustrate the general legal context in which the CA 
service industry is developing. With this understanding, we can better understand how 
the existing legal systems will provide incentives and disincentives to using digital 
signatures in consumer transactions. 
{AP3.2} This Appendix first surveys U.S. contract law, discussing the potential 
application of the Uniform Commercial Code and the common law of contracts, then 
provides an overview of contract law in certain international settings. This Appendix 
then addresses certain U.S. and E.U. tort law principles and concludes by addressing 
various "digital signature" laws and other laws relating to electronic commerce and 
electronic funds transfers. 
{AP3.3} This Appendix does not attempt to cover all of the existing legal systems which 
are relevant to users of digital signatures or providers of CA services. Such analysis 
should be performed in subsequent studies. It may also be worthwhile to analyze more 
carefully the interaction between competing legal doctrines within a single jurisdiction. 
{AP3.4} One of the most significant jurisdictions outside the US which has begun to 
concern itself with the legal implications of digital signatures is Germany, which is 
poised to enact one of the first digital signature laws outside the US. While in most non-
US jurisdictions the lack of precedent, statutory law and legal commentary regarding 
digital signatures hampers discussion of their legal consequences, such material exists 
in abundance in Germany. Furthermore, Germany's position in this area is likely to be 
quite influential among other jurisdictions outside the US, making it useful as a point of 
comparison. Other jurisdictions which are actively analyzing digital signature issues -- 
and which could be the subject of subsequent study -- include Australia, Malaysia and 
Singapore. 
{AP3.5} This Appendix discusses general legal principles and is not intended to be a 
comprehensive treatise of applicable law in the jurisdictions addressed. Exceptions to 
almost every rule discussed here can be found, but this analysis sets forth the basic 
rules that we believe would be applied by a decision-maker in the relevant jurisdiction. (a) A Statement of the Legal Problem: Open vs. Closed Systems. 
{AP3.6} As described previously, the use of digital signatures is seemingly 
straightforward. At a transaction's most basic level, the consumer and merchant 
independently establish relationships with a CA, each procures a certificate, the parties 
swap and verify certificates and the transaction is consummated. In practice, this 
process has the potential to create enormous risk for all the parties involved. 
{AP3.7} This Report does not deal with the many issues related to consumers relying on 
the certificates of merchants; such an analysis is properly the study of a subsequent 
report. It is expected that many -- but not all -- of the issues addressed in this paper will 
be equally applicable to the situations where consumers are the relying third parties. 
{AP3.8} As described in Appendix 2, this Report addresses "open" systems, where no 
contracts between the parties will exist except possibly in the process of obtaining or 
delivering certificates. In an open system, the relationship between the CA and the 
consumer, although important and multi-faceted, raises only a few complicated legal 
issues. Usually the CA will claim consumers are bound by contract to the CA's standard 
terms (usually contained in its certification practices statement). If something goes 
wrong, the contract would generally be the first source of operating rules to govern the 
problem. In addition to the contract, however, there may be tort principles or statutory 
guidelines that establish the default rules. There are also some general rules that may 
limit the provisions that can be contained in the contract, but again it is relatively 
straightforward to identify these rules. 
{AP3.9} In an open system, the relationship between the CA and the merchant, 
however, raises some very complicated legal principles. To get a perspective on the 
complexity of the issues, the diagram in Figure 1 provides a road map for the 
subsequent analysis. 
{AP3.10} Stated simply, the issue is whether, in an open system, the CA can form a 
contract with a merchant based on a relatively attenuated connection between the 
parties? Further, can a merchant benefit from any favorable provisions agreed to 
between the CA and the consumer? Finally, does the delivery of the certificate to the 
merchant give the merchant any rights to sue the person who placed the certificate into 
the stream of commerce (i.e., the CA)? These issues all are very difficult to resolve in 
analogous physical space situations, and this Appendix provides some thoughts on how 
some of the analysis might apply in the PKI context. 
(b) Contract Law in the United States. 
{AP3.11} The United States is primarily a "common law" legal system. Common law is a 
system of jurisprudence, originated in England and transplanted to the United States, 
based on judicial precedent and not legislatively-adopted statutory rules. Generally, 
legislative statutes supersede the common law, although some statutes are merely 
codifications of the common law. This section first addresses U.S. law applicable to the sale of goods, and then addresses U.S. law applicable to contracts for services. Both 
are relevant to an analysis of contract aspects of the role of CAs in consumer 
transactions. 
{AP3.12} (i) The Uniform Commercial Code. The Uniform Commercial Code ("UCC") is 
a set of standard rules in the United States prepared by the National Conference of 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law Institute. Each state in 
the United States is free to adopt the UCC rules as part of their statutory framework; in 
practice, most states adopt most of the proposed rules. The UCC is the comprehensive 
body of law in the United States governing the sale of "goods" both between merchants 
and consumers and among merchants. The UCC has proven very influential both in the 
United States and internationally, with many jurisdictions adopting rules based on or 
similar to the UCC. In addition, in the United States many courts look to the UCC as 
persuasive authority, even when it does not specifically apply. 
(1) Goods vs. Services. 
{AP3.13} To identify the applicable body of contract law, it must be determined whether 
the certificate issued by a CA to a subscriber, for further delivery to a merchant, is a 
"good," a "service" (or the memorial of services), or a mixture of a good and a service. 
{AP3.14} If the certificate is a "good," then Article 2 of the UCC applies and a number of 
default rules will apply (as described later in this section). Importantly, Article 2 will 
impose a number of implied warranties on the CA's activities and will impose procedural 
hurdles on limiting disclaimers of those warranties. On the other hand, if the CA is 
providing a "service," Article 2 does not apply. 
{AP3.15} Section 2-105(1) of the UCC defines "goods" as "all things . . . which are 
moveable at the time of identification to the contract for sale . . . ." In the sense that 
certificates are moveable (both in electronic form and if printed out), they could be 
deemed to fit within the definition of goods. 
{AP3.16} However, in some ways, the certificate merely is the tangible memorial of the 
services performed by the CA, which may include processing of the consumer's 
information, verification of the factual statements made by the consumer and 
maintenance of a Certificate Revocation List ("CRL"). In this regard, the certificate is not 
the critical element to the transaction; rather, the CA is selling its services, and the 
certificate is evidence that such services were performed. 
{AP3.17} Courts may treat the CAs as selling a mixture of services and goods. In such 
"mixed" cases, there are a number of different ways to decide whether or not Article 2 
applies: 
{AP3.18} * Many jurisdictions use a "predominant factor" test, which looks at whether 
the parties intended that the transaction was predominantly for the sale of goods. If so, 
Article 2 will apply to the entire transaction. If not, the common law will apply. {AP3.19} * Some jurisdictions use a "final product" test, which looks at the product 
remaining when a contract is completed. If the final product involves delivery of a good, 
Article 2 will apply to the entire transaction. If not, the common law will apply. 
{AP3.20} * Some jurisdictions attempt to determine which classification best serves 
public policy. 
{AP3.21} * Some jurisdictions divide mixed sales into "goods" and "services" 
components and then apply Article 2 to the goods component and the common law to 
the services component. 
{AP3.22} Because jurisdictions apply so many different rules in analyzing whether 
something is a good or a service, it is likely that jurisdictions will reach different results 
on how to categorize certificates and to what extent Article 2 applies to them. 
{AP3.23} In general, we believe that it is both likely and desirable that the certificate be 
viewed as evidence of the CA's performance of a service, meaning that the relationship 
between consumer and CA should not be governed by the rules contained in Article 2. 
The certificate is ultimately only valuable as evidence of the CA's performance of the 
services and the CA's willingness to stand behind its efforts. However, if the consumer 
and merchants are transacting goods, the consumer's delivery of the certificate to the 
merchant could be governed by Article 2 under either the predominant factor or final 
product test. Because of this, we also think it is possible that the relationship between 
the CA and the merchant, to the extent it is governed by contract law, could be 
governed in part by Article 2. Therefore, while we believe the analysis in Section (b)(ii) 
of this Appendix is more relevant to the CA/consumer relationship, the rest of this 
section completes the analysis of how Article 2 would apply to the various relationships. 
{AP3.24} If an agreement for the sale of goods is silent on an issue, the relevant 
provision of Article 2 will be automatically incorporated into the agreement. However, 
the parties are free to vary most of the UCC provisions by contract, and many choose to 
do so. 
(2) Contract Formation. 
{AP3.25} Contract formation requires an offer, an acceptance and consideration. Under 
the UCC Section 2-206, an offer is a manifestation of a willingness to enter into a 
bargain, made so as to justify another person in understanding that assent will conclude 
the contract. Acceptance may consist of any conduct sufficient to show agreement, 
including performance if performance is a reasonable mode of acceptance. A contract 
may exist despite the fact the offeree does not expressly signify acceptance. In general, 
the UCC makes the formation of contracts easier than it was under the common law -- if 
the parties intended to contract, the court will enforce their agreement. 
 
 CA/Consumer Relationship 
{AP3.26} In general, the CAs are likely to attempt to form contracts using the same 
formation process found with shrinkwrap licenses. Both involve mass-market 
transactions in which one party attempts to unilaterally bind the other to unnegotiated 
terms through conduct or performance. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh 
Circuit recently analyzed this issue in ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d 1447 (1996), a 
case involving a software company's use of a shrinkwrap license contained inside the 
packaging. The ProCD Court found an offer and acceptance had occurred pursuant to 
UCC Section 2-206. The offer was implicit in the vendor's placement of software on the 
shelf for sale. The acceptance was the buyer's retention of the software after having 
reviewed the terms of the license and having had the opportunity to return the software. 
As a result, a contract was created which included, as its terms, the terms of the 
shrinkwrap license. 
{AP3.27} Assuming the shrinkwrap license approach works, CAs will have little difficulty 
forming an agreement with consumers at the time when the consumers approach the 
CAs for certificates, at which point the contract will be formed when the consumer 
performs the requisite act. Alternatively, given that many CAs are now preinstalling 
certificates in consumers' browsers or clients, the CAs may also choose to require 
browser licensors to use their software license agreements to pass through to 
consumers the terms specified by the CAs. 
CA/Merchant Relationship 
{AP3.28} In the case of the merchant/CA relationship under Article 2, it is difficult to 
determine by what terms, if any, the merchant intends to be bound. Currently, most 
operating CAs attempt to specify that the merchant's use of the certificate is subject to 
the terms and conditions established by the CA (generally in the form of a certification 
practices statement). A CA may place some language in the certificate incorporating by 
reference the certification practices statement. In turn, the CA will make the certification 
practices statement available (often online). Under such practices, the merchant's act of 
relying on the certificate is a somewhat tenuous manifestation of the merchant's intent 
to enter into terms -- many of which were incorporated by reference and not on the face 
of the certificate -- the CA unilaterally imposes. 
{AP3.29} Generally, the UCC can fill the gaps where all the terms of a contract have not 
been worked out, but only when the parties clearly intend to be bound. The question, 
then, is whether the merchant's ambiguous acts demonstrate the intent of the CA and 
merchant to be bound to one another in contract. 
{AP3.30} Even if the CA's issuance of a certificate is sufficient to constitute an offer to all 
those who might use it in reliance, and the merchant's use is deemed sufficient to show 
a manifestation of assent to the terms contained in the certificate, the contract must be 
supported by consideration. Sections 17(1) and 71 of the Restatement (Second) of 
Contracts define consideration to be some right, interest, profit or benefit accruing to one party, or some forbearance, detriment, loss or responsibility, given, suffered or 
undertaken by the other. In an open system, it is questionable if any consideration has 
been exchanged when the only interaction between the CA and the merchant is the 
certificate itself and possibly access to a CRL (which may not even be maintained by 
the CA). 
{AP3.31} In sum, given the mechanics of the contract formation process and the UCC 
rules, we believe that merchants will have strong arguments to avoid the application of a 
CA's contract by asserting that no contract was formed. In addition, in light of our 
suggestions in the Report about the possibility of merchants bearing liability even if they 
act reasonably, it may be appropriate to avoid allowing the merchants to be 
inadvertently contractually obligated to bear additional risk. 
{AP3.32} Although we believe this is unlikely, it is possible that merchants would desire 
to enforce the terms of the CA's agreement even if no contract is formed. In this case, 
the merchant would claim the benefits of an equitable doctrine known as promissory 
estoppel. Promissory estoppel requires that there be clear and definite terms (i.e. the 
terms of the certificate and perhaps the certification practices statement), the party 
urging estoppel (i.e., the merchant) acted to its detriment in reasonable reliance on the 
agreement, and fairness requires enforcing the agreement. However, the CA's 
agreement may contain terms (such as disclaimers of any accuracy or limits on liability) 
that would be sufficient to make the merchant's reliance unreasonable. 
(3) Contract Terms. 
CA/Merchant Relationship 
{AP3.33} Assuming that a contract is actually formed between the merchant and CA, 
the next issue is to determine what terms are part of the contract. Terms may become 
part of the contract either by being contained within the actual certificate or by 
incorporation by reference into the certificate, so long as the merchant had notice of the 
terms and an opportunity to review them. There is no requirement that the merchant 
actually review the terms in order for the terms to become part of the agreement. 
{AP3.34} Given the number of issues CAs might desire to address in their certification 
practices statements, the ability of CAs to incorporate terms by reference is very 
important to CAs. These documents legitimately can be dozens of pages long. On the 
Internet, it also becomes relatively simple to incorporate terms by reference through the 
use of hypertext links. Despite the general rule of contracts permitting incorporation by 
reference, it is entirely possible that courts will be reluctant to bind merchants to such 
voluminous terms that were only summarized in a certificate and then incorporated by 
reference by hypertext link. This might also support a finding that the agreement was 
unconscionable. 
 {AP3.35} In addition, if the UCC applies to the relationship between the CA and the 
merchant, under the UCC, to enforce certain disclaimers it is necessary that the 
disclaimer be conspicuous and that certain terminology be used in the disclaimer. 
These requirements may not be satisfied, and the disclaimer ineffective, through the 
incorporation by reference approach currently used by some CAs. 
(4) Warranties and Limitations of Liability. 
{AP3.36} Warranties are statements of fact made by a party to a contract which, if 
untrue, give rise to breach of the contract and an action for damages. Many vendors 
make express warranties in their contracts as an inducement to buyers; the UCC also 
specifies certain implied warranties which are automatically made by the vendor and 
included in any agreement unless properly disclaimed. 
{AP3.37} Under the UCC, any disclaimers of warranties must be conspicuous and 
certain "magic words" must be used to disclaim certain implied warranties. So long as 
the disclaimers are not unconscionable, are conspicuous and use the proper "magic 
words," the CA and the consumer may contractually disclaim any warranties that would 
apply to the certificate. 
{AP3.38} Many sellers find it desirable to limit their liability for damages. In particular, 
many CAs will want to disclaim liability for consequential damages, which are damages 
that are caused by an injury but are not the necessary result of the injury. CAs will also 
want to limit the dollar amount of damages they can be liable for. Consumers and CAs 
may agree to these types of limitations of liability in a contract so long as the waiver is 
not unconscionable, although again in consumer transactions, the waivers of 
consequential damages must be conspicuous. 
{AP3.39} It is a more difficult issue determining whether or not, in the absence of a 
contractual relationship between CAs and merchants, UCC-based warranties (or the 
disclaimer of such warranties) extended in the CA's agreement with consumers will 
benefit, or limit the rights of, merchants. Section 2-318 of the UCC proposes three 
alternative rules governing the seller's warranty liability to third parties: 
* seller's warranties extend only to persons in the buyer's family or household, 
* seller's warranties extend to all natural persons who may reasonably be expected to 
use or be affected by the goods, or 
* seller's warranties extend to all artificial as well as natural persons who may 
reasonably be expected to use or be affected by the goods. 
{AP3.40} Many states have adopted one of these three official versions of Section 2-
318, but several states have adopted their own variations. Given the multitude of 
approaches taken by the various states, it is likely that non-uniform rules will develop 
with respect to whether CAs will have warranty obligations to merchants under the 
UCC. {AP3.41} In the absence of an effective contractual waiver or statutory limitation, CAs 
could be liable to merchants for all forms of damages (including consequential 
damages), and there would be no dollar cap on liability. If the CAs successfully form a 
contract with merchants, they can attempt to use the contract to disclaim warranties and 
limit their liability as discussed in the previous paragraph. 
{AP3.42} Disclaimers of warranties and limitations of liability are also subject to UCC 
Section 2-719. Section 2-719(2) says that if a limited remedy fails of its essential 
purpose, other UCC remedies will be available, and Section 2-719(3) says that a party 
may limit consequential damages if not unconscionable. Some cases have held that 2-
719(2) and 2-719(3) are dependent, meaning that consequential damages can be 
recovered, despite a limited remedy clause, when the limited remedy fails of its 
essential purpose. Other cases have held the sections independent, upholding the 
disclaimer of consequential damages even if the limited remedy fails of its essential 
purpose, so long as the disclaimer is not unconscionable. Once again, there is no 
predictability on this legal point. 
(5) Unconscionability. 
{AP3.43} UCC Section 2-302 specifies that an agreement will not be enforced when it is 
deemed unconscionable. Unconscionability can be found where the agreement is 
excessively one-sided, such as where the terms are unreasonably favorable to one 
party and the other party had little bargaining power and therefore an absence of 
meaningful choice. Unreasonably favorable contract terms include unfair limitations on 
consequential damages and excessive disclaimers of warranty. Courts may consider 
language barriers in evaluating the parties' relative positions. Courts may also consider 
if the party was unfairly surprised by the terms, such as in the case of a poorly educated 
party, hidden terms or a lack of a meaningful opportunity to read or understand the 
proposed terms. 
{AP3.44} Unconscionability poses a meaningful problem to the contract formation 
between the CA and both the consumer and merchant. In addition to the importance to 
the CA of disclaiming implied warranties, excluding consequential damages and 
capping its dollar liability, the CA has many other terms it often will desire to include in 
its certification practices statement. The result could be a long, technical, complicated, 
legalese-intensive document. 
{AP3.45} CAs' agreements with consumers could be deemed unconscionable because 
the consumer will often have limited sophistication to understand the terms of the 
contract and no bargaining power to negotiate over its terms. On the other hand, if a CA 
were to draft a "reasonable" agreement that it can legitimately argue could have been 
the outcome of a negotiated agreement, then the unconscionability doctrine may not 
apply. 
{AP3.46} CAs' agreements with merchants could be deemed unconscionable because 
of the tenuous way in which the agreement is formed and the unreasonableness of asking the merchant to review the agreement for each signature it desires to rely upon. 
On the other hand, the courts are less likely to treat merchants as lacking the 
sophistication to defend themselves, and merchants could always specifically negotiate 
an agreement if the merchant is uncomfortable with the CA's form agreement (meaning 
that merchants have some power to avoid the "take-it-or-leave-it" problem of most form 
agreements). 
{AP3.47} The ambiguity over whether or not the CAs' agreements with consumers (and 
to the extent one is formed, with merchants) would be determined to be unconscionable 
is a particularly vexing problem for the CAs and is a major impediment to certainty in the 
industry. To attempt to resolve this problem, it could be appropriate for industry to 
undertake the effort of developing reasonable business practices which will establish 
industry standards that are not unconscionable. 
(6) Proposed UCC Article 2B. 
{AP3.48} A major overhaul of the UCC is currently underway, including the proposed 
addition of a new Article 2B to create new rules that apply to the sale or license of 
intangible informational "goods." If Article 2B is enacted, it is possible that a certificate 
would be covered under its rules. Many experts believe that Article 2B is the leading 
edge of an effort to resolve a global need for a commercial law structure for transactions 
in digital goods. 
{AP3.49} Generally, Article 2B makes it easier for terms in standard form contracts 
which are not easily understood or known to the consumer at the time of contracting to 
be enforceable. Under the proposed rules, terms in standard form contracts, other than 
disclaimers of warranties in consumer transactions, will be deemed accepted by the 
licensee if, prior to or within a reasonable time after beginning to use the intangible, the 
licensee (a) signs or otherwise manifests assent to the form, and (b) had an opportunity 
to review the terms of the license before manifesting assent, whether or not the licensee 
actually read and understood the terms. If the terms are only available upon the initial 
use of the good (rather than prior to the acceptance of the good), the terms will only be 
enforceable if the licensee had the opportunity to return the good after reviewing the 
terms. Although Article 2B contains some limitations on contract enforceability 
(including, importantly, the doctrine of unconscionability), it places significant 
responsibility upon licensees to affirmatively reject terms by returning the goods if they 
find the terms unacceptable. 
{AP3.50} However, Article 2B imposes a relatively strenuous "manifestation of assent" 
process for mass market transactions, which will require the CA to obtain express 
consent to certain terms of its agreement if the term would be objectionable to a 
reasonable licensee. This approach will require the CA to bring the potentially offensive 
term to the attention to the consumer or merchant and to obtain an express consent to 
that offensive term. If applied to CAs' agreements, this approach may seriously limit the 
ability of a CA to incorporate terms by reference into its certificates. {AP3.51} Article 2B is still being considered by the National Conference of 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law Institute. Once adopted 
by these bodies, each state will make an independent decision about whether or not to 
adopt the article in whole or in part. It is expected to take several years for this process 
to be completed. 
(ii) Services. 
{AP3.52} The preceding sections discussed the legal application of the UCC to the 
relationships between CAs and consumers and CAs and merchants. This section 
discusses a similar analysis in the non-UCC context. 
{AP3.53} In the United States, in contrast to the UCC's authoritative role in contracts for 
the sale of goods, there is no comprehensive uniform body of law governing contracts 
for services. As a result, each state's laws vary, although many apply variations of the 
common law. 
(1) Relationship Between CAs and Consumers. 
{AP3.54} Even if the relationship between the CAs and the consumers is categorized as 
a service relationship, making the UCC inapplicable, much of the analysis contained in 
the UCC section above will still be applied, by analogy, by the courts. 
(2) Relationship Between CAs and Merchants. 
{AP3.55} It must first be determined whether the CA and the merchant enter into a 
contractual relationship. Like the UCC, contract formation under the common law 
requires offer, acceptance and consideration. 
Offer 
{AP3.56} The first issue is whether the CA's certificate or any other activity by the CA 
constitutes an offer. Because the certificate may be distributed generally, it could be 
argued that the certificate is like an advertisement -- which generally is considered not 
to be an offer but merely is an invitation to make an offer. If the CA says on the 
certificate, however, that use of the certificate forms a binding agreement, it is likely that 
the certificate would be deemed an offer because such a statement would manifest the 
CA's intent to be bound. 
Acceptance 
{AP3.57} Generally, unless the offer specifies a manner of acceptance, any reasonable 
manner of acceptance is sufficient to form a contract. Silence alone cannot constitute 
acceptance, and the offeror cannot make silence a means of acceptance if the offeree 
did not intend silence to indicate assent. In the case of certificates, however, the 
merchant would do more than remain silent; it would manifest assent in accordance with 
the method for acceptance specified in the certificate -- e.g., by relying upon the 
information contained therein. Case law suggests that in some situations this is sufficient to constitute acceptance, although other cases indicate that mere reliance on 
proposed terms is insufficient. 
Consideration 
{AP3.58} As discussed earlier in the UCC section, it is unclear if the CA and merchant 
exchange consideration. This applies equally in the case of agreements for services. 
Conclusion 
{AP3.59} We have already noted that it is more difficult to form a contract under the 
common law than it is under the UCC. Given that we think it is unlikely a contract 
between the merchant and CA is formed under the UCC, we believe it is even less likely 
that a contract between the merchant and CA will arise under a common law analysis 
solely by virtue of the terms contained in the certificate. 
(3) Implied Warranty of Workmanship. 
{AP3.60} Unless properly disclaimed, an agreement for services contains an implied 
warranty of workmanship; that is, that the services were performed in a workmanlike 
manner. In essence, this creates an obligation on the part of the party performing the 
services not to act negligently. Since negligence is a tort concept, courts are frequently 
faced with alternative claims from customers under service agreements for breach of 
warranty and for negligence. Principles relating to tort law in the PKI context are 
discussed in Section (d) below. 
(4) Liability Limitations and Unconscionability. 
{AP3.61} If a contract exists between the CA and the merchant, limitations of liability 
and disclaimers of warranty which became part of the contract will still be subject to 
principles of unconscionability such as those found in the UCC. As with the UCC, case 
law in this area demonstrates the absence of clarity over when form non-negotiated 
agreements will be enforceable and when they will not. 
(5) Extension of Warranties to Merchants. 
{AP3.62} In the absence of an agreement in place between a merchant and a CA, there 
exists an alternative argument under common law for a merchant to have recourse 
against a CA for losses suffered. The traditional rule in service relationships has been 
that one party is not liable to any party not in contractual "privity" (i.e., has entered into a 
contract with the party causing harm). However, this general rule has been relaxed by 
several jurisdictions. In the case of merchants, this means that in some situations 
merchants may be able to benefit from the warranties (if any) granted by the CA to the 
consumer. 
{AP3.63} In some ways, the CA -- by providing a certificate regarding the accuracy of 
information -- can be analogized to information providers, who provide information both 
to parties in privity and to parties who have some affiliation with the parties in privity. The landmark case of Ultramares Corp. v. Touche, 255 N.Y. 170 (1931), rendered by 
the highest court in the state of New York, held that information suppliers who fail to use 
reasonable care are liable only to parties in privity. The court reasoned that to extend 
this duty to parties not in privity would expose information providers to liability to an 
indeterminate class of people for an indeterminate amount. The Ultramares court was 
willing to extend the information suppliers' duty of care to third parties that the 
information provider knew were the ones for whom the information was being furnished. 
In the case of CAs, this could easily include the intended recipients (i.e., the 
merchants). However, mere knowledge that the party in privity intends to use the 
information commercially in dealing with unspecified third parties did not create a duty of 
care toward such third parties. 
{AP3.64} There is a continuum across jurisdictions in their adherence to the privity rule. 
Among the theories deployed by jurisdictions: 
* Liability extends only to those in privity. 
* Liability extends where the third party was known. 
* Liability extends where the third party was known but only if there was actual 
communication between the information provider and the third party. 
* Liability extends to all foreseeable third parties. 
* Liability extends based upon a balancing of various factors. 
* Liability extends only when the parties not in privity are physically injured. 
{AP3.65} Given that there is not a standard for whether or not information suppliers are 
liable to parties not in privity, it is unclear to what extent the CA could be liable to 
merchants based on a CA's contract with consumers. 
{AP3.66} One additional theory under which merchants could attempt to claim the 
benefits of the CA's warranties to consumers is the legal doctrine of "third party 
beneficiary." Generally, to be a third party beneficiary: (a) the merchant must be 
identified in the promises between the consumer and the CA, (b) the merchant must 
have the performance of the promise rendered directly to the merchant, (c) there must 
be a relationship between the consumer and the merchant that supports an intent to 
benefit the merchant, and (d) either (i) the merchant gets the CA's performance as a 
gift, or (ii) the consumer has an obligation to the merchant which is being performed by 
the CA. While some arguments could be made for the application of this theory to 
benefit the merchant, it would not be a traditional application of third party beneficiary 
law. 
(iii) United States Federal Law - Magnuson-Moss. 
{AP3.67} The Magnuson-Moss Act governs written warranties provided with "consumer 
products" (i.e., tangible person property which are normally used for personal, family or household purposes). The Magnuson-Moss Act requires that written warranties freely 
and conspicuously disclose, in simple and readily understood language, the terms and 
conditions of the warranty. Specific language must be included with any limitations of 
warranty or limitations of liability, and other restrictions regarding the manner of 
describing the warranty must be adhered to. While the Magnuson-Moss Act may apply 
to certificates, compliance with the Act is relatively mechanical. 
(c) Contract Law in Certain Non-U.S. Jurisdictions. 
{AP3.68} This section identifies some applicable European laws that could apply to 
transactions using digital signatures. As will be clear, although some general rules could 
apply in the consumer context, there are no comprehensive uniform rules that apply to 
consumer transactions in Europe or elsewhere. 
(i) UN Convention on the International Sale of Goods. 
{AP3.69} The UN Convention on the International Sale of Goods ("CISG") is the United 
Nations' counterpart to the UCC. However, the CISG applies to commercial sales only, 
not to consumer sales or service contracts, so its applicability to this Report is by 
analogy only. 
{AP3.70} The CISG applies a predominant purpose test similar to the UCC's approach 
to determine whether its provisions apply to a particular agreement. The parties can 
contractually avoid the application of the CISG. 
{AP3.71} Generally, it is slightly more difficult to form a contract under the CISG than it 
is under the UCC. For instance, the CISG requires a price to be specified in the 
contract. The CISG also requires that the acceptance mirror the offer on all material 
terms. If terms in the offer and acceptance differ, no contract is formed -- unlike the 
UCC, where a contract would be formed, but the conflicting terms would drop out and 
the UCC terms would fill in the gaps. 
{AP3.72} The theory underlying the UCC is that parties rarely read the boilerplate in 
forms, and thus contracts should only consist of terms that the parties actually agree 
upon. The CISG, on the other hand, believes boilerplate terms are important, and a 
contract should not form unless all material terms are agreed upon. 
{AP3.73} This difference provides insight into the philosophical underpinnings of the 
UCC and CISG that might impact the issue of whether a contract is deemed to be 
formed between CAs and merchants. Under the CISG, an offer addressed to specific 
people constitutes an offer if it is sufficiently definite and indicates an intention of the 
offeror to be bound. In contrast, an offer to many unspecified people is just an invitation 
to make an offer, unless contrary intent is clearly indicated. Under the CISG, any 
statement or conduct by the offeree indicating assent is an acceptance. The CISG is 
explicit that silence alone will not amount to an acceptance. Thus, the merchant's use of 
the certificate might be more likely to be deemed a valid acceptance under the UCC 
than it would under the CISG, which appears to require more formal assent to material terms. As indicated earlier, we believe it is unlikely that a contract is formed under the 
UCC between merchants and CAs, so it is doubtful a contract would be formed under 
the CISG. 
(ii) E.U. Directive on Unfair Contract Terms. 
{AP3.74} European Union Directives are legislative acts articulating E.U. policy which 
are binding on the European Union's member states. The Directives are intended to 
establish uniform legislation throughout the European Union, so that entities doing 
transborder business will have to comply with only one set of rules. Usually, member 
states have three years to conform their laws with an adopted directive. 
{AP3.75} The E.U. Directive on Unfair Contract Terms addresses non-negotiated 
consumer form contracts such as those used by CAs. The Unfair Contracts Directive 
states that unfair terms are unenforceable but such terms may be severed from the 
contract and the remaining terms enforced. The Unfair Contracts Directive defines 
unfair terms to be those terms that are: (a) not negotiated and which are contrary to the 
obligation of good faith or which impose a significant imbalance in the parties' rights, 
and (b) obligations under the contract to the detriment of the consumer. The Unfair 
Contracts Directive describes types of terms deemed to be imbalanced, including terms 
that the consumer did not have the opportunity to appreciate before the contract was 
formed. However, the Unfair Contracts Directive allows for the consideration of 
circumstances and the nature of the goods or services sold. Finally, if terms have 
conflicting meanings, the term will be interpreted most favorably to the consumer. As 
with the principles of unconscionability in the U.S., the Unfair Contracts Directive could 
significantly circumscribe the CAs' ability to rely on the terms of its contract. 
{AP3.76} Germany has a long-standing set of laws ("Gesetz zur Regelung des Rechts 
der Allgemeinen Geschaftsbedingungen" or "AGB Gesetz") similar to the E.U. Directive 
on Unfair Contract Terms. The AGB Gesetz generally provides that contract terms 
which one party has unilaterally established in advance with the intent of using them in 
a number of future transactions must be clearly identified to the other party, who must 
be given a reasonable opportunity to review these terms and approve them in advance. 
If these conditions are not complied with, the terms and conditions will be disregarded 
and the entire contract will be governed by statutory law. The AGB Gesetz is generally 
interpreted by the courts in a very consumer friendly way. 
{AP3.77} Under the AGB Gesetz, it is unclear to what extent courts will allow parties 
offering goods or services on the Internet to bind purchasers to standard contract terms 
which take up many computer screens and which would require the purchaser to spend 
a long time online reviewing them. Further, lengthy and complex certification practice 
statements could very well be unenforceable under the AGB-Gesetz. 
{AP3.78} (iii) German Consumer Protection Laws. A number of statutes designed to 
protect consumers could prove problematic when applied in the context of digital 
signatures and electronic commerce. For instance, the "Law on Revocation of Contracts Concluded Door to Door" (Hausturwiderrufsgesetz) gives consumers a wide ranging 
right to revoke contracts concluded "door to door" within a certain time limit. The extent 
to which this law would apply to online transactions concluded by consumers in their 
homes by digital signatures is a matter of debate in Germany. If it did apply, this law 
could allow consumers to invalidate transactions consummated using digital signatures. 
Similar issues arise with regard to the Law on Consumer Credit Transactions 
(Verbraucherkreditgesetz). 
(d) Tort Law. 
(i) Tort v. Contract. 
{AP3.79} In general, parties are free to establish legal relationships with each other. 
This is done by contract. However, in common law jurisdictions, there are situations 
where, even when the parties do not enter into a contract, one party will owe a duty to 
the other party. The body of law imposing these duties is called tort law. There are 
situations where tort obligations can exist even though parties have entered into a 
contract governing their relationship. Indeed, in the United States, it is often difficult for 
merchants to prospectively disclaim, by contract or otherwise, tort liability for harms 
created by their products. 
(ii) In the United States. 
{AP3.80} The most likely basis for a tort action by a consumer or merchant against a CA 
is the tort of negligent misrepresentation. Generally, negligent misrepresentation 
requires the following elements: (a) there was a material misrepresentation, (b) the 
misrepresentation was false, (c) the information supplier breached a duty of care to 
provide accurate information to the party requesting information, and (d) the plaintiff 
suffered injury as a result. Many courts require the existence of some type of 
commercial relationship between the parties prior to imposing liability. Most jurisdictions 
do not extend liability to unknown third parties. 
{AP3.81} The Restatement (Second) of Torts §552 (a highly persuasive summary of 
general U.S. law principles) states that one who, in the course of a business, profession 
or employment, or any transaction in which he has a pecuniary interest, supplies false 
information for the guidance of others in their business transactions, is subject to liability 
for the pecuniary loss caused by justifiable reliance on the information if he did not use 
reasonable care. In the case of CAs, the CAs will often be in a position to assert that 
merchants' reliance was not justified because of limiting language in the certification 
practices statement. 
{AP3.82} Note that currently no standard of care currently exists for CA conduct so it is 
unclear what conduct will subject a CA to liability for negligent misrepresentation. The 
Utah Digital Signature Act contains some minimum standards, but these have not been 
universally adopted. {AP3.83} Alternatively, some jurisdictions state that misrepresentations, even if 
innocent, will give rise to tort liability when the party disseminating the information had 
the means of knowing, ought to know, or had a duty to know the truth. These cases 
arose only in limited circumstances (primarily involving errors in aviation maps) and 
have been severely criticized by legal scholars. 
{AP3.84} As with the discussion regarding extension of UCC warranties to third parties, 
jurisdictions have formulated a wide range of rules about who can assert tort claims for 
negligent misrepresentation and what the damages will be: 
* The Restatements limit liability to loss suffered by a limited group of people for 
whose benefit and guidance one intends to supply the information for or knows 
the recipient intends to supply it to. 
* The majority of jurisdictions allow no recovery for negligent misrepresentation 
for economic loss. 
* Some jurisdictions allow recovery to those not in privity only for physical injury 
or economic loss caused by the use of a product. 
* Some jurisdictions allow recovery for economic loss if there was a special 
relationship between the party acting tortiously and the injured party. 
* Some jurisdictions take a broad view of the class of risks and the class of 
victims that are foreseeable. 
{AP3.85} Currently, UCC Article 2B proposes to adopt an implied warranty regarding 
information which parallels the Restatements position. This approach has been 
criticized by some members of the drafting committee and certain legal scholars. 
(iii) E.U. Directives on Products Liability. 
{AP3.86} The European Union has adopted two Directives related to products liability 
that could potentially affect CAs. The "Strict Products Liability Directive" (85/374/EEC) 
imposes liability on manufacturers for injuries caused by defective products, even if the 
manufacturer was without fault. To recover, an injured party only needs to show 
damages, a defective product, and a causal relationship between the two. Under this 
Directive, damages are limited to personal injuries or property damage, but some E.U. 
member states permit recovery for pain and suffering or punitive damages as well. 
{AP3.87} The "General Product Safety Directive" (92/59/EEC) requires manufacturers 
and suppliers to place only safe products on the market, to provide consumers with all 
relevant information related to risks associated with their use, and to inform consumers 
whenever use of a product may be dangerous. It also requires distributors to monitor 
the safety of products on the market, pass on information about product risks, and 
cooperate in actions taken to avoid such risks. {AP3.88} It is unclear whether a certificate issued by a CA would be considered a 
"product" and thus within the scope of these Directives. Under the Strict Products 
Liability Directive, "products" are defined as "all movables . . . even [if] incorporated into 
another movable or into an immovable." Interestingly, electricity is expressly included as 
a "product." At least one United Kingdom case has suggested that software was a 
product under that country's implementation of this Directive, but its analysis focused 
primarily on the tangible nature of a floppy disk. We believe that it would be unlikely and 
inappropriate to categorize certificates as a "product" under these Directives, just as we 
concluded that it is unlikely that certificates will be categorized as a good under the 
UCC. 
(e) Digital Signature/CA Laws. 
(i) United States of America - State Laws. 
{AP3.89} Several states within the United States are developing digital signature 
legislation. Several of the more important state efforts are surveyed here; a complete list 
of current state digital signature legislation is provided in Appendix 5. The Utah, 
California and Florida approaches represent three different approaches to the problem 
of developing legislation regarding digital signatures; many other states that have 
considered or have passed digital signature-related legislation have followed one of 
these three approaches. 
{AP3.90} We have not attempted here to identify if any of these legislative efforts 
actually resolve some of the legal difficulties identified in the previous sections, although 
such an inquiry would surely yield some insight. 
(1) Utah. 
{AP3.91} The first state to adopt digital signature legislation was Utah, which enacted 
the Utah Digital Signature Act of 1995 (as amended) (the "Utah Act"). The Utah Act's 
stated goals are: (1) to facilitate commerce by means of reliable electronic messages; 
(2) to minimize the incidence of forged digital signatures and fraud in electronic 
commerce; (3) to implement relevant standards, such as Standard X.509 of the 
International Telecommunication Union; and (4) to establish uniform rules regarding the 
authentication and reliability of electronic messages. 
{AP3.92} Under the Utah Act, a government agency assumes the obligations of being a 
"top level" CA and is charged with policy making, facilitating implementation of digital 
signature technology, and providing regulatory oversight. Licensing under the Utah Act 
is voluntary; however, licensed CAs are offered certain legal benefits. Utah may provide 
the same legal benefits to CAs licensed or authorized by other jurisdictions if the 
licensing or authorization schemes are substantially similar to the Utah Act and 
regulations. 
{AP3.93} The Utah Act imposes certain duties on CAs and subscribers. Prior to issuing 
a certificate to a subscriber, the CA must confirm, among other things, that: (1) the prospective subscriber is the person to be listed in the certificate; (2) the information in 
the certificate is accurate; and (3) the subscriber rightfully holds the private key 
corresponding to the public key to be listed in the certificate. Neither the CA nor the 
subscriber can waive these requirements. By issuing a certificate, a CA makes certain 
warranties to the subscriber, including that the certificate contains no information the CA 
knows to be false and that the certificate satisfies all material requirements of the Utah 
Act. The CA cannot disclaim or limit these warranties. By issuing a certificate, a CA 
certifies to all who reasonably rely on it that, among other things, the information in the 
certificate is accurate and that the subscriber has accepted the certificate. 
{AP3.94} By accepting a certificate issued by a licensed CA, a consumer certifies to all 
who reasonably rely on the certificate that the consumer rightfully holds the private key 
corresponding to the public key listed in the certificate, and that all representations 
made by the subscriber to the CA or otherwise incorporated into the certificate are true. 
A subscriber is obligated to indemnify the issuing CA for any loss or damage caused by 
publishing or issuing a certificate in reliance of: (1) a false and material representation of 
fact by the subscriber; or (2) the subscriber's failure to disclose a material fact done 
intentionally to deceive the CA or a person relying on a certificate or negligently. This 
indemnity obligation cannot be disclaimed or contractually limited in scope. By 
accepting a certificate, a subscriber also assumes a duty to exercise reasonable care to 
retain control of the subscriber's private key and to prevent its disclosure to any person 
not authorized to create the subscriber's digital signature. 
{AP3.95} The Utah Act provides that, unless waived by the CA, a CA is not liable for any 
loss caused by reliance on a false or forged digital signature if the CA complied with all 
material requirements of the Utah Act with respect to the false or forged digital 
signature. A licensed CA is not liable in excess of the amount specified in the certificate 
as its recommended reliance limit for a loss caused by reliance on a misrepresentation 
in the certificate of any fact that the licensed CA was required to confirm. Furthermore, a 
licensed CA is only liable for direct compensatory damages and not for punitive or 
exemplary damages, damages for lost profits or lost opportunity, or damages for pain 
and suffering. 
{AP3.96} If reliance on a digital signature is "not reasonable under the circumstances," 
the recipient of that digital signature assumes the risk that digital signature is forged. 
{AP3.97} Several evidentiary presumptions arise under the Act, including: 
(1) a presumption that a certificate digitally signed by a licensed CA and either 
published in a recognized repository or made available by the issuing CA or by the 
subscriber listed in the certificate is issued by the CA which digitally signed it and is 
accepted by the subscriber listed in it; 
(2) a presumption that the information listed in a valid certificate and confirmed by a 
licensed CA issuing the certificate is accurate; (3) a presumption that, if a digital signature is verified by the public key listed in a valid 
certificate issued by a licensed CA: 
(a) that digital signature is the digital signature of the subscriber listed in that 
certificate; 
(b) that digital signature was affixed by the signer with the intention of signing the 
message; and 
(c) the recipient of that digital signature has no knowledge or notice that the 
signer: (i) breached a duty as a subscriber; or (ii) does not rightfully hold the 
private key used to affix the digital signature; and 
(4) a presumption that a digital signature was created before it was timestamped by a 
disinterested person utilizing a trustworthy system. 
{AP3.98} Unless waived, a recognized repository, or the owner or operator of a 
recognized repository, is not liable for its failure to record suspension or revocation of a 
certificate unless more than one business day elapsed after notice was received. 
Otherwise, the repository may be held liable for any loss of a person who relied on a 
revoked or suspended certificate, up to the amount of the recommended reliance limit 
on the relevant certificate and including only direct compensatory damages and not 
punitive damages or lost profits, savings, or opportunity. Repositories are not liable for 
misrepresentation in a certificate published by a licensed CA. 
(2) California. 
{AP3.99} In contrast to the broad scope of the Utah Digital Signature Act, California has 
adopted legislation pertaining only to digital signatures affixed to communications with 
public entities. The Act provides that a digital signature (which is defined as an 
electronic identifier created by a computer) shall have the same force and effect as a 
manual signature if: (1) it is unique to the person using it; (2) it is capable of verification; 
(3) it is under the sole control of the person using it; (4) it is linked to data in such a 
manner that if the data are changed, the digital signature is invalidated; and (5) it 
conforms to regulations adopted by the Secretary of State. Any party has the option to 
use or accept a digital signature. The California Secretary of State is supposed to 
promulgate regulations implementing the legislation by March 1, 1997. 
(3) Florida. 
{AP3.100} Florida's "Electronic Signature Act of 1996" authorizes the Secretary of State 
to be a CA to verify electronic signatures and requires it to study the use of electronic 
signatures for commercial purposes. 
 
 
 (ii) United States - Federal Laws and Regulations. 
{AP3.101} The National Institute of Standards and Technology ("NIST") has algorithm 
standards in place for digital signatures. The Digital Signature Standard, or DSS, uses 
public and private keys, and users can encrypt a signature only or the entire message. 
In support of the DSS, the General Accounting Office issued a decision that electronic 
signatures create a valid contract consistent with federal law. The Pentagon also 
notified NIST that the digital signature standard can be used by the Defense 
Department to sign unclassified data and -- in some cases -- classified da *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 4 
Certification Authority Services and Policies 
1. Introduction. 
This is Appendix 4 to the Report of the ILPF Working Group on Certification Authority 
Practices (the "Report"). This Appendix provides a "snapshot" of the industry's 
development by surveying the practices and policies of selected Certification Authorities 
("CAs"). 
This Appendix first briefly summarizes the existing or prospective services of eight CAs 
who offer or plan to offer services which most closely match the consumer transaction-
oriented model discussed in the Report. Additionally, this Appendix briefly summarizes 
the existing or prospective services of five other entities whose services differ from the 
consumer-oriented model discussed in the Report; these other entities illustrate the fact 
that digital certificates will be used for a variety of purposes in a number of distinct 
contexts. 
Next, this Appendix surveys the practices and policies of certain consumer-oriented 
CAs in four legally significant areas: (1) subscriber authentication techniques; (2) the 
legal relationship established between CAs and a subscriber (including issues such as 
warranties, liability limitations, and legal duties imposed on CAs and subscriber); (3) the 
legal relationship established between CAs and relying non-subscribers (including 
warranties, liability limitations, and legal duties); and, (4) key management techniques 
(including key generation, key revocation, and root key authenticity and security). This 
discussion focuses primarily on four CAs which have disclosed their relevant practices 
and policies: VeriSign (which has disclosed a great deal of relevant information), and 
COST, Nortel and Signet Systems (which have made more limited amounts of 
information available). The other consumer-oriented CAs have offered little or no 
information concerning the policies on these legal issues. 
This Appendix and its attachment are current through December 1, 1996. Numerous 
significant changes have occurred since December 1, 1996 that are not reflected in this 
Appendix. 
This Appendix does not address other companies and organizations who have 
expressed a general intent to offer certification services. A list of the companies and 
organizations discussed in this Report, and other companies and organizations of 
interest, and their World Wide Web addresses are included in Attachment A to this 
Appendix. 
 
 2. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF CA SERVICES. 
(a) Consumer-Oriented CAs. 
(i) COST Computer Securities Technologies (Kista, Sweden) 
NOT YET ACTIVELY issuing certificates to individuals 
COST offers certification services derived from the Internet Engineering Task Force's 
(IETF) Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM) model; COST has extended the PEM model in 
order to transfer certificates via the World Wide Web. COST's own certificate is self-
signed. COST acts as a Policy Certification Authority (PCA) for national CAs in Sweden, 
Holland, the U.K., Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Spain, Austria, Ireland, Malaysia, and 
Singapore. Two U.S.-based servers are also incorporated into the COST hierarchy. 
COST currently certifies only other CAs, including company CAs. In the future, they plan 
to offer certification services directly to individuals. COST has articulated three identity-
assurance policies: Low Level Assurance, Medium Level Assurance, and High Level 
Assurance. COST maintains certificate revocation lists for the CAs which it currently 
certifies. Additionally, COST offers several sophisticated hardware and software 
products for use by CAs and subscribers, including a smart card-based digital signature 
system. [After the cut-off date for this Appendix, Sembawang Media of Singapore 
launched a CA pilot project based upon the COST hierarchy. This pilot effort does 
include the issuance of certificates directly to individuals. Representatives from COST 
report that other COST-hierarchy CAs are also issuing certificates to individuals, but 
such certificates are currently not accessible online.] 
(ii) EuroSign (United Kingdom) 
ACTIVELY issuing certificates to individuals 
EuroSign is currently offering an "EasySign" certificate, which involves only the 
subscriber's self-certification of identity. No certificate-related services (i.e., revocation 
or validation) are available. EuroSign appears to be a recent start-up with limited 
resources. 
(iii) GTE CyberTrust (Needham, MA USA) 
NOT YET ACTIVELY issuing certificates to individuals 
GTE CyberTrust plans to offer three different types of CA services. Under its SETsign 
program, GTE will provide CA services for credit card and other major card-issuing 
organizations that want to use the Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) protocol. GTE 
plans to provide SET-compliant certificate services for cardholders, merchants and 
banks. GTE's CYBERsign program is designed to provide public key certification for 
individuals at three different identity assurance levels: name-uniqueness only, trusted 
third party verification, and in-person verification. GTE's Virtual CA program will provide CA services for organizations that require CA capability but do not desire CA ownership 
responsibilities. [On Dec. 18, 1996 GTE CyberTrust announced that it has issued to 
Wells Fargo Bank the first operational digital certificates to comply with the SET 
protocol, and that it was providing Wells Fargo and participating merchants with a wide 
range of certificate management and support services.] 
(iv) Nortel Entrust (Toronto, Canada) 
ACTIVELY issuing certificates to individuals 
Nortel is currently offering free "Entrust Demo Web Certificates" to the public. These 
X.509-compliant certificates use Nortel's proprietary public key technology and can be 
installed into certain web browsers. Nortel does not investigate the accuracy of 
identification information submitted by subscribers. The certificates carry a two-year 
expiration date; there are no procedures for revoking certificates. In addition, Nortel is 
offering free "no assurance" certificates for web servers. Nortel's focus appears to be on 
licensing its technology to other companies that engage in certification services, rather 
than on providing CA services itself. Nortel markets its Entrust products for use by 
others on private computer networks and on the Internet. [In January, 1997 Northern 
Telecom Limited spun-out the Entrust division into a separate company, Entrust 
Technologies.] 
(v) Signet Systems (Brisbane, Australia) 
ACTIVELY issuing certificates to individuals 
Signet is involved with a pilot project associated with Australia's proposed National 
Public Key Authentication Framework (PKAF). Signet acts as a Policy Approval 
Authority (PAA), issuing certificates to customers and partners who further offer 
certification services. On July 1, 1997, Signet's PAA certificate will be revoked and 
replaced with the government-issued Policy and Root Registration Authority (PARRA) 
certificate envisioned by the PKAF. Additionally, Signet apparently is offering certificates 
directly to subscribers. The scope of certification-related services available online (i.e., 
certificate acceptance, revocation or validation) is unclear. Signet has articulated three 
increasingly rigorous policies under which it will issue certificates: personal, business, 
and legal/financial. Signet incorporates such policies into certificates via ASN.1 notation 
and ISO-registered object identifiers. 
(vi) Thawte Certification Services (Durbanville, South Africa and Raleigh, NC USA) 
NOT YET ACTIVELY issuing certificates to individuals 
Thawte plans to offer three types of certificates, which it calls "Digital IDs." Basic 
Certificates will involve no identity assurance; Medium Certificates will involve "some 
documentation" in addition to self-certification of identity; and Strong Certificates will 
require personal presence at a Thawte office prior to issuance. Thawte had made Beta Test Certificates available for installation in the beta release of Netscape Navigator 3.0. 
Beta Test Certificates required only self-certification of identity, and no revocation or 
validation services were available. Thawte no longer offers beta certificates, however. 
Thawte's website promises that the full panoply of certificates will be available on 
November 15, 1996, but no certificates were available as of December 1, 1996. Thawte 
also plans to offer server certificates. 
(vii) United States Postal Service (Washington, D.C. USA) 
NOT YET ACTIVELY issuing certificates to individuals 
As part of the General Services Administration's Federal Security Infrastructure 
Program, the United States Postal Service (USPS) intends to act as a CA for members 
of the public who wish to interact electronically with the U.S. government and others. 
Subscribers will present identification at a local Post Office and receive a "smart disk" 
(produced by Fischer International Systems) to use to generate encryption keys. In 
addition to sending encrypted and digitally-signed e-mail, subscribers will utilize a 
proprietary secure browser (made by Frontier Technologies) to communicate securely 
through the Web. The system will use the government's Data Encryption Standard and 
Digital Signature Standard. No certification services are currently available to the public. 
(viii) VeriSign (Mountain View, CA USA) 
ACTIVELY issuing certificates to individuals 
VeriSign offers "Digital IDs" (certificates) to the public, for use in web browsers and 
S/MIME compliant e-mail applications. VeriSign plans to offer four classes of Digital IDs, 
each with different levels of assurance of a subscriber's identity. Classes 1 - 3 are 
intended for use by individuals; Class 4 is intended for business use and will certify an 
individual's relationship with an organization as well as certify that individual's identity. 
Currently Class 1 and Class 2 Digital IDs are available. Under a Class 1 Digital ID, an 
individual self-certifies his identity. Under Class 2 Digital IDs, an individual's self-
Reported information is automatically verified against a consumer database maintained 
by Equifax. Certificates can be revoked, and the validity of certificates can be checked, 
via VeriSign's website. VeriSign also offers Digital IDs for web servers, which are used 
to identify and authenticate particular servers and to encrypt information passed 
between a server and a web browser. 
(b) Non-Consumer-Oriented CAs. 
(i) CertCo, LLC (New York, NY USA) 
CertCo, which is affiliated with Bankers Trust, plans to issue certificates through banks 
and other financial institutions beginning in 1997. Little information is available about 
their planned services, but evidently CertCo intends to coordinate a consortium of 
companies, each with certificate authority status. Each company in the consortium will hold only part of the relevant root key, and each company will share in the liability risk 
associated with issuing certificates. 
(ii) CivicLink (Chicago, IL USA) 
CivicLink is a service which allows a user to access government records online. 
Currently some limited records from Prince George County, Maryland, Marion County, 
Indiana, and Los Angeles County, California are accessible. For Los Angeles County, 
limited electronic filing of court documents is possible. Electronic filing, available since 
May 1996, is accomplished using digital signatures or by fax via CivicLink. Ameritech 
Information Access (AIA), a joint venture of Ameritech and BC Systems Corporation 
(Canada), operates CivicLink and serves as a certification authority. Digital signatures 
created under this system are currently intended only for use in filing court documents 
with LA County. AIA indicates that they intend to expand the potential uses of their 
certificates. 
(iii) Internet Commerce Group (Mountain View, CA USA) 
Sun Microsystem's Internet Commerce Group offers Certification Authority services to 
customers of its SunScreen product line; the certificates are used primarily for access 
control. SunScreen is a turnkey security system comprised of hardware, software, and 
services, designed for complex commercial networks. Sun provides two certification 
services: SunCA (1024-bit certificates), and SunCAglobal (export-oriented 512-bit 
certificates). The self-signed public certificates of each of these CAs are published on 
the Internet Commerce Group's website. Certificate revocation lists, updated monthly, 
are also published on the website. 
(iv) TradeWave TradeAuthority (Austin, TX USA) 
TradeWave's TradeAuthority program performs certification services for customers of 
TradeWave's TradeVPI software system. TradeVPI allows businesses to set up "Virtual 
Private Internets" in order to utilize the public Internet to establish a secure private 
network. TradeAuthority is a self-certified online CA which issues certificates enabling 
users to access a particular VPI. Potential subscribers ask to become VPI members by 
filling out an online membership form using a proprietary TradeWave browser and 
submitting it to the TradeAuthority. The subscriber must then be approved by a 
designated Local Registration Agent (LRA) appointed by the VPI owner. The 
TradeAuthority then issues certificates to subscribers upon LRA approval. Certificates 
can be revoked by the LRA, and certificate revocation lists are updated daily. 
TradeAuthority uses public key technology licensed from Nortel Entrust. 
 
 
 3. CERTIFICATION AUTHORITY POLICIES. 
(a) Subscriber Authentication Techniques. 
Three active certification authorities (VeriSign, Nortel Entrust and EuroSign) offer 
certificates that do not authenticate a subscriber's identity. Certificates are issued based 
solely on unverified information submitted online by a subscriber. GTE CyberTrust and 
Thawte have indicated that they intend to issue this type of certificate as well. It is 
unclear whether Signet offers this type of certificate. 
VeriSign also currently issues Class 2 certificates, for which VeriSign automatically 
compares information submitted by a subscriber against a database maintained by 
Equifax before issuing a certificate online. A criminal could still defeat this system by 
submitting information that matches an individual's information in the Equifax database. 
GTE CyberTrust indicates that it plans a similar third-party verification scheme for some 
of its certificates. No other CA currently offers a similar service. 
VeriSign's planned Class 3 certificates will require submission of a notarized copy of a 
signed application, in addition to registering online. The notary is required to check and 
list three forms of identification documents, including at least one with a picture. 
VeriSign generally will not process applications that fail to comply with this requirement. 
VeriSign will not investigate or otherwise certify notaries. 
Signet indicates that under its "Personal" policy, subscriber identity will be verified 
based only on information the subscriber submits on an application form. Under, 
Signet's "Business" policy, identity will be authenticated using various specified 
business documents. Authentication techniques under the "Legal" policy have not been 
publicly specified. 
The USPS has indicated that it will require "a picture ID" before issuing encryption keys. 
No other CAs have publicly detailed the steps they intend to take in order to 
authenticate the identity of subscribers. 
(b) Legal Relationship Between CA and Subscriber. 
Three of the four CAs currently issuing certificates to individuals -- VeriSign, Signet and 
Nortel -- demand that subscribers manifest agreement to certain legal terms as a 
condition of accepting or using a certificate. EuroSign does not require assent to any 
legal terms as a precondition to obtaining a certificate. COST, while not currently 
offering certificates to individuals, had outlined some aspects of its approach to the 
CA/Subscriber legal relationship. GTE CyberTrust, Thawte, and the U.S. Postal Service 
have not publicly disclosed the legal terms under which they plan to offer their services, 
or the legal mechanisms they intend to use to implement such terms. 
Nortel's legal agreement with subscribers is brief and straightforward. Prior to beginning 
the certificate-issuance process online, a potential subscriber is confronted with a web page containing two paragraphs of legal terms. The potential subscriber must click on a 
button marked "acknowledge" in order to proceed to the next step. 
Signet's "Certification Authority Service Agreement" with subscribers is a ten page 
contract which resembles a commercial software license in language and format. Signet 
intends for subscribers to manifest assent to this contract by signing a paper document. 
The agreement specifies that it is governed by Australian law. 
VeriSign's "Subscriber Agreement" is presented to potential subscribers during the 
online certificate application process in much the same fashion as Nortel's agreement. 
In addition to containing a number of significant legal terms, VeriSign's agreement 
incorporates VeriSign's Certification Practice Statement (CPS) by reference. The CPS is 
a lengthy (83 pages when printed) hypertext document which details VeriSign's 
certification practices and policies and contains numerous legally significant provisions. 
(i) Warranties to Subscribers. 
Nortel's agreement indicates that Nortel "accepts no responsibility or liability" arising 
from use of its demo certificates and indicates that the certificates contain unverified 
information. Otherwise, its agreement does not explicitly address the issue of 
warranties. 
Signet's agreement states that Signet "will endeavor" to provide certification services in 
accordance with certain stated goals, which relate primarily to availability of online 
resources. Signet does appear to accept liability for failure to meet certain service goals, 
with damages set at a fixed amount. However, the agreement also notes that Signet 
"gives no warranty or guarantee in relation to the performance, features or compatibility 
of co-operating electronic certification products or services." Furthermore, the 
agreement states that, subject to some limitations, "all terms, conditions, warranties, 
undertakings, inducements or representations whether express, implied, statutory or 
otherwise relating in any way to the provision of the Certification Service or other 
obligations under this agreement will be excluded." 
VeriSign's subscriber agreement states: "AS STATED IN THE CPS, [VERISIGN] 
DISCLAIMS CERTAIN IMPLIED AND EXPRESS WARRANTIES, INCLUDING 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE" (throughout this Appendix, capitalization in quotes mimics the original). 
VeriSign does offer certain limited warranties, detailed in twelve separate sections of the 
CPS. Among other things, VeriSign warrants that it will follow certain key management 
practices and that it will follow certain identification authentication procedures for each 
class of certificate. 
COST also that indicates that it is willing to offer some warranties. Under its Medium 
Assurance Policy, COST states that it will accept some limited liability as to the validity 
of certificates and the correctness of identification information in certificates, under 
circumstances negotiated with customers. Under its High Level Assurance Policy, COST indicates that it accepts "full liability" as to validity and identification. The exact 
meaning of "full liability" is unclear and may have specific meaning under Swedish law. 
It is also unclear whether COST has issued any certificates to CAs under either of these 
policies (COST does not yet issue certificates to individuals). 
(ii) Liability Limitations. 
Concerning liability limitations, Nortel's agreement simply states that Nortel accepts no 
liability arising from the use of its certificates. Further, the agreement requires the 
subscriber to agree that to the following: "I will indemnify Nortel for any claim or liability 
arising from my misrepresenting myself to any third party." 
Signet's agreement states that, with certain qualifications, "Signet will not be under any 
liability (including liability as to negligence) to the Customer or to any third party in 
respect of any loss or damage (including consequential loss or damage), however 
caused, which may be suffered or incurred or which may arise directly or indirectly as a 
result of or in connection with the provision of the Certification Services ...." In its 
description of its policies Signet suggests that liability levels will vary based on the 
relevant policy, but this is not currently reflected in its Service Agreement. 
VeriSign's subscriber agreement states that VeriSign's CPS places limits on VeriSign's 
liability and that VeriSign refuses all liability for incidental, consequential and punitive 
damages. VeriSign's CPS also imposes dollar limits on damages of all types: liability for 
Class 1 certificates is capped at U.S. $100, for Class 2 certificates at U.S. $5,000, and 
for Class 3 certificates at U.S. $100,000. The liability caps are intended to apply to the 
aggregate liability arising from any particular certificate, regardless of how many 
transactions or parties utilized such certificate. If aggregate damages exceed the liability 
cap, the CPS states that the "available liability cap shall be apportioned first to the 
earliest claims to achieve final dispute resolution, unless otherwise ordered by a court of 
competent jurisdiction." 
As discussed above, COST has indicated its willingness to accept limited liability under 
its Medium Assurance policy and "full liability" under its High Assurance policy. COST 
negotiates liability issues directly with customers and does not publicly release the 
details of its liability policies. 
(iii) Subscriber Legal Duties. 
As noted above, Nortel requires subscribers to indemnify Nortel. No other legal duties 
are expressly addressed in the Nortel agreement. 
Under Signet's service agreement, a subscriber agrees to certain "customer 
responsibilities" such as "comply[ing] with all reasonable directions and instructions," 
agreeing not to use or permit others to use the "Certification Services" in order to 
commit a crime, and taking every reasonable precaution to avoid contaminating any software or hardware with any "'viruses,' 'worms,' or 'trojans.'" The subscriber also 
agrees to not disclose any of Signet's confidential information. 
Signet's agreement also imposes indemnity obligations upon subscribers for any liability 
arising out of (a) the use of the Certification Service by the subscriber or anyone 
authorized to use the service by the subscriber, or (b) "any software or hardware 
contamination" resulting from the subscriber's use of the service. 
Signet's agreement does not mention or discuss any duties a subscriber might have to 
keep a private key secure or to revoke a compromised key. 
VeriSign's CPS attempts to impose a number of legal duties upon subscribers. These 
duties are sprinkled throughout the CPS, but some of the more significant duties are 
imposed in portions of Sections 7.2, 7.3, and 7.4: 
[T]he subscriber certifies and agrees with the [Issuing Authority (IA)] and to all who 
reasonably rely on the information contained in the certificate that at the time of 
acceptance and throughout the operational period of the certificate, until notified 
otherwise by the subscriber, 
(i) each digital signature created using the private key corresponding to the public key 
listed in the certificate is the digital signature of the subscriber and the certificate has 
been accepted and is operational (not expired, suspended or revoked) at the time the 
digital signature is created, 
(ii) no unauthorized person has ever had access to the subscriber's private key, 
(iii) all representations made by the subscriber to the IA regarding the information 
contained in the certificate are true, 
(iv) all information contained in the certificate is true . . . 
By accepting a certificate, the subscriber assumes a duty to retain control of the 
subscriber's private key, to use a trustworthy system, and to take reasonable 
precautions to prevent its loss, disclosure, modification, or unauthorized use. . . . 
BY ACCEPTING A CERTIFICATE, THE SUBSCRIBER AGREES TO INDEMNIFY AND 
HOLD THE IA, VERISIGN, AND THEIR AGENT(S) AND CONTRACTORS HARMLESS 
FROM ANY ACTS OR OMISSIONS RESULTING IN LIABILITY, ANY LOSS OR 
DAMAGE, AND ANY SUITS AND EXPENSES OF ANY KIND, INCLUDING 
REASONABLE ATTORNEYS' FEES, THAT THE IA, VERISIGN, AND THEIR AGENTS 
AND CONTRACTORS MAY INCUR, THAT ARE CAUSED BY THE USE OR 
PUBLICATION OF A CERTIFICATE, AND THAT ARISES FROM (I) FALSEHOOD OR 
MISREPRESENTATION OF FACT BY THE SUBSCRIBER (OR A PERSON ACTING 
UPON INSTRUCTIONS FROM ANYONE AUTHORIZED BY THE SUBSCRIBER); (II) 
FAILURE BY THE SUBSCRIBER TO DISCLOSE A MATERIAL FACT, IF THE MISREPRESENTATION OR OMISSION WAS MADE NEGLIGENTLY OR WITH 
INTENT TO DECEIVE THE IA, VERISIGN, OR ANY PERSON RECEIVING OR 
RELYING ON THE CERTIFICATE; OR (III) FAILURE TO PROTECT THE 
SUBSCRIBER'S PRIVATE KEY, TO USE A TRUSTWORTHY SYSTEM, OR TO 
OTHERWISE TAKE THE PRECAUTIONS NECESSARY TO PREVENT THE 
COMPROMISE, LOSS, DISCLOSURE, MODIFICATION, OR UNAUTHORIZED USE 
OF THE SUBSCRIBER'S PUBLIC KEY. 
(c) Legal Relationship Between the CA and Relying Non-Subscribers. 
As discussed in detail in the Report, the nature of the legal relationship between relying 
third parties and CAs is difficult to analyze. Of the CAs who have publicly addressed the 
legal questions surrounding certification services, only VeriSign and Signet have directly 
tackled this particular issue. VeriSign attempts to establish a contractual relationship 
with relying parties in three different ways. First, when a relying party checks the status 
of a VeriSign certificate, a statement is inserted just above the online "submit" button: 
"By submitting this query, I agree to be bound by VeriSign's CPS." Similarly, when one 
searches the VeriSign site for a particular certificate, the same statement is expressed 
just above the "submit" button. Additionally, VeriSign certificates have the following 
information in one field: 
www.verisign.com/repository/CPS Incorp. by Ref., LIAB. LTD(c)96 
It is unclear whether a binding contract can be formed in such a fashion, particularly in 
light of the sheer volume of the CPS. 
Signet intends to establish direct contractual relationships with relying third parties. 
Signet's view is that accessing a certificate revocation list (CRL) is an integral part of the 
process of utilizing a certificate. Third parties who wish to rely on a certificate will enter 
into a "service agreement" with Signet prior to accessing Signet's CRL. This service 
agreement will be similar or identical to the service agreement signed by subscribers. 
Signet expects that Australian legislation will provide that parties who rely on certificates 
without checking CRLs will bear any resulting loss. 
No other CA explicitly attempts to create a contractual relationship with relying parties. 
(i) Warranties to Relying Third Parties. 
If VeriSign forms a contract with relying third parties with the CPS as the contract terms, 
then the relying party could take advantage of the limited warranties VeriSign offers 
(described above) but would also be subject to the warranty disclaimers made in the 
CPS. 
Similarly, relying third parties who enter into a service agreement with Signet will benefit 
from any warranties provided in the contract, but will also be subject to contractual 
disclaimers of warranties. Nortel's legal agreement does not address this issue. 
(ii) Liability Limitations. 
As with warranty disclaimers, if VeriSign forms a contract based upon the CPS with 
relying third parties, then the liability limitations stated in the CPS would be implicated. If 
the VeriSign/relying third party relationship is not governed by contract, then, as 
discussed in the Report, only statutorily-imposed limitations of liability would apply. 
Signet's relationship with relying third parties will be governed by a traditional contract; 
presumably any liability limitations in the contract will be enforceable, subject to the 
provisions of general contract law. 
As noted above, both VeriSign and Signet do attempt to limit by contract their liability to 
third parties through indemnification and by requiring a subscriber to make express 
representations or warranties as part of a subscriber agreement. If enforceable against 
parties with sufficient assets, these clauses could shift liability to a subscriber under 
specified circumstances. 
(iii) Legal Duties. 
The VeriSign CPS imposes few or no legal duties on relying third parties. 
Signet's service contract with relying parties will presumably impose similar duties on 
third parties as it does on subscribers (see Section 3(b)(iii) above). Additionally, Signet 
expects that Australian legislation will impose certain duties on relying third parties, 
such as a duty to check the relevant CRL. 
No other CA attempts to impose legal duties on relying non-subscribers. 
(d) Key Management Techniques. 
A detailed analysis of the complex technical issues related to key management is not 
attempted here. Rather, certain key management practices of current CAs will be briefly 
discussed in an effort to highlight potentially significant legal issues. 
(i) Key Generation. 
Most of the currently-operating CAs rely on browser software to generate key pairs. A 
subscriber generates a key pair on its own computer using the browser software and 
transmits the public key to the CA. Thus, the CA never controls the subscriber's private 
key. In contrast, the USPS plans to issue subscribers a "smart disk" with which they 
would generate encryption keys. 
 (ii) Key Revocation and Validation. 
VeriSign is the only CA which currently offers online key revocation and validation. 
COST publishes a CRL on its site, but does not publish formal revocation policies. 
(iii) Root Key Authenticity and Security. 
All currently-operating CAs are self-certified. VeriSign is the only CA that has gone to 
significant lengths to establish the authenticity of its public key. In March of 1996, 
VeriSign held a well-publicized "key ceremony" that was "designed to provide irrefutable 
evidence of VeriSign's secure technical and procedural infrastructure," according to a 
VeriSign press release. No other CA has publicly revealed its security standards; all 
appear to rely solely on their reputation to establish the authenticity of their self-
published keys. The remaining CAs apparently publish their own public key exclusively 
on their websites. 
 
ATTACHMENT A: 
Companies and Organizations Offering or Planning to Offer CA Services, 
Companies Providing CA-Related Software, and Hardware and Other Notable 
Organizations 
Name of Company / 
Website 
Org. (Country) 
Atalla (Tandem) (USA)  http://www.atalla.com
 
American Bar Assoc. 
Information Security  http://www.abanet.org/scitech/home.html
 
Committee 
BBN Corporation (USA)  http://www.bbn.com
 
CertCo, LLC  http://www.certco.com
 
CivicLink (Ameritech 
Information Access)  http://www.ameritech.com/civiclink
 
(USA) 
CommerceNet (USA)  http://www.commerce.net
 
COST Computer 
Security Technologies  http://www.cost.se
 
(Sweden) 
Cylink (USA)  http://www.cylink.com
 
Datakey (USA)  http://www.datakey.com
 
DFN-PCA (Germany)  http://www.cert.dfn.de
 
Digital Secured 
Networks Technologies  http://www.dsnt.com
 
(USA) Enterprise Integration 
Technologies (EIT)  http://www.eit.com
 
(USA) 
EuroSign (UK)  http://www.eurosign.com
 
Federal Security 
Infrastructure Program  http://www.gsa.gov/fsi
 
(USA) 
Fischer International 
http://www.fisc.com
(USA)   
Frontier Technologies 
http://www.frontiertech.com
(USA)   
GMD - TKT.SIT 
http://www.darmstadt.gmd.de/TKT/security
(Germany)   
GTE CyberTrust (USA)  http://www.gte.com/Cando/Business/Docs/Software/trust.html
 
Harbinger (USA)  http://www.harbinger.com
 
IBM Net Registry  http://www.internet.ibm.com/commercepoint/registry
 
ICE-TEL Project 
http://www.darmstadt.gmd.de/ice-tel/ice-home.html
(Germany; international)   
IETF Public Key 
Infrastructure Working  http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/pkix-charter.htm
 
Group 
Internet Commerce 
Group (Sun  http://www.sun.com/security/product/ca.html
 
Microsystems) (USA) 
Microsoft (USA)  http://www.microsoft.com
 
Netscape (USA)  http://www.netscape.com
 
NORTEL Entrust 
http://www.nortel.com/entrust/main.html
(Canada)   
OnWatch (Bell Sygma) 
http://www.public-key.com/index.html
(Canada)   
PGP, Inc. (USA)  http://www.pgp.com
 
Premenos (USA)  http://www.premenos.com
 
Radguard (Israel)  http://www.radguard.com
 
RSA (USA)  http://www.rsa.com
 
Sembawang Media 
http://ca.contact.com.sg
(Singapore)   
Signet Systems 
http://www.signet.org.au/index.html
(Australia)   
Slovenian Policy 
Certification Authority  http://www.e5.ijs.si/cert/sipca_cert.html
 
(Slovenia) Spyrus (USA)  http://www.spyrus.com
 
Terisa (USA)  http://www.terisa.com
 
Thawte Consulting 
http://www.thawte.com
(South Africa)   
TradeWave (USA)  http://andromeda.tradewave.com/tradewave
 
Trusted Information 
http://www.tis.com
Systems (TIS) (USA)   
UNINETT (Norway)  http://www.uninett.no/pca/index.html
 
United States Postal   
Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 5 
Selected Bibliography on Certification Authorities and Digital Signature 
Reference Material 
Theodore Sedgwick Barassi, "The CyberNotary: Public Key Registration and 
Certification and Authentication of International Legal Transactions," available 
at http://www.intermarket.com/ecl/cybrnote.html. 
Michael S. Baum and Henry H. Perritt, Electronic Contracting, Publishing and EDI 
Law (1991). 
Michael S. Baum, Federal Certification Authority Liability and Policy (1994). (Published 
by the U.S. Department of Commerce's National Technical Information Service as 
Report No. PB94-191202.) 
C. Bradford Biddle, "Misplaced Priorities: The Utah Digital Signature Act and Liability 
Allocation in a Public Key Infrastructure", 33 San Diego Law Review(1996), available 
at http://www.SoftwareIndustry.org/issues/docs-org/digsig.pdf. 
Santosh Chokhani and Warwick Ford, "The Certificate Policy and Certification Practice 
Statement Framework," November 3, 1996, available at http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/pki/. 
Carl M. Ellison, "Establishing Identity Without Certification Authorities," July 22, 1996, 
available at http://www.clark.net/pub/cme/usenix.html. 
Paul Fahn, "Answers to Frequently Asked Questions about Today's Cryptography, 
Version 2.0" (September 20, 1993), available athttp://www.rsa.com/pub/faq/faq.asc. 
Federal Security Infrastructure Program, NII Federal Information Security Infrastructure 
Program Management Office Action Plan, October 17, 1995, available 
at http://www.gsa.gov/fsi/action.htm. 
A. Michael Froomkin, "The Essential Role of Trusted Third Parties in Electronic 
Commerce", 75 Oregon L. Rev. 49 (1996), available 
at http://www.law.miami.edu/~froomkin/articles/trusted.htm. 
Randy Gainer, "Allocating the Risk of Loss for Bank Card Fraud on the Internet", John 
Marshall Journal of Computer & Information Law (Fall 1996). 
Michael J. Ganley, "Digital Signatures and Their Uses," 13 Computers & Security 385 
(1994). 
Information Security Committee of the Science and Technology Section of the American 
Bar Association, Digital Signature Guidelines. October 5, 1995 draft available at http://www.state.ut.us/ccjj/digsig/dsut-gl.htm. See also April 16, 1996 and August 1, 
1996 drafts. 
Interagency Working Group on Cryptography Policy, Enabling Privacy, Commerce, 
Security and Public Safety in the Global Information Infrastructure, May 20, 1996, 
available athttp://www.epic.org/crypto/key_escrow/white_paper.html. 
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) Report, Uniform International Authentication 
and Certification Practices [not publicly available] 
International Telecommunications Union Recommendation X.509 (November, 1993). 
See http://www.itu.ch/itudoc/itu-t/rec/x.html for more information. 
Internetworking Public Key Certification Infrastructure for Europe (ICE-TEL) Project 
Programme, dated October 1, 1995, available 
at http://www.darmstadt.gmd.de/TKT/security/ice/public.html[link down as of October 2, 
1996] 
Steven T. Kent, "Internet Privacy Enhanced Mail," 36:8 Communications of the ACM 48 
(1993). 
Brian Miller, "How to Sign on the Digital Line," Government Technology, June 1995, 
available at http://www.govtech.net/1995/gt/jun/features/elec.htm. 
MITI Report [not available] 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Digital Signature Standard, May 19, 
1994, available at http://www.nist.gov/itl/csl/fips/fips186.txt. 
Dr. Jim K. Omura, "Digital Signatures and Certificates," available 
at http://www.cylink.com/products/security/digsig/. 
Henry H. Perritt, Jr., "Cyberpayment Infrastructure," 1996 J. Online L. art. 6, available 
at http://www.wm.edu/law/publications/jol. 
Bernard D. Reams, Jr., Electronic Contracting Law: EDI and Business 
Transactions (1996-97 Ed.). 
Bruce Schneier, E-Mail Security: How to Keep Your Electronic Messages Private 98 
(1995). 
Bruce Schneier, Applied Cryptography: Protocols, Algorithms, and Source Code in 
C (2d ed. 1996). 
Standards Australia, Strategies for the Implementation of a Public Key Authentication 
Framework (PKAF) in Australia, SAA MP75--1996. UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce, available 
athttp://eclips.osc.edu/eclips/undocs/model_law.html. 
Utah Digital Signature Act Illustrations, available 
athttp://www.state.ut.us/ccjj/digsig/dsut-egs.htm. 
Utah Digital Signature Act Tutorial on Digital Signatures, available 
at http://www.state.ut.us/ccjj/digsig/dsut-tut.htm. 
VeriSign Certification Practice Statement, Version 1.1 (August 22, 1996), available 
at ftp://ftp.verisign.com/repository/CPS. 
Peter N. Weiss, "Security Requirements and Evidentiary Issues in the Interchange of 
Electronic Documents: Steps Towards Developing a Security Policy," 12 J. Marshall J. 
Computer & Info. L. 425 (1993). 
Benjamin Wright, The Law of Electronic Commerce (2d Ed. 1995).  
Other Useful Digital Signature Resources 
CommerceNet PKI Task Force: http://www.commerce.net/work/taskforces/pki/pki.html. 
Florida Department of State: http://www.dos.state.fl.us/digsig/index.html. 
Georgia Digital Signature Task Force: http://www.cc.emory.edu/BUSINESS/gds.html. 
Kaye Caldwell's Digital Signature 
page: http://www.SoftwareIndustry.org/software/issues/digsig.htm. 
Matrix of State Laws: http://www.magnet.state.ma.us/itd/legal/matrix10.htm.  
Digital Signature Legislation (current to November 15, 1996) 
United States 
Arizona Revised Statutes §41-121. Effective April 18, 1996. 
California AB 1577. Enacted. 
Connecticut General Statutes §19a-25a. 
1996 Delaware Laws Ch. 509. Enacted July 12, 1996. 
Florida Senate Bill 942. Became law May 25, 1996. 
Georgia Digital Signature Act. Pending. Hawaii Senate Bill 2401. Passed June 17, 1996. 
Idaho House Bill 515. Enacted March 1, 1996. 
Illinois House Bill 3394. Pending. 
Iowa §48A.13. Passed 1995. 
Kentucky House Bill 422. Pending. 
Louisiana Revised Statutes Annotated §40:2144 (1995). 
Massachusetts Electronic Record and Signature Act. 
Michigan Senate Bill 939. Pending. 
New Mexico Digital Signature Regulations. Proposed. 
New York Senate Bill 7420. Pending. 
Oregon Senate Bill 992. Died. 
Rhode Island House Bill 8125. Pending. 
Utah Digital Signature Act. 
Washington Senate Bill 6423. Enacted March 29, 1996. 
International 
Proposed amendments to Articles 14 and 28 of France Law no 90-1170 of December 
29, 1990. 
Proposed German Digital Signature Law. 
 
Relevant Non-Digital Signature Specific Legal Resources 
Uniform Commercial Code Article 2, available at http://www.law.cornell.edu/ucc/2/. 
ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, available at http://zeus.bna.com/e-law/cases/procd.html. 
Proposed Uniform Commercial Code Article 2B, available 
at http://www.lawlib.uh.edu/ucc2b/. 
Ultramares Corp. v. Touche. Not available on the Internet. Magnuson-Moss Act, 15 U.S.C. §§2301-12, available starting 
at http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/15/2301.html. 
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods, available 
at http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/documents/sales/cisg/art/. 
E.U. Directive on Unfair Contract Terms. Not available on the Internet. 
E.U. Directive on Products Liability. Not available on the Internet. 
Electronic Funds Transfer Act, 15 U.S.C. §1693 et seq., available starting 
at http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/15/1693.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 6 
Selected Bibliography on Description of Digital Signatures 
This description of digital signatures has been reprinted with permission from Chapter 4 
of Online Law: The Spa's Legal Guide To Doing Business On The Internet (1996), 
written by Thomas J. Smedinghoff and the Information Technology Law Department of 
McBride Baker & Coles and published by Addison-Wesley Developers Press. 
To order "Online Law" or other SPA publications, contact the SPA at 1730 M Street, 
N.W., Suite 700, Washington, D.C. 20036-4510, or call 1-800-388-7478, or visit SPA's 
home page at http://www.spa.org. 
1. USING DIGITAL SIGNATURES. 
(a) What is a Digital Signature? 
A digital signature is an electronic substitute for a manual signature that serves the 
same functions as a manual signature and more. It is an identifier created by a 
computer instead of a pen. In more technical terms, a digital signature is the sequence 
of bits that results from using a one-way hash function to create a message digest of an 
electronic communication. The resulting message digest is then encrypted using a 
public-key algorithm and the sender's private key. A recipient who has the sender's 
public key can accurately determine (1) whether the sequence of bits was created using 
the private key that corresponds to the signer's public key, and (2) whether the 
communication has been altered since the sequence of bits was generated. Digital 
signatures look like an unintelligible string of alphanumeric characters. For example 
----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE---- 
Version: 2.6.2 
owHtWX1sU1UUP+91G+22ysbHDHcBeZAVmq7L9iauNJ@UuhX2soUSpaufVsfu8tby1k
UXTGsGhAgsEY4 
h9b+EPBgArBGNSELGpiNEFM5A80xIzEoPiPSEiMRFbPfR/ajW7rlBjR/Zbf0/eed9+5991
77j3ndS9C 
WlcIlqe3Dflw45vqJ85+dZ5hPywt6u0jb5zYvRmy2drFnZKT17a/97n/Tt11d8dNmyvqV12K
7jt8Lxf 
---END PGP SIGNATURE--- 
is the digital signature for the following e-mail message: 
 
 October 30, 1995 
Dear Order Department: 
We commit to purchase 10,000 widgets at your price of $175 per hundred. 
Ship to: Industrial Products Co. 
55 Retail Drive 
Chicago, Illinois 60061 
Sincerely, 
Purchasing Department,  
Industrial Products Co. 
 
A digital signature is not a digitized image of a handwritten signature or a typed 
signature such as "/s/john doe." Moreover, unlike a handwritten signature which is 
unique to the signer but is presumably consistent across all documents signed, a digital 
signature is unique for each document "signed." This is because a digital signature is 
derived from the document itself. As a result, any change to the document will produce 
a different digital signature. 
A digital signature can serve the same purpose as a handwritten signature in that it may 
signify authorship, acknowledgment, or assent, among other things. However, digital 
signature also serves important information-security purposes that handwritten 
signatures cannot. A digital signature allows the recipient of a digitally signed 
communication to determine whether the communication was changed after it was 
digitally signed. That is, a digital signature provides assurance about the source and 
integrity of the communication. Because a digital signature provides assurances as to 
integrity, it is to this extent superior to a handwritten signature. 
(b) How is an Electronic Communication Digitally Signed? 
Before a sender can digitally sign an electronic communication, the sender must first 
create a public-private key pair. The private key is kept confidential by the sender and is 
used for the purpose of creating digital signatures. The public key is disclosed generally 
by posting the key in online databases, repositories, or anywhere else the recipient of 
the digitally signed communication can access it. 
To digitally sign an electronic communication, the sender runs a computer program that 
creates a message digest (or hash value) of that communication. The program then 
encrypts the resulting message digest using the sender's private key. The encrypted 
message digest is the digital signature. The sender then attaches the digital signature to the communication and sends both to the intended recipient. A digitally signed 
communication might look like this: 
Subject: Order 
Author: rqz@ipc.com 
October 30, 1995 
---BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE--- 
Dear Order Department: 
We commit to purchase 10,000 widgets at your price of $175 per hundred. 
Ship to:  
Industrial Products Co.  
555 Retail Drive  
Chicago, Illinois 60061 
Sincerely, 
Purchasing Department,  
Industrial Products Co. 
----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE---- 
Version: 2.6.2 
owHtWX1sU1UUP+91G+22ysbHDHcBeZAVmq7L9iauNJ@UuhX2soUSpaufVsfu8tby1k
UXTGsGhAgsEY4 
h9b+EPBgArBGNSELGpiNEFM5A80xIzEoPiPSEiMRFbPfR/ajW7rlBjR/Zbf0/eed9+5991
77j3ndS9C 
WlcIlqe3Dflw45vqJ85+dZ5hPywt6u0jb5zYvRmy2drFnZKT17a/97n/Tt11d8dNmyvqV12K
7jt8Lxf 
---END PGP SIGNATURE--- 
The digital signature process can be made very easy. With a user-friendly interface, the 
sender can digitally sign a communication simply by clicking on buttons with a mouse. 
No special technical expertise is needed. The sender should, however, appreciate the 
legal effects and consequences of digitally signing an electronic communication. 
 
 (c) Verifying a Digital Signature. 
When a recipient gets a digitally signed communication, the recipient's computer runs a 
computer program containing the same cryptographic algorithm and hash function the 
sender used to create the digital signature. The program automatically decrypts the 
digital signature (the encrypted message digest) using the sender's public key. If the 
program is able to decrypt the digital signature, the recipient knows that the 
communication came from the purported sender, that is, the recipient has verified its 
authenticity. This is because only the sender's public key will decrypt a digital signature 
encrypted with the sender's private key. 
The program then creates a second message digest of the communication and 
compares the decrypted message digest with the digest the recipient created. If the two 
message digests match, the recipient knows that the communication has not been 
altered or tampered with, that is, the recipient has verified its integrity. 
(d) Prerequisites for the Use of Digital Signatures. 
The effectiveness of the digital signature process depends upon the reliable association 
of a public-private key pair with an identified person. The discussion thus far has made 
one critical assumption: that the public-private key pair of the sender does, in fact, 
belong to the sender. Any assurance of authenticity would be worthless if the public key 
used to decrypt a digital signature belonged to an impostor and not the purported 
sender. 
Paper signature usually have an intrinsic association with a particular person because 
they are that person's own handwriting. However, public-private key pairs used to create 
digital signatures have no intrinsic association with anyone in particular -- they are 
nothing more than large numbers. When a recipient obtains the public key actually for a 
digitally signed communication, how can he or she verify that the public key actually 
belongs to the purported sender? An impostor could have generated the public-private 
key pair and entered that public key in a public database under the purported sender's 
name. 
The solution to this problem is to enlist a third party, trusted by both the sender and 
recipient, to perform the tasks necessary to associate a person or entity on one end of 
the transaction with the key pair used to create the digital signature on the other. Such a 
trusted third party is called a certification authority. 
2. CERTIFICATION AUTHORITIES. 
(a) Function and Role. 
A certification authority (CA) is a trusted third person or entity that ascertains the identity 
of a person, called a subscriber, and certifies that the public key of a public-private key 
pair used to create digital signatures belongs to that person. The certification process generally works in the following way. The subscriber: 
1. Generates his or her own public/private key pair; 
2. Visits the CA and produces proof of identity, such as a driver's license and passport 
or any other proof required by the CA; and 
3. Demonstrates that he or she holds the private key corresponding to the public key 
(without disclosing the private key). 
These three steps in the certification process are likely to vary somewhat from CA to 
CA. For example, one CA may require a subscriber to appear in person before the CA 
as part of the second step of establishing the subscriber's identity. Another CA may be 
willing to rely on a third party, such as a notary, to establish the subscriber's identity. 
Once the certification authority has verified the association between an identified person 
and a public key, the certification authority then issues a certificate. A certificate is a 
computer-based record that attests to the connection of a public key to an identified 
subscriber. A certificate identifies the certification authority issuing it and the subscriber 
identified with the public key. The certificate also contains the subscriber's public key 
and possibly other information, such as an expiration date for the public key. To provide 
assurance as to the authenticity and integrity of the certificate, the certification authority 
attaches its own digital signature to the certificate. 
The certification authority then notifies the subscriber that the certificate has been 
issued so as to give the subscriber an opportunity to review the contents of the 
certificate before it is made public. It is important that the subscriber be given an 
opportunity to double-check the accuracy of the contents of the certificate because the 
subscriber may be bound by any communication digitally signed with the private key 
that corresponds to the public key contained in the certificate or held liable for 
misrepresentations to the certification authority. 
If the subscriber finds that the certificate is accurate, the subscriber may publish the 
certificate, or direct the CA to do so, making it available to third parties who may wish to 
communicate with the subscriber. A certificate is published by being recorded in one or 
more repositories or circulated by any other means so as to make it accessible to all 
intended correspondents. A repository is an electronic database of certificates -- the 
equivalent of a digital Yellow Pages. A repository is generally available online and may 
be maintained by the certification authority or by anyone providing repository services. 
Repositories are generally accessible to anyone. 
Repositories contain other important information as well as certificates. If a private key 
is compromised or lost, such as through loss of the medium on which it is stored or 
accidental deletion, it is generally necessary to suspend or revoke the corresponding 
certificate so that others will know not to rely on communications digitally signed with 
that key. This information is also posted in the repository. Once a certificate has been published, the subscriber may then append the certificate to 
any electronic communication. If the recipient wants to verify the connection between 
the sender and his public key, the recipient can look to the attached certificate for some 
assurance. 
(b) Who Can Be a Certification Authority? 
Certification authorities may include federal and state governmental entities, private 
persons or entities licensed to act as certification authorities by a state, and private 
persons or entities acting as certification authorities for commercial purposes. For 
example, the U.S. Postal Service has announced large-scale plans to offer services 
designed to facilitate electronic commerce, including functioning as an all-purpose 
certification authority. The USPS may be well suited to function as a certification 
authority: In transactions between companies or individuals, it is an objective third party 
with an established reputation for credibility. Through its nationwide network of post 
offices, the USPS can register public keys for applicants who appear in person. This will 
enable the USPS to provide an added level of security, such as photographs and 
fingerprinting, to ensure that each registered public key corresponds to a real person, 
not an alias or an assumed identity. 
The Los Angeles Superior Court has established a limited-purpose certification authority 
in connection with an electronic filing and retrieval system that will rely on digital 
signatures to assure the authenticity and integrity of electronic court filings. The court 
will act as certification authority for its own personnel. Private parties authorized by the 
court will act as the certification authority for attorneys and litigants. 
A number of private commercial certification authorities are also currently operating. 
These include the Net Market Company, an affiliation of shopkeepers on the Internet, 
and VeriSign, Inc., which issues certificates and provides related services to 
corporations and individuals for use in digitally signing documents for any purpose. 
Value-added networks may also serve as a limited local certification authority function 
for subscribers to their network. 
(c) Verifying a Certification Authority's Digital Signature. 
To provide assurances as to the authenticity of a certificate it issues, a certification 
authority digitally signs each such certificate itself. Anyone can verify the authenticity 
and integrity of a certificate issued by a certification authority by verifying the 
certification authority's digital signature using the certification authority's public key. 
Note, however, that anyone who wants to verify authenticity has the same problem with 
the CA's public key as he or she has with any other public key. How does the person 
know whether the public key really belongs to the CA? The answer is that the CA has its 
public key certified by another, higher-level CA, which acts as a certification authority for 
it. That higher-level CA then digitally signs the certificate it has issued, verifying the 
connection between the lower-level CA and the lower-level CA's public key. The lower-level CA may then make the certificate for its key available to anyone who seeks to 
verify the lower-level CA's digital signature. 
The higher-level CA, in turn, needs to have its connection to a public key certified to an 
even higher-level CA, and so on and on. This process of higher and higher CAs 
certifying public keys is often referred to as chaining certificates. 
Of course, the chain has to stop somewhere. Where it stops will depend on the 
importance of a communication to the recipient. Depending on the nature of the 
electronic communication, the recipient may not bother to verify the sender's signature, 
much less the lowest level CA's signature. If the communication is of greater 
importance, the recipient may trace the certificates up the chain until reaching a 
certificate issued by a CA he or she knows and trusts. 
3. PROTECTING THE PARTIES TO THE TRANSACTION. 
(a) Certification Practice Statements. 
Unless they are subject to state licensure and regulation, certification authorities 
generally do not adhere to any uniform standard or procedures for verifying the 
identities of persons for whom they issue certificates. Thus a digital signature is only as 
reliable as the certification authority is trustworthy in performing its functions. 
Consequently, a party needs some way to gauge how much reliance it should place on 
a digital signature supported by a certificate a particular CA issued. For example, if a 
certification authority verifies identity based on any single piece of identification, the 
third party might be more cautious in its reliance than it would if the certification 
authority requires the subscriber to appear in person with a driver's license and passport 
and to be fingerprinted. 
To help recipients of a digitally signed communication gauge their level of risk, the 
particular procedure a certification authority follows in issuing certificates may be stated 
in a certification practice statement. A certification practice statement may also include 
information about the practices the CA follow in its operations and about the details of 
the security of its system. 
Certification practice statements may serve an important function for a certification 
authority as well. A certification authority that follows its announced practices may be 
able to avoid a claim that it was negligent in failing to do more to connect a user to a 
public key. 
(b) Certificate Revocation Lists. 
With public-key cryptography, each person has to keep his or her private key 
confidential and secure. This is easier than two people trusting each other to keep a key 
secret, as in conventional cryptography; nevertheless, the security of private keys is a 
problem. It is inevitable that someone's key will be lost or compromised, either through carelessness or a successful cryptanalytic attack. In addition, there are times -- such as 
when a person dies; a company goes out of business; or an employee quits, is fired or 
transferred to a new position -- when a key may no longer be needed or used. Thus, 
there will be times when a key needs to be revoked before it expires. 
A key is revoked by revoking its certificate. The problem is how to notify people that 
they should no longer rely on a key. The solution to this problem is the certificate 
revocation list or CRL. A CRL is simply a database of certificates of keys that have been 
revoked before their expiration date. A CRL may be part of the repository maintained by 
the certification authority. If a private key is lost, compromised, or no longer used for any 
other reason, the corresponding public key and its certificate would be placed on the 
CRL. Before relying on a public key, a person should verify its status by checking the 
CRL. 
(c) Certificate Expiration. 
It is possible for a cryptographic key to be compromised even though its holder 
conscientiously safeguarded it. With a little luck and a lot of motivation, keys can be 
broken through what is known as a brute-force attack. In a brute-force attack, every 
possible key is tried until one decrypts the ciphertext. The longer the key length, the 
longer it takes to try all the possible keys. For example, for a key that is 56 bits long, it 
would take approximately 10 hours to find the key. For a key that is 128 bits long, it 
would take 5.4 x 1018 years to find the key. 
Thus, one way to guard against a successful brute-force attack is to use a long key. 
Another is to change keys periodically. 
As with revoked keys, there must be some way to let people know when a key expires. 
This can be done simply by including a validity period in the certificate for a public key. 
Anyone who then consults the certificate for that key will know whether it has expired. 
Once a key and its certificate expire, the use simply creates a new key pair and has the 
public key certified. 
Encryption keys generally expire after a relatively short time; this raises the question of 
how a digital signature can be verified after the public key has expired. For example, if a 
company enters into a twenty-year lease, how can the integrity of the digitally signed 
lease be verified when the corresponding certificate has already expired? 
One solution is to have the digital signature date/time stamped. The date/time-stamped 
version of the digital signature could be used years later to enforce the original contract. 
The date/time stamp would establish the date and time at which the document was 
signed, and thus establish that at such time there was a valid certificate connecting the 
signer to the public key. 
 Appendix 8 
Selected Bibliography on Working Group Terms of Reference and Work Plan 
The Development Committee, recognizing the importance of certification authority 
practices to online commerce, has commissioned a Working Group on Electronic 
Commerce which is executing, as a demonstration project, the following project. 
1.  Business Practices For Certificate Authority Services Terms Of Reference. 
(Note: Subject to review and further approval) 
2.  SCOPE. 
This project shall have three main components, it shall: 
1.  identify issues relating to authenticating Internet electronic commerce 
transactions using certificate authority services; 
2.  review and analyze certificate authorities services and policies; 
3.  recommend threshold policies and business practices for electronic 
commerce certificate authority services. 
3.  WORK PRODUCTS. 
This working group shall produce the following: 
A report on the existing practices of certification authorities with respect to the 
following issues 
o  subscriber authentication 
o  certification authority duties to subscribers 
o  certification authority duties to relying third parties 
o  associated discussion of disclaimers of warranties and limitations of 
liabilities. 
The report will identify and survey additional issues affecting certification 
authorities, such as key management policies and obligations and 
jurisdiction/choice of law issues. 
The report will include: 
o  A bibliography of resources and reference materials related to digital 
signatures and certification authorities. 
o  A comparative analysis of selected, existing certification authorities and 
their practices, plus a list of known certification authorities (and related 
industry participants). o  A consolidated, non-technical description of digital signatures and their 
functions, including alternative definitions. 
The report will be presented in hard copy, as well as be available electronically. 
The Working Group will utilize on-line methods for reviewing work product, and 
engaging in informed dialogues regarding the ongoing activities required to reach 
the intended work products. 
Other Considerations: The Forum must be sensitive to creating an actual or 
implied bias toward a particular technology (e.g., RSA, DSA, etc.) or certificate 
authority (e.g., VeriSign, Northern Telcom, etc.) in the staffing of this project as 
well as the drafting of any documents. 
4.  WORK PLAN. 
Certain elements of the work product will be presented to the Development 
Committee for approval on 16 January, 1997 in London. 
The work plan for the Development Period is in development and will be 
announced on or about 15 October, 1996 and posted to this location. 
 
 