This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in Legal Reference Services 
Quarterly on May 16, 2016, available online: https://doi.org/10.1080/0270319X.2016.1177422. 
 
Preparing Law Students for Information 
Governance 
 
SUSAN DAVID DEMAINE 
Ruth Lilly Law Library, Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA 
 
Information governance is a holistic business approach to managing and using 
information that recognizes information as an asset as well as a potential source of 
risk. Law librarians and legal information professionals are well situated to take 
leadership roles in information governance efforts, including instructing law students 
in  information  governance  principles  and  practices.  This  article  traces  the 
development of information governance and its importance to the legal profession, 
offers a primer on information governance principles and implementation, and 
discusses  how  academic  law  librarians  and  other  legal  educators  can  teach 
information governance to law students using problem-based learning or similar 
pedagogical methods. 
KEYWORDS  information  governance,  e-discovery,  law  school  curriculum,  practice-ready, 
instruction, law librarian, legal education, information management, data, problem-based learning 
 
In a world in which information is increasingly seen as a top-level asset, the safeguarding and management of 
information is of concern to everyone.1 
I.  WHAT IS INFORMATION GOVERNANCE? 
                                                 
© Susan David deMaine 
The author would like to offer many thanks to the members of the 2015 Boulder Conference on Legal 
Information for their input and many improvements to this article, particularly Maria Protti, Benjamin J. Keele, and 
Catherine A. Lemmer. Special thanks also to Marguerite Most for her careful consideration and editorial input.  
Address correspondence to Susan deMaine, Ruth Lilly Law Library, Indiana University Robert H. McKinney 
School of Law, 530 West New York Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA, E-mail: sdemaine@iupui.edu 
1  ALAN MACCLELLAN, INFORMATION GOVERNANCE AND ASSURANCE: REDUCING RISK, PROMOTING POLICY 
1 (2014). 
1 
 Information governance is a holistic business approach to information developed in response to the 
demands of electronic discovery in litigation, technological developments, exponential increases in data, 
privacy concerns, and the importance of information in business decisions. The essential idea of information 
governance is that information is an asset that, if managed wisely, has great value, but if managed poorly 
(or not at all), opens an organization up to serious risks.2 In its Commentary on Information Governance, 
the  Sedona  Conference 3  defines  information  governance  as  an  organization’s  “coordinated, 
interdisciplinary approach to satisfying information compliance requirements and managing information 
risks while optimizing information value.”4 
Soon after the well-known Zubulake decisions by Judge Scheindlin in the Southern District of New 
York in the early 2000s marked a seismic shift in the discovery of electronic information for litigation,5 the 
experts of the Sedona Conference recognized that e-discovery was only part of the challenge. E-discovery 
could not be fully addressed without discussing the larger information environment.6  
Since then, new knowledge, practices, and technologies have developed; so have expectations and 
demands. The fact that “the world contains an unimaginably vast amount of digital information which is 
getting ever vaster ever more rapidly”7 means the goalposts are always moving ahead. In addition, 
regulation of information has escalated in response to rising privacy, security, and financial stability 
concerns,  and  has  created  additional  obligations  for  companies  and  the  lawyers  who  advise  them. 
Information governance is designed to anticipate and prepare for these data challenges so that crises can be 
avoided when possible, responses can be appropriate, efficient, and effective, and better business decisions 
can be made. Now, information governance is a matter of necessity for the firms and organizations in which 
lawyers work and, perhaps more importantly, for the clients that lawyers advise. Information governance 
                                                 
2   The risks reduced by information governance are more than just legal or security risks. They also include 
enterprise risks such as lost business opportunities or unforeseen changes in an organization’s market.  
3   The Sedona Conference is a nonprofit institute “dedicated to the advanced study of law and policy in the areas 
of antitrust law, complex litigation, and intellectual property rights. The mission of [the Sedona Conference] is to drive the 
reasoned and just advancement of law and policy by stimulating ongoing dialogue amongst leaders of the bench and bar 
to  achieve  consensus  on  tipping  point  issues.”  About  Us,  SEDONA  CONFERENCE, 
https://thesedonaconference.org/aboutus [http://perma.cc/DW8K-NF5C]. It is well-known for its work on e-discovery 
best practices, among other things.  
4   SEDONA CONFERENCE, COMMENTARY ON INFORMATION GOVERNANCE 4 (Dec. 2013), 
https://thesedonaconference.org/publication/The%20Sedona%20Conference%C2%AE%20Commentary%20on%20I
nformation%20Governance [http://perma.cc/ZP7P-KH9M].  
5   The decisions in Zubulake v. USB Warburg in the early 2000s shifted some of the costs of retrieving 
electronically stored information (ESI) to the requesting party but left 75% of the costs to be borne by the responder 
and imposed heavy sanctions for the loss of such information. See Zubulake v. UBS Warburg LLC, 217 F.R.D. 309 
(S.D.N.Y. 2003) (Zubulake I); Zubulake v. UBS Warburg LLC, 216 F.R.D. 280 (S.D.N.Y. 2003) (Zubulake III); Zubulake v. 
UBS Warburg LLC, 220 F.R.D. 212 (S.D.N.Y. 2003) (Zubulake V).  
6   SEDONA CONFERENCE, supra note 4, at 4.  
7   Data, data everywhere, ECONOMIST, Feb. 25, 2010, at 71, available at http://www.economist.com/node/15557443 
[http://perma.cc/LMW2-E6C5]. 
2 
 has become “table stakes,” essential not only to e-discovery and compliance but also to business success 
and security.  
Law librarians and legal information professionals are positioned at the crossroads of information 
science, law, business, and education, and thus we are uniquely situated to make significant contributions 
to information governance. 8 This article explores how academic law librarians can seize opportunities to 
help prepare law students for information governance. Many law schools have responded to the rapid 
development of e-discovery by offering specialized courses,9 but only a few address the larger topic of 
information governance. Information governance’s relationship to e-discovery and other legal concerns 
such as regulatory obligations and business practices makes familiarity with information governance vital 
for lawyers advising clients in these areas. Although there is little room in most law school curricula for 
extensive study of business management trends, lawyers should understand what the business community 
is doing and be able to talk knowledgably on the subject.  
This article offers a primer on information governance for law librarians and other legal educators who 
want to understand the rising importance of information governance (Parts II through V). It then discusses 
the importance of and methods for teaching law students about information governance (Parts VI and VII).  
II.  WHY INFORMATION GOVERNANCE NOW? 
The concept of information governance has been around since businesses began using computers for 
everyday activities,10 but it has become a pressing issue in the last several years thanks to a convergence of 
events. The first is e-discovery. Over the last two decades, discovery has shifted from production of mostly 
paper documents to production of vast quantities of electronic information (referred to in the field as ESI, 
or electronically stored information). ESI can include emails, texts or other instant messages, calendars, 
documents, spreadsheets, databases, presentations, research data compilations, and so on. Responding to e-
discovery requests for all this data can be disruptive, difficult, and expensive. A large portion of the 
disruption and expense can be chalked up to two main factors: dealing with information that was 
unnecessarily retained, and accessing information that was not well-preserved. Furthermore, even “deleted” 
ESI can sometimes be recovered and its production required in the discovery process.  
E-discovery was in its nascent stages in 2003 when Judge Scheindlin of the U.S. District Court for the 
Southern District of New York issued several pre-trial decisions in Zubulake v. UBS Warburg, a case 
                                                 
8   In an email to an American Association of Law Librarians (AALL) discussion group, Jean O’Grady asserted that 
it is time for law librarians “to claim leadership of the broader universe of legal information….” We need to be “identified 
with the broader executive leadership functions related to information and knowledge strategy” if we want to stop the 
trend that “[l]aw firms seek professionals from other disciplines to lead knowledge strategy.” E-mail from Jean O’Grady, 
Dir. Research Serv. and Lib., DLA Piper, to AALL Association for Legal Information Discussion List (Jan. 11, 2016) (on 
file with author).  
9   Michele Lange, Back to (Law) School: Ediscovery Education by the Numbers, EDISCOVERY BLOG (Sept. 3, 2014), 
http://www.theediscoveryblog.com/2014/09/03/back-law-school-ediscovery-education-numbers/ 
[http://perma.cc/2J6U-93PZ]. Kroll’s research found that 69 law schools were offering some level of instruction on e-
discovery outside the typical Civil Procedure class. Unfortunately, the flip side of this number means that 124 schools 
are not offering stand-alone e-discovery instruction.  
10   Some would posit that it has been around as long as filing cabinets and libraries. 
3 
 involving a workplace sex discrimination and retaliation claim. In a string of landmark opinions, Judge 
Scheindlin tackled e-discovery issues of first impression. In Zubulake I11 and III,12 she crafted and applied 
a new test for cost-shifting when ESI is deemed “inaccessible.” Judge Scheindlin’s approach required 
extensive and accurate information about the responding party’s computer systems and data storage. In the 
end the responding party undertook extensive data recovery efforts to produce the “inaccessible” data and 
bore 75% of the related costs. In Zubulake V13, Judge Scheindlin found that the defendant, its in-house 
counsel, and its outside counsel all failed in their duties to preserve relevant evidence once litigation was 
reasonably anticipated. She sanctioned them all, including the lawyers.14  
These decisions and other developments in e-discovery had an impact on the 2006 amendments to the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.15 The amendments specifically included ESI as discoverable, increased 
involvement  by  the  courts  in the  discovery  process,  and  added to  early  disclosure  and  discussion 
requirements. They also provided a safe harbor when spoliation was truly inadvertent and offered some 
protection against inadvertent disclosure of privileged materials.16 
More than a decade after the Zubulake decisions and a decade after the 2006 amendments to the Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure, many attorneys still do not understand the nuts and bolts of e-discovery and its 
implications.17 Predictive coding, in which a sample of hand-picked relevant documents are used to “teach” 
computer software to identify other potentially relevant documents, is seldom understood or used despite 
evidence that it is more effective and less costly than other search methods. With phenomena such as cloud 
storage, bring-your-own-device policies, and social media, the challenges involved in e-discovery are 
growing considerably faster than the knowledge of many attorneys.18  Lack of knowledge can be costly. 
Failing to preserve data and to collect potentially relevant ESI can result in sanctions (monetary penalties 
and/or adverse rulings) for both client and counsel.  
The  complexities  of  e-discovery  are  not  the  only  catalyst  driving  information  governance.  E-
discovery’s breakout converged with increased regulation and data collection in several key areas. First, 
                                                 
11   Zubulake v. UBS Warburg LLC, 217 F.R.D. 309 (S.D.N.Y. 2003) (Zubulake I).  
12   Zubulake v. UBS Warburg LLC, 216 F.R.D. 280 (S.D.N.Y. 2003) (Zubulake III). 
13   Zubulake v. UBS Warburg LLC, 220 F.R.D. 212 (S.D.N.Y. 2003) (Zubulake V). 
14   See id.  
15   Judge Scheindlin was a member of the Judicial Conference of the United States Advisory Committee on the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure from 1998 to 2005, when the committee was drafting the 2006 amendments to the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.  
16   See Fed. R. Civ. P. Rules 16, 26, 33, 34, 37, and 45 (as amended 2006). See also Carl G. Roberts, The 2006 
Discovery Amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, LAW PRAC. TODAY (Aug. 2006), 
http://apps.americanbar.org/lpm/lpt/articles/tch08061.shtml [http://perma.cc/3MT3-27SA]. 
17   Ed Silverstein, Survey: Attorneys Don’t Know Enough E-Discovery, LEGALTECH NEWS (Feb. 17, 2015), 
http://www.legaltechnews.com/home/id=1202718079925/Survey-Attorneys-Dont-Know-Enough-EDiscovery 
[http://perma.cc/3MT3-27SA]. 
18   Id.  
4 
 the passage of the USA PATRIOT Act19 in the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attacks greatly increased the 
collection of data by the government. Accounting scandals at Enron and Worldcom prompted passage of 
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,20 which created new record-keeping and reporting compliance measures. 
The financial crisis of 2008 led to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act21 
under which financial institutions are subject to more data collection, retention, and reporting requirements. 
Regulations protecting consumer privacy such as the Federal Trade Commission’s Safeguards Rule22 in 
2002 and Red Flags Rule23 in 2007 have also caused proper data collection, handling, and storage to become 
issues of utmost importance. It is estimated that “[i]n the U.S. alone,…there are more than 20,000 laws that 
deal with how long data is kept and what form it is in.”24  
Complicating matters is the fact that data crosses national boundaries without pause or notice. With 
internet connectivity and cloud computing, data can travel the globe instantaneously, touching servers in 
many different jurisdictions. People also travel, of course, and it is not always clear whether they carry the 
protections of their home country with them or are subject to the protections of the host country. The 
European Union, for example, has extensive laws governing data, especially personal data,25 as do many 
other countries.26 But many do not. The complexities are staggering.  
The sheer amount of data being generated as the digital age continues to unfold is another complication. 
Governments,  businesses,  organizations,  and  individuals  are  producing,  using,  and  collecting  ever 
                                                 
19   Pub. L. 107-56, 115 Stat. 272 (Oct. 26, 2001).  
20   Pub. L. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745 (July 30, 2002), codified at 15 U.S. Code § 7201 et seq.  
21   Pub. L. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (July 21, 2010), codified at 12 U.S. Code § 5301 et seq.  
22   16 C.F.R. 314.1-314.5 (2015). This rule requires financial institutions subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal 
Trade Commission to establish data security protocols and systems to protect consumer data. These financial institutions 
must also ensure that their affiliates and service providers keep consumer data secure.  
23   16 C.F.R. 681.1 (2015). This rule requires many businesses to establish and implement a written identity theft 
prevention program to help detect warnings of a data security breach and theft of identity information.  
24   Rebekah Mintzer, Build a Better Information Governance Program, LEGALTECH NEWS (Feb. 5, 2015), 
http://www.legaltechnews.com/id=1202717053709 [http://perma.cc/55Y2-L8LY].  
25   See generally, DOROTHEE HEISENBERG, NEGOTIATING PRIVACY: THE EUROPEAN UNION, THE UNITED 
STATES, AND PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION (2005); Julia M. Fromholz, The European Union Data Privacy Directive, 15 
BERK. TECH. L.J. 461 (2000); Christopher Kruner, The European Union and the Search for an International Data Protection 
Framework, 2 GRONINGEN J. INT’L L. 55 (2014) (discussing the EU’s interest in promoting its own data protection laws 
as well as data protection on a global scale).  
26   See Charles R. Ragan, Information Governance: It’s a Duty and It’s Smart Business, 19 RICH. J.L. & TECH. 12, ¶11-15 
(2013) (citing Gail Lasprogata et al., Regulation of Electronic Employee Monitoring: Identifying Fundamental Principles of Employee 
Privacy through a Comparative Study of Data Privacy Legislation in the European Union, United States and Canada, 2004 STAN. 
TECH L. REV. 4, ¶ 14 (2004); ERIKA MCCALLISTER ET AL., GUIDE TO PROTECTING THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF 
PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION § 2-2 (2010); Matthew Glynn, Australia: Data Privacy Compliance in Asia Pacific, 
MONDAQ (Nov. 17, 2012), 
http://www.mondaq.com/australia/x/206518/data+protection/data+privacy+compliance+in+asia+pacific 
[http://perma.cc/P3Y7-D5L5]; and Aldo M. Leiva, Data Protection Law in Spain and Latin America: Survey of Legal 
Approaches, 41 INT'L L. NEWS, Fall 2012, at 1. 
5 
 increasing amounts of information. Big data27—immense amounts of data being created very rapidly and 
in all sorts of formats28—has entered the scene. With tremendous growth in online shopping, social media, 
mobile devices, and the “internet of things,” we are experiencing an explosion of digital data with no end 
in sight.29 Research conducted by IBM indicates that by the end of 2011, “everyday consumers [were] 
creating 2.5 quintillion bytes [2.5 billion gigabytes] of data.”30 Of course, that figure is now several years 
out of date, and it is estimated that the amount of digital information increases tenfold every five years.31  
The effects of the interwoven and immense growth in data, laws, and e-discovery expectations have 
been exacerbated by corporate data breaches such as those experienced by Anthem, Target, and Sony 
Pictures.32 Other data scandals such as Hilary Clinton’s use of a personal email server when she served as 
Secretary of State have added to an atmosphere of fear regarding out-of-control data.33 These events 
highlight the need for consistent information governance policies. 
The current interest in information governance in the corporate world and legal profession results from 
this convergence of massive increases in the amount of data with more obligations to track and protect data, 
more need to pluck data from the haystacks when necessary, and more push to make data-driven business 
                                                 
27   Big data is regularly identified as big in three dimensions: volume, velocity, and variety. Doug Laney, 3-D Data 
Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity and Variety, GARTNER (Feb. 6, 2001), http://blogs.gartner.com/doug-
laney/files/2012/01/ad949-3D-Data-Management-Controlling-Data-Volume-Velocity-and-Variety.pdf 
[http://perma.cc/5UQZ-US9K]. See also Doug Laney, Deja VVVu: Others Claiming Gartner’s Construct for Big Data, 
GARTNER (Jan. 14, 2012), http://blogs.gartner.com/doug-laney/deja-vvvue-others-claiming-gartners-volume-velocity-
variety-construct-for-big-data/ [http://blogs.gartner.com/doug-laney/deja-vvvue-others-claiming-gartners-volume-
velocity-variety-construct-for-big-data/]. To get an idea of what big data refers to, consider all clicks Amazon’s 
computers record every day, all the tweets that are sent, the pings from all the smartphones, and a day’s worth of data 
produced by the Large Hadron Collider. A car manufacturer might have big data in the data recorded by all its testing 
equipment or data sent in from vehicles on the road, while a city might have big data in its traffic camera records. “Data 
mining” means finding ways to extract useful information out of the billions of data points being collected.  
28   Data scientists distinguish between structured data and unstructured data. Classic databases offer structured 
data, with row and header columns, formulae, labels, and meticulous metadata. The data gathered from email, social 
media, the internet of things, and elsewhere varies so widely in format and content that it is simply called unstructured 
data.  
29   Data, data everywhere, supra note 7. 
30   IBM Study Reveal Challenges Midmarket CMOs Face to Sustain Brand Loyalty with Today’s Social Consumer, IBM NEWS 
RELEASES (Nov. 16, 2011), http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/35999.wss [http://perma.cc/ALT3-
3QWG].  
31   Id.  
32   Erin E. Harrison, InfoGov: Not Just Another Pretty Buzzword, LEGALTECH NEWS (June 1, 2015), 
http://www.legaltechnews.com/id=1202727858316 [http://perma.cc/JP2X-MLVE]. See also SEDONA CONFERENCE, 
supra note 4, at 2.  
33   Michael S. Schmidt, Hillary Clinton Used Personal Email Account at State Dept., Possibly Breaking Rules, N.Y. TIMES 
(March 2, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/03/us/politics/hillary-clintons-use-of-private-email-at-state-
department-raises-flags.html [http://perma.cc/ZUE8-J8M9 ]. A version of this article also appeared in print at Michael 
S. Schmidt, Clinton Used Personal Email at State Dept., N.Y. TIMES, March 3, 2015, at A1.  
6 
 decisions. This is evidenced in guidelines coming from records management associations,34 e-discovery 
vendors and advisors,35 information technology consultants,36 and those who specialize in law and 
technology.37 
III. WHAT DOES INFORMATION GOVERNANCE DO? 
It would be hard to overstate the importance of information and the knowledge we can derive from it, 
but understanding, protecting, and making the most of the vast quantities of information we are producing 
takes  planning  and  strategic  thinking.  Management  of  information  has  typically  been  siloed  into 
departments such as IT (hardware and  software,  storage,  security), records  (regulatory  compliance, 
retention),  marketing  (customer  data),  library  (research,  external  information  sources,  knowledge 
databases), and legal (litigation holds, e-discovery). Information governance cuts across these siloes and 
sees information first and foremost as a business asset. To derive the most value from this asset, the 
resources and processes needed to create, use, and protect the information must be understood and 
appropriately designed. These two foci—(1) business value and (2) resources and processes—present no 
small task. The necessary resources and processes are numerous and complex. Understanding the business 
value of information requires simultaneous consideration of opportunity and risk, both of which can be 
difficult to identify and measure.38  
To be successful, information governance must address data through its entire lifecycle–from creation, 
use, retention, and destruction–before they arise. Unlike information management strategies of the past, no 
single silo is the focus. Instead, overall productivity and value are the goals.39 Information governance 
envisions  an  entire  framework  of  policies,  procedures,  technologies,  organizational  systems  and 
enforcement mechanisms that bring about reliable compliance by all participants in the enterprise.40 This 
framework can be built from the answers to the following questions as applied to all sorts of different 
information: 
1.  Use: What is the information for? What information is required? Is this the right information for 
the task?  
2.  Flow: Where is information coming from and where is it going? 
3.  Timing: When is the information needed? 
                                                 
34   See, e.g., ARMA International, http://www.arma.org/ [http://perma.cc/4HXR-S2PU]. 
35   See, e.g., The Sedona Conference, https://thesedonaconference.org/ [http://perma.cc/DW8K-NF5C]. 
36   See, e.g., Gartner Inc., http://www.gartner.com/technology/home.jsp [http://perma.cc/ACE5-DY7E].  
37   See, e.g., Legaltech News, which frequently publishes articles on information governance at its website. 
Information governance is also being covered at legal technology conferences. See, e.g., Ed Silverstein, Legaltech West Panel 
to Ready Organizations for Infogov Explosion, LEGALTECH NEWS (May 21, 2015), http://www.legaltechnews.com/latest-
news/id=1202727128163/Legaltech-West-Panel-to-Ready-Organizations-for-Infogov-Explosion 
[http://perma.cc/9SX9-9NGG]. 
38   Id.  
39   Vasant Raval and Greg Dyche, Seven Myths of Information Governance, 4 ISACA J., Aug. 2012, at 26. 
40   See AMELIA PHILLIPS ET AL., E-DISCOVERY: AN INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL EVIDENCE 41-42, 175-77 (2014); 
LINDA VOLONINO AND IAN REDPATH, E-DISCOVERY FOR DUMMIES 240-49 (2010). 
7 
 4.  Access: Who can and should be using the information and for what purpose? 
5.  Interaction: How do users manipulate/interact with the information?  
6.  Compliance: What social and legal obligations are attached to the information? 
7.  Risk: What happens if this information is leaked or stolen or misused? 
8.  Retention/destruction: What is the useful life of the information?  
9.  Responsibility: Who is/should be accountable for the information?41 
The result is a system that distinguishes between different kinds of information based on importance 
to the business, usefulness, obligations, and longevity, and provides for the storage and use of that 
information. The information governance system can then anticipate e-discovery and be prepared for 
litigation holds. It also ensures that there are destruction policies and technologies in place so that 
information can be deleted once its useful lifespan is over. It incorporates compliance, privacy, and 
security considerations. Finally, an effective information governance system provides for information 
recovery in the wake of disaster by backing up essential data. By viewing the many facets of information 
as a whole, planning for the total life of the information is more effective and valuable than if planning is 
done piecemeal. 
To appreciate the effects of information governance, consider more closely the matter of e-discovery. 
As discussed above,42 information governance owes its development, in part, to the explosive growth in e-
discovery and therefore is designed in part to address complexities of e-discovery.43 The overarching 
importance of information governance relative to e-discovery is explained by Linda Luperchio, Director of 
Information Lifecycle Governance and E-discovery at The Hanover Insurance Group:  
[Information] governance expertise is as critical, if not more critical, than e-discovery 
expertise. If you don’t approach…governance in the right way, the volume of work 
regarding e-discovery is going to go off the charts. Data grows at an alarming rate, so you 
have to get a handle on it as early as possible.44 
Information governance helps with many of the tasks involved in e-discovery. For example, a data map 
is a useful tool for creating a shared understanding of data types and locations e-discovery. A data map can 
identify all the IT systems (including legacy systems45) and what they hold, back-up and retention policies, 
                                                 
41   The questions are derived from Christian P. Walker, Principles of Holistic Information Governance, The Info Gov 
Guerrilla (Apr. 1, 2013), https://christianpwalker.wordpress.com/2013/04/01/principles-of-holistic-information-
governance/ [http://perma.cc/4WYF-GVC7]. 
42   See supra Part II.      
43   It has also been posited that techniques used in e-discovery, such as predictive coding, can inform information 
governance—and be a valuable part of the expertise lawyers provide for their clients. See Bennett B. Borden and Jason R. 
Baron, Finding the Signal in the Noise: Information Governance, Analytics, and the Future of Legal Practice, 20 RICH. J.L. & TECH. 7 
(2014).  
44   Chris DiMarco, Strong Info Governance Policies Can Drive Down E-Discovery Expenditure, LEGALTECH NEWS (March 
9, 2015), http://www.legaltechnews.com/id=1202720029692/Strong-Info-Governance-Policies-Can-Drive-Down-
EDiscovery-Expenditure [http://perma.cc/F3CT-G8HF].  
45   “Legacy systems” are technologies that are no longer used (e.g. floppy disks or an old email server). Even 
though no longer used, the outdated technology may contain data relevant to current business activities or litigation.  
8 
 and who is responsible for these systems and policies.46 A data map is much easier to create – and hopefully 
already exists – if information governance is in place. Because information governance provides for all 
aspects of the information lifecycle, including discovery in litigation, an information governance plan will 
also ease the implementation of litigation holds, data collection, winnowing for relevance, review for 
privilege, and then production. Finally, information governance helps defend the destruction of data through 
the routine application of standard policies.  
The role of e-discovery and other information functions in the larger information governance picture is 
illustrated by the Information Governance Reference Model (IGRM). The IGRM was developed by EDRM, 
a group of electronic discovery experts who originally created the well-known Electronic Discovery 
Reference  Model.47 The  IGRM  is  intended  to  illustrate  and  inform  the  discussion  of  information 
governance and continues to be tweaked as insights arise. The IGRM serves as a visual means of 
understanding what people mean when they talk about information governance. It is not intended to be 
prescriptive  but  rather  “to  provide  a  reference  that  will  promote  cross-functional  dialogue  and 
collaboration.”48 
                                                 
46   For more on data maps and IG, see Information Maps: A Multi-Disciplinary Must, IRON MOUNTAIN, 
http://www.ironmountain.com/~/media/Files/Iron%20Mountain/Knowledge%20Center/Reference%20Library/Whi
te%20Paper/I/Information%20Maps%20%20A%20Multi%20Disciplinary%20Must.pdf?dmc=1&ts=20150611T09522
27325 [http://perma.cc/QN2F-FMLQ] (last visited June 11, 2015).  
47   The Electronic Discovery Reference Model (EDRM) is a conceptual portrayal of the iterative stages of the e-
discovery process. These stages include information governance, identification, preservation, collection, processing, 
review, analysis, production, and presentation. See EDRM Stages, EDRM, http://www.edrm.net/resources/edrm-stages-
explained [https://perma.cc/U6BV-NWF4]. 
48   Information Governance Reference Model, EDRM, http://www.edrm.net/projects/igrm [http://perma.cc/X43M-
UNPK].  
9 
  
Fig. 1: The IGRM Model. Used with persmission. 
The outer ring of the IGRM shows the entities within an organization that have responsibility for and 
interest in information at some point during the information’s lifecycle. Briefly, Business is concerned with 
the development and application of information. Legal and Records/Information Management (RIM) are 
concerned  with  identifying,  organizing,  and  retaining  information  for  compliance  purposes,  legal 
protections of value, and responses to litigation. IT is concerned with implementing and maintaining access, 
storage, and retrieval systems. Closely related to IT is Privacy/ Security, which is concerned with protecting 
information from theft and corruption. Together, IT and Privacy/Security likely bear responsibility for 
disaster recovery as well.49 Depending on the nature and size of the organization, boundaries between these 
                                                 
49   Recovering from a natural disaster or something similarly devastating is typically the impetus behind the 
planning, but a security breach is actually more likely. A recovery plan should be part of information governance 
structure. In another example, banks and financial institutions are expected to have recovery plans to restore their 
10 
 entities may be blurred or even nonexistent, and distinctions may arise more from how information is 
viewed than from which department is doing the viewing.  
The center of the diagram illustrates the basic lifecycle of information as it moves from creation and 
use in the business sector of the model through retention to eventual disposal. Notice that during the middle 
stage, the need for litigation holds and discovery falls in the purview of the legal sector while storage and 
security are handled at the intersection of the IT and privacy/security sectors. Disposal falls into the RIM 
and IT sectors as it is often RIM that identifies information that is no longer needed and IT ensures proper 
disposal.  
The inner and outer circular arrows of the diagram emphasize that information governance is holistic, 
ongoing, and unified—an approach to information that requires integration of policies and transparency of 
process throughout the governance structure.  
IV. HOW DOES INFORMATION GOVERNANCE RELATE TO AND DIFFER FROM 
OTHER INFORMATION MANAGEMENT SCHEMES? 
Organizational and information experts employ a slew of acronyms and terms to talk about coping with 
information. In addition to information governance, these include governance of information technology 
(IT governance), information management, records (and information) management (RIM), knowledge 
management (KM), enterprise content management (ECM), and big data analytics. The distinctions 
between information governance and other information management models are an important part of the 
shared vocabulary that contributes to information governance’s success.  50 Without this background 
knowledge, people may well resist the idea of information governance and see it as duplicative of other 
systems or just another trend. Communicating that information governance is an overarching, systemic goal 
different from other schemes is vital.  
Because it is intended to cover the entire lifecycle of information in all parts of the organization, 
information governance is generally viewed as the most expansive of the information management 
schemes. The focus is on enterprise-wide strategy and policy covering everything from incoming data and 
analytics to storage and search, security and privacy, retention and deletion. A few voices maintain that 
information governance is actually narrower than it claims to be because it insists on “governing” and 
categorizing information, more like the compliance- and control-focused records management systems. 51 
According to one e-discovery attorney, this characterization of information governance is especially true 
now with the seas of information so vast—and expanding exponentially—that governing it is infeasible. 52  
                                                 
financial soundness and business operations in the event of financial disaster. See Luca Amorello and Sacha Huber, 
Recovery Planning: A New Valuable Corporate Governance Framework for Credit Institutions, 3 L. & ECON. YEARLY REV. 296 
(2014), available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2577760 [http://perma.cc/6UVW-ZXPV].  
50   On the importance of shared vocabulary, see Mintzer, supra note 24. 
51   See, e.g., Ralph Losey, Information Governance v. Search: The Battle Lines Are Redrawn, E-DISCOVERY TEAM (Feb. 8, 
2015), http://e-discoveryteam.com/2015/02/08/information-governance-v-search-the-battle-lines-are-redrawn/ 
[http://perma.cc/9JPS-RVKW]. 
52   Id. 
11 
 To understand the extent of information governance, it helps to contrast it with the other schemes for 
managing information. While it may seem like little more than semantics, “information management” 
generally refers to an approach that emphasizes tactics and targeted procedures rather than information 
governance’s enterprise-wide strategy and focus on information as an array of assets. Likewise, “enterprise 
content management” sounds like it has the scope of information governance, but pundits describe ECM as 
concentrating on documents rather than data. ECM views documents as having a defined purpose according 
to content rather than multi-faceted expressions of data with untapped potential value.53 ECM has also been 
described as a noun rather than a verb, the implication being that it is a static event and not an ongoing 
process that changes as technologies and information change.54  
“Records management” concentrates on the organization and retention of information required for 
internal functions or by external bodies. This covers areas such as human resources, financial records and 
filings, product testing, supply chains certifications, and the like. Records management tends to focus on 
strict organizational systems, retention schedules, and destruction of material no longer needed.  
“Knowledge management” focuses on the capture and sharing of work products, innovative ideas, 
insights, and lessons learned from experience. Knowledge management is concerned with collecting and 
curating information with high business utility. As defined early on in the KM movement, “[k]nowledge 
management is the process of capturing, distributing, and effectively using knowledge.”55 The emphasis is 
on sharing information in order to make better business decisions, streamline an organization’s production, 
and avoid re-inventing the wheel. Examples include building databases of work products, identifying and 
developing experts, and creating communities of practice.56 Typically, knowledge management does not 
relate to  e-discovery  (either  in its anticipation  or  implementation),  management  of information for 
compliance purposes, or enterprise-wide retention, destruction, privacy, and security issues. 
“Big data” is data that is too large and diverse to handle on ordinary computing platforms with the usual 
business software. Gartner, the technology research and advising company, coined the often used 3Vs 
definition: data that is huge along three metrics—volume, velocity, and variety.57 In other words, big data 
is generated at unprecedented speeds and in numerous formats from multiple sources. Big data analytics 
are the methods and tools used to extract useful information from the enormous pools of data that are 
developing as digital technology becomes more ubiquitous. An attraction of big data analytics is the idea 
that information does not have to be well-organized to be workable; tools can be developed to mine vast 
                                                 
53   Dave Hunt, Where Worlds Collide – Why Enterprise Content Management is not Information Governance, BARRACUDA 
(Feb. 2, 2015), https://blog.barracuda.com/2015/02/02/where-worlds-collide-why-enterprise-content-management-is-
not-information-governance/ [http://perma.cc/XL85-CB3R]. 
54   John Mancini, Content Management 2020: Thinking Beyond ECM (2015), available at http://info.aiim.org/cm2020 
[http://perma.cc/2BY7-RL7U]. 
55   Thomas H. Davenport, Saving IT's Soul: Human Centered Information Management, HARV. BUS. REV., Mar.-Apr. 
1994, at 119. 
56   Michael E. D. Koenig, What is KM? Knowledge Management Explained, KM WORLD (May 4, 2012), 
http://www.kmworld.com/Articles/Editorial/What-Is-.../What-is-KM-Knowledge-Management-Explained-82405.aspx 
[http://perma.cc/B74Q-KNYM]. 
57   Laney, Deja VVVu, supra note 27.  
12 
 and heterogeneous pools of data and still come up with useful results.58 It has been suggested that perhaps 
big  data  analytics  will  render  moot  the  notion  of  proportionality  in  discovery. 59 The  notion  of 
proportionality is currently intended to limit the scope and volume of document review in order to keep the 
cost of discovery from exceeding the value of the claim. Big data tools such as predictive coding are making 
massive searches much more feasible.60  
It is impossible to know exactly how big data analytics will evolve, but it is not the same as information 
governance. Where information governance is a strategic approach to and understanding of all information 
needs and uses in the enterprise, big data analytics is a category of tools that can be used within the 
information governance structure to improve the use of information assets.  
The term “data governance” is also evident in the literature. Sometimes this term is used to mean 
essentially the same thing as information governance.61 At other times, the term is used more narrowly, 
focusing on the nature and integrity of the data artifacts themselves rather than the knowledge they 
represent.   
Information governance and IT governance are also different concepts. Technology is key to all 
information management systems. It is both the cause of and cure for the data explosion. With so many 
applications, so many devices, and so many heterogeneous data environments, information technology 
departments can feel overwhelmed. As IT expert Chris Curran writes, “IT is stressing under the weight of 
applications, emerging tech, vendors and systems and sans the support of a seamless, flexible and sturdy 
integrated infrastructure.”62 IT governance focuses on managing hardware and software resources to help 
alleviate the stress. Information governance includes IT governance but at the same time looks beyond the 
                                                 
58   Despite the excitement surrounding big data, the analytics have limitations that are sometimes unrecognized. 
Economist Tim Harford points out that a statistical problem such as a sampling error or a sampling bias is not resolved 
by big data but rather magnified. As an example, consider all the data produced by Twitter users. It is a remarkably large 
data pool, and would thereby suggest greater statistical accuracy by virtue of the large sample size. The problem is that 
Twitter users are not representative of the population as a whole; the sample is not random. Similarly, very large data sets 
can make flukes seem more prominent than they really are. Statisticians and computer scientists are working on new 
techniques to address some of the issues with big data. Tim Harford, Big data: Are we making a big mistake?, FIN. TIMES 
(Mar. 28, 2014), http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/21a6e7d8-b479-11e3-a09a-00144feabdc0.html [http://perma.cc/2J97-
5RYD]. 
59   James Shook, Vendor Voice: Will Big Data Eat Proportionality?, LEGALTECH NEWS (Jan. 22, 2015), 
http://www.legaltechnews.com/id=1202715843471/Vendor-Voice-Will-Big-Data-Eat-Proportionality? 
[http://perma.cc/6QHP-U6XU].  
60   See generally Borden and Baron, supra note 43.  
61   See generally Kristin Weber et al., One Size Does Not Fit All--A Contingency Approach to Data Governance, 1 ACM J. 
DATA & INFO. QUAL., June 2009, Art. 4, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1515693.1515696.  
62   Chris Curran, Understanding IT Complexity, CIO DASHBOARD (June 2, 2015), http://www.ciodashboard.com/it-
strategy/understanding-it-complexity/ [http://perma.cc/MBY4-2U5S]. 
13 
 hardware and software to the content of the data and the information that can be pulled from it to determine 
its use and handling.63   
V.  HOW DO BUSINESSES MAKE INFORMATION GOVERNANCE HAPPEN? 
As noted above, the IGRM is primarily a tool to help people talk about information governance. 
Building a shared understanding about information’s value, use, and risk is vital because organizations can 
be overwhelmed by the idea of establishing information governance. They are paralyzed by the quantities 
of unmanaged information that can cost them dearly. To counter this paralysis, it is important to understand 
that information governance is an ongoing journey, not a destination. Policies, procedures, and decisions 
will need regular monitoring, further development, and tweaking.64  
It is also important to understand what may help or hinder information governance. Paul Tallon, a 
professor of information systems, has identified organizational factors that enable or inhibit information 
governance. Factors that enable information governance include:   
1.  An organizational strategy that focuses on customers and innovations; 
2.  Technology strategies that align with customer/innovation focus and call for specific behaviors; 
3.  A centralized organization with centralized IT; 
4.  Standardization and integration of IT systems; 
5.  A culture that promotes strategic use of information; 
6.  Being subject to regulations that specify requirements for collection/retention; and  
7.  An awareness of accelerating data growth. 
Factors that inhibit information governance include:  
1.  Product complexity and a broad product mix;  
2.  Outdated departmental silos (IT and others) and low process integration; 
3.  Pack-rat mentality in the organizational culture; and  
4.  Decentralization.65  
To see these factors in action, consider two examples. First, take a large university comprised of many 
separate schools—everything from the fine arts to medicine. This organization must cope with a vast range 
of information: grades, class schedules, websites, personal and medical data, parking systems, payroll and 
benefits, financial data, library systems, research data of all sorts, and, last but not least, email. Traditionally, 
universities are relatively siloed organizations—the School of Liberal Arts needs one system while the 
School of Engineering needs another. Faculty members have a sense of independence unique to academia, 
and students come and go. There may be a culture that promotes hanging on to data forever (albeit 
sometimes for good reason). At the same time, however, IT is likely to be largely centralized, and the 
university culture is likely to support innovation as well as strategic uses of information. In addition, a fair 
portion of the data held by universities is subject to regulation. These latter factors—centralization of IT, 
                                                 
63   Paul P. Tallon et al. The Information Artifact in IT Governance: Toward a Theory of Information Governance, 30 J. MGMT. 
INFO. SYS., Winter 2013-14, at 141. 
64   Vasant Raval and Greg Dyche, Seven Myths of Information Governance, 4 ISACA J. 1 (2012). 
65   Tallon, supra note 63.  
14 
 interest in innovation, information subject to regulation—may help information governance, but all told, a 
university is likely to face significant challenges in implementing information governance.  
Second, consider an architectural and civil engineering firm with 100 employees. This firm is highly 
focused on customer satisfaction and innovation. Its IT is centralized and standardized. The firm is small 
enough that there are few silos, although the human resources and finance departments each have their own 
ways of doing things. Services offered by the firm are not particularly diverse even though they handle 
projects of varying size. Most employees are aware of data growth issues and value a streamlined 
organization, but they also know it is important to keep records to document safety measures and design 
decisions. Compared to the university, the engineering firm is nimble and organized around a single 
purpose. It will face fewer challenges in implementing information governance.  
Experts largely agree that information governance requires buy-in, and preferably direction, from the 
top of the organization. Information governance does not directly generate revenue; funding will need to 
be thoroughly justified and understood by the very highest echelons of an organization.66 In addition, 
information governance—in both implementation and continual application—must be independent of any 
one unit and cut across boundaries within an organization. Information decisions must be made with the 
organization’s best interests in mind rather than the interests of individuals or departments within the 
organization.67  
A top-down approach to information governance brings together a team of leaders from key areas such 
as compliance, legal, IT, marketing, and operations. Together, these stakeholders and stewards work “to 
understand how each of them attaches value to their information, as well as understanding the life cycle of 
that information. …By building consensus and understanding, stakeholders will appreciate how their own 
specific needs impact each of the other groups and influence the overall information governance strategy.”68 
Top-down implementation of information governance is particularly effective at taking the holistic view of 
information that lies at the heart of information governance. Top-down approaches make the most cost-
effective use of outside consultants, happen more quickly, and leave fewer areas of duplication and 
overlapping effort.69  
On the other hand, the top-down approach to information governance may contribute to “analysis 
paralysis”—so much to do that no one knows where or how to start. The size and complexity of an 
enterprise-wide project may be overwhelming and a bottom-up approach may be more feasible.70 Small 
projects can be undertaken and then expanded to create the larger framework that will eventually support 
                                                 
66   Mintzer, supra note 24. 
67   SEDONA CONFERENCE, supra note 4, at 8. 
68   Peter Mullens, Information Governance – The top-down approach, BARRACUDA (Nov. 5, 2014), 
https://blog.barracuda.com/2014/11/05/information-governance-the-top-down-approach/ [http://perma.cc/AAD2-
9XXD].  
69   Id.  
70   Raval and Dyche, supra note 64.  
15 
 an enterprise-wide system.71 For example, Joe Garber, Vice-President of Information Governance for HP, 
writes that in cleaning up legacy data 
[o]rganizations can start small, focusing on a specific repository, department, or geography. 
This allows them to clean up legacy information quickly and without having to go through 
the hassle of getting everyone from every department or business unit to agree on policies 
and procedure. Perhaps more important, it allows them to realize tangible savings quickly, 
so they can make a business case for future projects based on facts. In short, information 
governance is no longer a “boil the ocean” proposition.72 
Christian P. Walker, an information systems consultant, writes about using guerilla tactics to introduce 
information governance into clients’ projects. With one client, he established good information governance 
practices within individual projects. These practices included sending links to documents rather than 
attachments, using versioning instead of iterative copies, labeling work consistently, applying retention and 
deletion schedules, and securing content.73 The organization’s vice-president of IT noticed, and asked how 
to implement information governance across the enterprise.74 Reflecting on this experience, Walker 
explained that “[s]ometimes you’ve just got to sneak IG into your client’s projects the same way you sneak 
veggies into a recalcitrant child’s diet.”75 
A bottom-up, small project approach to information governance may also result in fewer disruptions of 
current practices and deal more immediately with real problems.76 It may also avoid misunderstandings, 
unsuitable policies, and resistance that may follow when information governance is handed down from on 
high.  For  information  governance  to  work,  policies  must  suit  needs,  and  everyone  must  accept 
accountability for governance over the long haul and bear responsibility.77 Information governance is a 
shared undertaking, and involving data stakeholders is key. The CIO of University of Washington Medical 
Center puts it well:  
We have a master data map that looks at our six major areas of data…. We have a data 
management committee whose members are the owners of these six areas. They set the 
policies and decide what is core and peripheral…consult with administrators as to how 
                                                 
71   Id.  
72   Joe Garber, It will cost you if you don’t have an information governance strategy, 21 LEGALTECH NEWS, June 2015, at 41, 
42. 
73   Christian P. Walker, Guerrilla Tactics – IG whether they want it or not, INFO GOV GUERRILLA (Sept. 29, 2014), 
https://christianpwalker.wordpress.com/2014/09/29/ig-guerrilla-tactics/ [http://perma.cc/ND96-T4WR]. 
74   Id.  
75   Id.  
76   Peter Mullens, Information Governance – the bottom-up approach, BARRACUDA (Nov. 19, 2014), 
https://blog.barracuda.com/2014/11/19/information-governance-the-bottom-up-approach/ [http://perma.cc/ZT2W-
87NU].  
77   Debra Logan, What Is Information Governance? And Why Is It So Hard?, GARTNER (Jan. 11, 2010), 
http://blogs.gartner.com/debra_logan/2010/01/11/what-is-information-governance-and-why-is-it-so-hard/ 
[http://perma.cc/D9ND-3XFU].  
16 
 information is used. We also have a policy document that sets out roles for data custodians, 
stewards, and owners. Even if I’m the CIO, I don’t own the institution’s data….But being 
responsible for data integrity, storage, and security, I have a role as the main data steward. 
My job is executing policy.78 
This statement highlights not only user involvement in policy-setting but also shared oversight and the 
creation  of  ownership/stewardship  rights  and  responsibilities.  Tallon  refers  to  these  as  “structural 
practices.”79 In addition to these structural practices, successful information governance requires significant 
“relational practices” such as instruction, communication regarding user needs, and feedback on the 
effectiveness of policies and procedures.80  
This idea that both structural and relational practices are necessary highlights the fact that, in the end, 
comprehensive information governance requires both top-down and bottom-up input and commitment. 
Those with enterprise-wide accountability can provide big-picture analysis, insight into organizational 
goals, and leverage to see that goals are actually achieved. Those with hands-on experience with and 
responsibility for the various kinds of information bring detailed knowledge about data content and use 
along with the ability to actually execute procedures to the table. If either the top-down or bottom-up 
trajectory is missing, information governance will be more difficult to achieve. 
VI. THE IMPORTANCE OF INFORMATION GOVERNANCE INSTRUCTION 
Although there are still knowledge and skills gaps among attorneys regarding e-discovery,81 some 
lawyers have developed considerable expertise and others are beginning to get up to speed. Law firms are 
starting to offer more e-discovery services in-house and investing more money and expertise in e-discovery 
technology. According to the Law Firm e-Discovery Strategy Survey published in April 2015 by HBR 
Consulting, “[a] law firm’s capability to provide e-discovery services has gone from a novelty to a business 
necessity.”82 This is echoed in a 2015 advisory opinion from the California State Bar’s Standing Committee 
on Professional Responsibility and Conduct stating that the professional obligation of competency requires 
facility with e-discovery for any attorney dealing with litigation.83  
                                                 
78   Tallon, supra note 63.  
79   Id.  
80   Id.  
81   See supra text accompanying notes 17-18.   
82   HBR CONSULTING, LAW FIRM E-DISCOVERY STRATEGY SURVEY (2015), available at 
http://www.hbrconsulting.com/downloads/HBR_LDC_Law%20Firm_EDiscovery_EXECUTIVE%20SUMMARY_S
urvey_Results_May_2015.pdf [http://perma.cc/2DGR-67JY]; HBR Releases Results of Law Firm e-Discovery Strategy Survey, 
BUSINESSWIRE (May 27, 2015, 12:36 PM EDT), 
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20150527006283/en/HBR-Releases-Results-Law-Firm-e-Discovery-
Strategy#.VXIInNJVhHw [http://perma.cc/4NXN-J6VZ]. 
83   State Bar of Cal. Standing Comm. on Prof’l Responsibility & Conduct, Formal Op. No. 2015-193 (2015) 
(“Attorneys attorney handling e-discovery should be able to perform (either by themselves or in association with 
competent co-counsel or expert consultants) the following: 
• initially assess e-discovery needs and issues, if any;  
17 
 As the preceding sections explain, e-discovery cannot be dealt with in a vacuum.84 The Law Firm e-
Discovery Strategy Survey states that “assisting clients with Information Governance challenges” is an area 
where law firms can expand service offerings. Basri and Mack point out that counsel with expertise will be 
well-positioned to manage not only e-discovery but also “broader information governance activities for the 
corporation.”85  
Education is key to creating this competence. In their treatise eDiscovery for Corporate Counsel, Carole 
Basri and Mary Mack assert that “this means formal law school training for law students. …[T]he demand 
for lawyers who understand the law and technology…will outstrip the supply of qualified professionals.”86 
In a similar vein, Chris Gallagher, an expert on the e-discovery industry and an adjunct professor at Touro 
College of Law, writes that “eDiscovery and [other information technology-based] usable skills will ensure 
that recent law school graduates will be an immediate value to their clients, saving them both time and 
money.”87  
It is likely that demands for lawyers with information governance expertise will only increase as 
corporations  face  greater  information  obligations.  Charles  Ragan,  a  commercial  litigator,  draws  a 
                                                 
• implement/cause to implement appropriate ESI preservation procedures; 
• analyze and understand a client’s ESI systems and storage; 
• advise the client on available options for collection and preservation of ESI; 
• identify custodians of potentially relevant ESI; 
• engage in competent and meaningful meet and confer with opposing counsel concerning an e-discovery 
plan; 
• perform data searches; 
• collect responsive ESI in a manner that preserves the integrity of that ESI; and 
• produce responsive non-privileged ESI in a recognized and appropriate manner.”). 
84   See supra Parts II through V.  
85   CAROLE BASRI AND MARY MACK, EDISCOVERY FOR CORPORATE COUNSEL § 28:4 (2014-15).  
86   Id.  
87   Chris Gallagher, eDiscovery: The Crucial Next Step in Law School Curriculum, BLOOMBERGBNA LEGAL 
COMMUNITIES: BIG LAW BUSINESS (June 5, 2015), https://bol.bna.com/ediscovery-the-crucial-next-step-in-law-school-
curriculum/ [http://perma.cc/U3UV-8JNE]. Many commentators in the legal blogosphere have echoed the need for 
instruction in e-discovery and other information technology related skills in the law school curriculum (and elsewhere) as 
well. See, e.g., Shannon Capone Kirk and Kristin G. Ali, “Teach Your Children Well” – A Case for Teaching E-Discovery in Law 
Schools, E-DISCOVERY TEAM, http://e-discoveryteam.com/school/%E2%80%9Cteach-your-children-
well%E2%80%9D-a-case-for-teaching-e-discovery-in-law-schools/ [http://perma.cc/9BKU-SHGV] (last visited June 5, 
2015); Hilary Daninhirsch, E-discovery training crucial to a full legal education, INSIDE COUNSEL (June 16, 2014), 
http://www.insidecounsel.com/2014/06/16/e-discovery-training-crucial-to-a-full-legal-educa [http://perma.cc/4EML-
J6SC]; Michael Fitzgerald, 14 Reasons Law Schools Must Teach Tech, INFO. WEEK, (July 9, 2013), 
http://www.informationweek.com/mobile/mobile-devices/14-reasons-law-schools-must-teach-tech/d/d-id/1110682? 
[http://perma.cc/NH5A-2ASD]. See also Richard Granat and Marc Lauritsen, Teaching the Technology of Practice: The Top 10 
Schools, 40 LAW PRAC., July-Aug. 2014, at 44, available at 
http://www.americanbar.org/publications/law_practice_magazine/2014/july-august/teaching-the-technology-of-
practice-the-10-top-schools.html [http://perma.cc/KTE3-A9GW]. 
18 
 connection  between  the  Delaware  Chancery  Court’s  opinion  in  In  re  Caremark  International, Inc. 
Derivative Litigation,88 which expanded the oversight duty of a corporate board of directors to include 
ensuring compliant management of records to prevent corporate losses, and the need for information 
governance.89 In light of data security breaches and the rising costs of e-discovery, Ragan’s point adds 
considerable weight to the argument that law students need instruction in information governance.  
Similarly, law firms are under pressure from clients to demonstrate that they “maintain[] high quality 
internal information governance...strategies and practices.”90 Clients want assurances that law firms are 
equipped to address data security and privacy concerns. Lawyers need to be able to discuss information 
governance knowledgeably and to show that their own practice is engaged in rigorous information 
governance.  
A few schools are already including information governance in their e-discovery or “technology of 
law” curricula.91 Gallagher notes that  
[c]lasses that follow the Electronic Discovery Reference Model (EDRM)92 beginning with 
Information Governance would give students real world understanding of the flow of data. 
Corporations are working harder than ever to balance legal and regulatory obligations with 
business efficiency and a goal of reducing the cost of electronically stored information 
(ESI), limiting liability, and increasing process efficiency.93 
Nonetheless, the vast majority of schools are not teaching information governance, even at a time when 
students are searching for ways to differentiate themselves in a tight job market.94 To ameliorate this 
situation,  more  law  librarians and  other  legal  educators  need  not  only  the basic  knowledge  about 
information governance provided in the previous sections but also ideas about how it can be taught.  
VII.  TEACHING INFORMATION GOVERNANCE 
                                                 
88   In re Caremark Int’l Inc. Derivative Litigation, 698 A.2d 959 (Del. Ch. 1996)  
89   Ragan, supra note 26, at ¶11-15.  
90   Erin E. Harrison, The Firm of the Future: Utilizing IG Assessments to Meet Clients' Needs, LEGALTECH NEWS (Aug. 
31, 2015), http://www.legaltechnews.com/id=1202736089998 [http://perma.cc/L6P3-5NAY]. 
91   The University of Minnesota Law School offers a seminar in information governance taught by Charles Ragan. 
Course Details, UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA LAW SCHOOL, https://www.law.umn.edu/current/alphabetical-course-
list/details.html?courseNumber=6705 [http://perma.cc/7NJF-TWHJ]. The Cardozo School of Law is offering a 
program called the Cardozo Data Law Initiative that includes information governance in its curriculum. Cardozo Data 
Law Initiative, CARDOZO LAW, http://www.cardozo.yu.edu/CDLI [http://perma.cc/7KU8-7LT6]. Similarly, Vanderbilt 
Law School offers a course entitled Electronic Discovery and Information Governance. Course Information: Electronic 
Discovery and Information Governance, VANDERBILT LAW SCHOOL, https://law.vanderbilt.edu/courses/304 
[http://perma.cc/3F96-PN2X].  
92   See EDRM, supra note 47.  
93   See Gallagher, supra note 86.  
94   See id.  
19 
 Information governance has a unique manifestation in every enterprise, and, to an extent, teaching 
information governance is about communicating a mindset and a deep understanding of information and 
its uses. It is not about a specific set of skills or knowledge. This makes the topic ill-suited for the lecture- 
and question-based approaches typical of law school classrooms. Instead, it invites a hands-on, active 
learning pedagogy such as problem-based learning or the case-study method. These approaches fit well 
with the American Bar Association’s accreditation requirement for experiential learning instituted in the 
2014-15 standards.95   
Problem-based learning (PBL) inverts the traditional approach of providing substantive material to 
students and posing questions to test their comprehension and retention. In PBL, the teacher presents 
students with a problem, a real-life (or close to) situation. The problem should be somewhat messy—“ill-
structured” as the pedagogical literature terms it.96 The problem should not have one pat answer but rather 
pose decision points with multiple possible answers. PBL lets students explore and learn from realistic 
complexities.97  
Students, typically working in small groups, chart their own course of learning as they investigate the 
problem. The teacher engages with the students in the role of tutor and facilitator. Once the students reach 
solutions, their groups spend time reflecting on their efforts. They consider what they have learned, how 
they learned it, and what they might have done differently. They consider how to apply what they learned 
in one situation to other situations. In short, problem-based learning offers students the opportunity to learn 
substantive material, its application to real problems, and problem-solving skills all at the same time while 
maintaining ownership over their own learning process.98   
                                                 
95   See Standards 303(a)(3) (Curriculum) and 304 (Simulation Courses and Law Clinics). American Bar Association, 
ABA Standards and Rules of Procedure for Approval of Law Schools (2014-2015).  
96   David H. Jonassen and Woei Hung, All Problems are Not Equal: Implications for Problem-Based Learning, in 
ESSENTIAL READINGS IN PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING: EXPLORING AND EXTENDING THE LEGACY OF HOWARD S. 
BARROWS 17, 21-15 (Andrew Walker et al. eds., 2015). 
97   Id.  
98   See, e.g., John R. Savery, Overview of Problem-Based Learning: Definitions and Distinctions, in ESSENTIAL READINGS IN 
PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING: EXPLORING AND EXTENDING THE LEGACY OF HOWARD S. BARROWS 5 (Andrew Walker 
et al. eds., 2015). PBL’s development and success in medical schools and wider adoption in other disciplines at all levels, 
including law, has been thoroughly documented elsewhere. See generally ESSENTIAL READINGS IN PROBLEM-BASED 
LEARNING: EXPLORING AND EXTENDING THE LEGACY OF HOWARD S. BARROWS (Andrew Walker et al. eds., 2015); 
JOSÉ A. AMADOR ET AL., THE PRACTICE OF PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING: A GUIDE TO IMPLEMENTING PBL IN THE 
COLLEGE CLASSROOM (2006); THE POWER OF PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING (Barbara J. Duch et al. eds., 2001); 
Christine Ver Ploeg and Jim Hilbert, Project-Based Learning and ADR Education: One Model for Teaching ADR Students to 
Problem Solve for Real, 11 APPALACHIAN L.J. 157 (2011-12); Keith H. Hirokawa, Critical Enculturation: Using Problems to Teach 
Law, 2 DREXEL L. REV. 1 (2009-10); Shirley Lung, The Problem Method: No Simple Solution, 45 WILLAMETTE L. REV. 723 
(2008-09); Cath Sylvester et al., Problem-based learning and clinical legal education: What can clinical educators learn from PBL?, 4 
INT’L J. CLINICAL LEGAL EDUC. 39 (2004); Fiona Martin, Using a Modified Problem Based Learning Approach to Motivate and 
Enhance Student Learning of Taxation Law, 37 LAW TEACHER 55 (2003). Given the wide availability of information on 
problem-based learning, the focus here need only be on designing a PBL unit on information governance.  
20 
 One drawback of using problem-based learning to teach information governance is that PBL, at least 
in theory, embraces an open inquiry model in which students decide what the questions are and how to seek 
answers.99 Conceivably, students could pursue avenues that do not help them learn about information 
governance.  
The case-study method100  provides a more structured and guided inquiry than PBL and may be more 
appropriate depending on learning objectives and time considerations.101 The case-study method referred 
to here is not the use of appellate cases to discern legal principles as in the typical law school course. Instead 
it is the business school approach in which students are presented business situations and dilemmas based 
on real companies and background materials to help them understand these dilemmas. Students take on the 
role of decision-makers and explore through discussion, debate, and analysis what could or should be done 
and what the consequences might be. Students then examine what decisions were actually made and how 
those decisions played out.102  
An information governance project lends itself well to either of these active learning approaches.103 
Applicable learning objectives might include: 
•  Describe complexity of information assets and systems in today’s businesses. 
•  Articulate the purpose and benefits of information governance. 
•  Explain how information governance can work. 
•  Identify and analyze specific risk areas and areas for improvement in business under study. 
•  Develop recommendations for implementation of information governance with emphasis on risk 
areas.  
                                                 
99   It should also be noted that PBL purists urge that this pedagogical method should not be used piecemeal but 
rather only across entire courses or even curricula. See Savery, supra note 97. Nonetheless, instructors have documented 
success with smaller PBL units. See, e.g., Amador, supra note 97.  
100   It is also called simply the “case method” but this creates even more opportunity for confusion with the typical 
law school classroom approach.  
101   See M. Srinivasan et al., Comparing problem-based learning with case-based learning: Effects of a major curricular shift at two 
institutions, 82 ACADEMIC MEDICINE, Jan. 2007, at 74.  
102   For more detailed information on the business school case study method and its use in legal education, see 
Michelle M. Harner and Robert J. Rhee, Deal Deconstructions, Case Studies, and Case Simulations: Toward Practice Readiness with 
New Pedagogies in Teaching Business and Transactional Law, 3 AM. U. BUS. L. REV. 81 (2014); Michelle M. Harner and Robert 
J. Rhee, Innovation in Teaching LLC: Teaching LLCs Through a Problem-Based Approach, 71 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 489 (2014); 
Judy Gedge, Should Deficiency Judgments be Banned? Teaching Materials Designed to Promote an Informed Student Debate, 19 J.L. 
BUS. & ETHICS. 65 (2013); Celeste M. Hammond, Borrowing from the B Schools: The Legal Case Study as Course Materials for 
Transaction Oriented Elective Courses: A Response to the Challenges of the MacCrate Report and the Carnegie Foundation for 
Advancement of Teaching Report on Legal Education, 11 TRANSACTIONS 9 (2009); Todd D. Rakoff and Martha Minow, A Case 
for Another Case Method, 60 VAND. L. REV. 597 (2007); Bradley T. Borden, Using the Client-File Method to Teach Transactional 
Law, 17 CHAP. L. REV. 101 (2013). 
103   Active learning is a broad term referring to activities that demand more of learners than merely listening to 
someone speak and taking notes. The purpose of active learning is to provide opportunities for learners to become 
engaged in the material and take responsibility for their own learning.  
21 
 •  Prepare and give a presentation (or prepare written report) explaining information governance, its 
importance to the business, and recommended implementation to corporate officers.  
With these objectives in mind, the instructor can craft a problem scenario in which a business has a 
variety of information assets in various forms and locations with different purposes and stewards. Consider 
the example above of the architectural firm. A scenario could be crafted in which this architectural firm is 
sued for failure to use low-e glass in the windows of an apartment building, making the apartments 
inefficient in warm weather.104 In the course of discovery, the lawyers (students) identify issues with the 
firm’s use of data. Some possible issues include: employees who sometimes use personal computers for 
work;  computers that  have  been  wiped  without  appropriate  backup and analysis  of their  contents; 
employees who have left the firm and taken their laptops with them; backup systems that are not always 
run on schedule; records retention schedules that are nonexistent or not followed; data stuck in legacy 
systems; a lack of guidelines for email storage and retention; no system for preserving work-related text 
messages; and scattered responsibility for regulatory compliance. This “ill-structured” problem becomes 
the basis for the students’ research into information governance and development of a client proposal that 
identifies problem areas, and recommends and explains implementation of information governance.  
In a PBL approach, the groups of students can be expected to conduct their own research and learn   
how to look beyond the legal sources such as cases and statutes with which they are familiar. This may 
prove too time-intensive, though, due to the large number of articles and business blog posts on information 
governance. Using a more guided-inquiry approach, the instructor can create an electronic library or 
bibliography for students to draw on.105 Students would still have to analyze and sift the materials but will 
be prevented from going too far astray.  
For the case-study approach, the instructor can select a real-world information governance problem in 
which the company's actual solutions are documented. For example, in the last decade, Intel revised its 
management of information from simple protection of data to a “protect-to-enable” governance approach. 
Both the before and after governance structures and the issues addressed are discussed in a 2013 article in 
MIS Quarterly Executive.106 An instructor could assign the first half of the article to set the scene and 
establish the problems. Students can then use information governance materials, and perhaps more 
information about Intel, to discuss solutions. The second half of the article can then be used to illustrate 
what decisions were actually made and prompt discussion of how those decisions have played out.   
With either problem-based learning or a case-study approach, students will be immersed in realistic 
issues, and expected to explore information governance literature and propose solutions—all designed to 
simulate a real-world situation arising out of the e-discovery context. 
                                                 
104   See Fred A. Berstein, Lawsuit Suggests New Liability for Architects, ARCHITECTURAL RECORD (Aug. 20, 2014), 
http://archrecord.construction.com/news/2014/08/140820-Lawsuit-Suggests-New-Liability-for-Architects.asp 
[http://perma.cc/EAL3-BVVV]. 
105   See Appendix A for a list of suggested materials.  
106   Paul P. Tallon et al. The Evolution of Information Governance at Intel, 12 MIS QUARTERLY EXECUTIVE, Dec. 2013, at 
189.  
22 
 VIII. CONCLUSION 
Implementing information governance is difficult, especially given the exponential growth trajectory 
of information, but the effort pays off. Information governance leads to reductions in risks, errors, costs, 
and lawsuits and improves decision-making, customer satisfaction, and effective use of data.107 In its 
Commentary on Information Governance, published in December 2013, the Sedona Conference provides 
telling examples of how information governance can benefit different types of organizations in different 
ways.108 A business such as Wal-Mart that focuses on efficiency and cost control may benefit from 
information governance because it helps streamline information flows and reduces unnecessary data 
storage. An organization in a highly regulated field such as health insurance or finance may benefit from 
the assurance of compliance supplied by information governance. An organization that depends on 
creativity such as a graphic design firm or a marketing firm may find that information governance 
maximizes the accessibility and usability of its information assets.109 For an organization of any kind, it is 
also the new reality that people outside the organization—judges, regulators, insurers, suppliers, customers, 
clients, and future hires—may expect information governance.110   
Trends in business management come and go, and information governance has its detractors who claim 
it is already passé thanks to cheap storage and powerful search algorithms.111 Nonetheless, the purposes 
and principles of information governance—regardless of what it is called or exactly how it is defined—are 
both timeless and timely. As Joe Garber, Vice-President of Information Governance for HP, explains, “With 
growing enterprise data posing so many challenges—and perhaps holding so much untapped value—
organizations simply can’t wait any longer…. The time to act is now….”112 The time for law schools to 
prepare students for this demand is now as well.  
   
                                                 
107   Id. Tallon cautions that the positive effects of information governance were easier to see in mid-level results 
than at the firm-level, e.g., it is easier to see fewer errors than to correlate information governance to greater profitability. 
108   SEDONA CONFERENCE, supra note 4, at 5-6. 
109   Id.  
110   See BARCLAY T. BLAIR, MAKING THE CASE FOR INFORMATION GOVERNANCE: 10 REASONS WHY 
INFORMATION GOVERNANCE MAKES SENSE 5-10 (2011), http://barclaytblair.com/2011/08/22/making-the-case-for-
ig-ebook/. 
111   See, e.g., Losey, supra note 51.  
112   Garber, supra note 72, at 41.  
 
23 
 APPENDIX A:  
MATERIALS ON INFORMATION GOVERNANCE FOR STUDENT PROJECT 
1.  SEDONA CONFERENCE, COMMENTARY ON INFORMATION GOVERNANCE (2013), available at 
https://thesedonaconference.org/publication/The%20Sedona%20Conference%C2%AE%20Com
mentary%20on%20Information%20Governance (providing a comprehensive but manageable 
explanation of information governance with strong connections drawn to the legal 
considerations). 
2.  ALAN MACCLELLAN, INFORMATION GOVERNANCE AND ASSURANCE: REDUCING RISK, 
PROMOTING POLICY (2014) (discussing the essential information knowledge and skills necessary 
in information governance). 
3.  ROBERT F. SMALLWOOD, INFORMATION GOVERNANCE: CONCEPTS, STRATEGIES, AND BEST 
PRACTICES (2014) (covering all aspects of information governance from big picture to best 
practices).  
4.  BARCLAY T. BLAIR, MAKING THE CASE FOR INFORMATION GOVERNANCE:10 REASONS WHY IG 
MAKES SENSE (2010), http://barclaytblair.files.wordpress.com/2011/08/making-the-case-for-
information-governance-barclay-t-blair.pdf [http://perma.cc/J3AN-BFHX] (presenting the 
necessity of information governance) 
5.  Charles R. Ragan, Information Governance: It’s a Duty and It’s Smart Business, 19 RICHMOND J. 
L. & TECH. 12 (2013) (explaining information governance and its importance).  
6.  Bennett B. Borden and Jason R. Baron, Finding the Signal in the Noise: Information Governance, 
Analytics, and the Future of Legal Practice, 20 RICHMOND J. L. & TECH. 7 (2014) (discussing the 
value of information governance in making information more usable in legal contexts).  
7.  How the Information Governance Reference Model (IGRM) Complements ARMA International’s 
Generally Accepted Recordkeeping Principles (GARP®), EDRM (Dec. 2011), 
http://www.edrm.net/resources/edrm-white-paper-series/igrm-garp [http://perma.cc/599W-REU6] 
(detailing the relationship between the IGRM and GARP with a focus on assessing the maturity 
level of an organization’s information governance). 
8.  Paul P. Tallon et al. The Evolution of Information Governance at Intel, 12 MIS QUARTERLY 
EXECUTIVE, Dec. 2013, at 189 (discussing implementation of information governance at Intel, 
moving the company from a "protect" mindset to a "protect-to-enable" mindset with regard to its 
data). 
9.  Kristin Weber et al., One Size Does Not Fit All—A Contingency Approach to Data Governance, 1 
ACM J. DATA & INFO. QUALITY, June 2009, at Art. 4 (applies concepts from IT governance to 
data or information governance).  
10. Harry Pugh, Information Governance: A Practical Approach for the Dodd-Frank Era, 29 WALL 
STREET &TECH., Feb. 2011 (focusing on the need for information governance in financial 
institutions, emphasizing defensible disposal and records management).  
24 
 11. Mario Silic and Andrea Beck, Factors Impacting Information Governance in the Mobile Device 
Dual-Use Context, 23 RECORDS MGMT. J. 73 (2013) (focusing on issues arising from mobile 
technologies and bring-your-own-device policies). 
12. Juerg Hagmann, Information Governance--Beyond the Buzz, 23 RECORDS MGMT. J. 228 (2013) 
(investigating information governance from the perspective of someone familiar with records 
management practices, and emphasizing information governance's broader holistic perspective).  
13. Deborah H. Juhnke, Four Steps for Conquering Information Chaos, INFO. MGMT., Mar./Apr. 
2013, at 35 (focusing on accountability, assessment, analysis, action, and audit to achieve 
information governance). 
14. Sam McCollum, A Roadmap for Effective Information Governance, INFO. MGMT., Jan./Feb. 
2013, at 27 (discussing thirteen steps in developing a "strategic information management" plan 
and roadmap in the context of information governance). 
15. Debra Logan, What is Information Governance? And why is it so hard?, GARTNER (Jan. 11, 
2010), http://blogs.gartner.com/debra_logan/2010/01/11/what-is-information-governance-and-
why-is-it-so-hard/ [http://perma.cc/D9ND-3XFU] (offering a quick read on information 
governance basics). 
16. Debra Logan, How Can Governance Succeed?, GARTNER (Jan. 25, 2010), 
http://blogs.gartner.com/debra_logan/2010/01/25/how-can-governance-succeed/ 
[http://perma.cc/2BBA-9JPP] (following up on Logan’s earlier post with a more in-depth look at 
what is required for information governance to be successful). 
17. Christian P. Walker, Principles of Holistic Information Governance, INFO GOV GUERRILLA (Apr. 
1, 2013), https://christianpwalker.wordpress.com/2013/04/01/principles-of-holistic-information-
governance/ [http://perma.cc/4WYF-GVC7] (providing a quick checklist of considerations when 
undertaking information governance).  
 
 
25 
 