2011]  BOOK REVIEWS        263 
 
 
 
 
 
Research Handbook on the Protection of Intellectual Property under WTO 
Rules. Edited by Carlos M. Correa. Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA; 
Edward Elgar Publishing, 2010. Pp. xi, 751. ISBN 978-1-84720-904-7. 
UK£185.00; US$320.00. 
 
Research Handbook on the Interpretation and Enforcement of Intellectual 
Property under WTO Rules. Edited by Carlos M. Correa. Cheltenham, UK; 
Northampton, MA; Edward Elgar Publishing, 2010. Pp. ix, 309. ISBN 978-1-
84980-107-2. UK£115.00; US$195.00. 
 
  These books are the first two volumes in the Research Handbooks on 
the WTO series. As of this writing, two additional volumes are planned. The 
first two volumes start the series on solid scholarly footing and would make 
good acquisitions for libraries supporting advanced researchers studying 
international trade, patents, trademarks, and copyright. 
With the adoption of the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement, the WTO became a major forum for 
negotiating intellectual property rules. The first book’s twenty-one chapters 
cover a wide range of issues relating to the TRIPS Agreement, including 
copyright, patents, trademarks, geographical indicators, and semiconductor 
chip designs. The volume’s scope is impressive and makes it suitable as a 
reference volume. Many of the chapters are largely descriptive, detailing the 
history of a treaty’s adoption, the proceedings of a trade dispute, or the 
provisions of a statute. The contributors offer proposals and interpretations, 
but the emphasis on description will be valuable to readers simply seeking to 
gain an understanding of a treaty or case. This is an advanced work and 
readers just beginning to explore international intellectual property law may 
want to do some introductory reading to get some grounding in the terms of 
art and important legal actors.  
The second volume, on interpretation and enforcement of intellectual 
property rules, has a much narrower scope. The ten chapters analyze the 
interpretive principles adopted by dispute settlement panels. While the WTO 
 264  INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF LEGAL INFORMATION  [Vol. 39.2 
 
panels do not produce binding precedent, the chapters will help readers 
understand how trade disputes involving intellectual property are decided and 
how the decisions are enforced under different countries’ legal systems. 
Aside from the TRIPS Agreement as the common object of study, there are 
few characteristics unifying the chapters in either volume. Citation format 
varies a bit, and some chapters have reference lists, while others use only 
footnotes. The index for each book is a valuable tool, but the volumes could 
also benefit from unified bibliographies and glossaries defining all the various 
acronyms that are liberally sprinkled throughout the chapters. Most of the 
chapters are original works; a few are noted as being revisions of earlier 
scholarly articles or reports. These books will be useful sources for advanced 
scholars of international trade and intellectual property law. Libraries 
supporting more introductory collections on these topics may not need either 
volume. Most libraries would probably find the first, broader volume more 
valuable. 
 
Benjamin J. Keele 
Reference Librarian 
Wolf Law Library 
William & Mary Law Library 
Williamsburg, VA USA 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 