 
The Story of Sony v. Universal Studios:  Mary Poppins 
Meets the Boston Strangler 
            --Jessica Litman* 
 
Respondents argue that an abstract theoretician’s view of 
the copyright monopoly allows them to control the way William 
Griffiths watches television.  In the name of that abstract vision, 
they ask the federal courts to establish a bureaucracy more 
complex than anything Congress has established in the field of 
copyright to date, in order that they may levy an excise tax on a 
burgeoning new industry. 
 
  First draft of Justice John Paul Stevens’s dissenting opinion in Sony 
v. Universal Studios1 
 
Sony v. Universal Studios may be the most famous of all copyright cases.  People 
who know nothing about copyright know that the Sony-Betamax case held that home 
videotaping of television programs is fair use.   Paradoxically, although the Supreme 
Court  granted  certiorari  in  the  case  to  decide  whether  the  copyright  law  permitted 
consumers to engage in private home copying of television programs, the majority ended 
up crafting its analysis to avoid answering that question definitively.  Instead, it ruled that 
even if consumers sometimes violated the copyright law when they taped television 
programs off the air, that violation did not make the manufacturer and seller of the 
copying equipment they used liable for copyright infringement.  That was so, the Court 
ruled, because some of the time, home videotaping was authorized by the programs’ 
copyright owners, and some of the time, home videotaping qualified as fair use.  Since 
videotape recorders could be used for legitimate as well as infringing copying, making 
and selling the devices did not subject the Sony Corporation to liability.  
 
When  the  Justices  initially  met  to  discuss  the  case,  only  one  of  them  was 
persuaded that consumer home videotaping was permissible under the Copyright Act.  
Justice Stevens argued that Congress had never intended to regulate a consumer’s making 
a single, noncommercial copy.  What became the majority opinion in Sony evolved as an 
effort by Justice Stevens to recruit four additional votes to a decision in Sony’s favor. 
 
Background 
 
In the fall of 1975, when the first Sony Betamax appeared in stores, the American 
public  had  already  become  used  to  personal  copying  technology.    The  photocopy 
                                                 
* I’m grateful to Jon Weinberg, Cory Streisinger and Fred Von Lohmann, whose comments greatly 
improved this chapter, and to Chris Bloodworth and Georgia Clark of the Wayne State University Law 
Library, who helped me to get my hands on copies of several obscure documents.  
1  Justice John Paul Stevens, 1st draft, Memorandum in Sony v. Universal Studios, No. 81-1687 (circulated 
June 13, 1983), at  22. 
  Page 1 of 31 machine, invented in 1937 and sold commercially since 1950, was a common piece of 
equipment in business offices and libraries.2  Copyshops had sprung up in the mid-1960s.  
Consumer audiocassette recorders, first marketed in 1963, had become ubiquitous. The 
telephone  answering  machine,  introduced  by  Phonemate  in  1971,  had  become 
increasingly  familiar,  and  telefacsimile  machines  were  making  inroads  in  the  U.S. 
market.  Before the Sony Betamax, several manufacturers had introduced consumer home 
video devices, but all of them had flopped.3  
 
A number of U.S. companies expected that the next big thing would be laser disc 
video playback-only devices.  MCA, owner of Universal Studios, had invested heavily in 
a format it called DiscoVision.  RCA (then-owner of NBC) was working on its own laser 
disc system, named SelectaVision.  Magnavox was trying to perfect Magnavision.  None 
of these systems was ready for the market, and none of them was compatible with the 
others.  The appearance of a home video tape recorder threatened the potential market for 
laser disc devices:  Would consumers purchase playback-only machines if they could 
instead buy machines that could both play and record? 
 
The first Betamax introduced in the U.S. was a combination television-video tape 
recorder that cost more than two thousand dollars.  Several months later, Sony introduced 
the Betamax SL-7300, a stand-alone video tape recorder with a list price of $1300 (about 
$4400 in today’s dollars).  By the time of trial, the price of a Sony Betamax had dropped 
to $875, equivalent to about $2500 in 2005 dollars.  Notwithstanding the steep price, 
people bought it.  Sony supported its product launch with a series of commercials and 
print ads touting the opportunity to watch two shows that were being broadcast at the 
same time.  “We’ve all been in the situation where there are two TV programs on 
opposite each other and we’d give any thing to be able to see both of them.  Well now 
you  can  see  both  of  them,”  began  one  ad.4  “Sony  Betamax  videocassette  recorder, 
destined to be a superstar in your home entertainment scene:  even if you’re not there, it 
records TV programs you don’t want to miss, builds a priceless videotape library in no 
time,” claimed another.5 
 
Journalist James Lardner, the author of Fast Forward, the definitive book on the 
history of the Sony case, begins his book with the story of an ad that Sony’s ad agency 
conceived and sent to Universal Studios for its approval.  “Now you don’t have to miss 
Kojak because you’re watching Columbo (or vice versa).”  Kojak and Columbo were two 
of Universal’s most popular shows, and the ad agency figured that the studio would be 
delighted  that  American  audiences  would  be  able  to  watch  both  of  them.    Sidney 
                                                 
2 In Williams & Wilkins Co. v. U.S.  487 F.2d 1345, aff’d by an equally divided Court, 420 U.S. 376 
(1975), medical publishers sued the National Library of Medicine for massive photocopying of medical 
journal articles for the benefit of medical researchers.  Justice Blackmun recused himself from the case 
because of his earlier relationship with the Mayo Clinic, and the remaining Justices divided 4 to 4 on 
whether the photocopying was fair use or copyright infringement. 
3 See JAMES LARDNER, FAST FORWARD 60-81 (2002); NICK LYONS, THE SONY VISION 202- 15 (1976). 
4 Sony Betamax display ad, New York Times, Nov. 5, 1975, at 19. 
5 Macy’s Sony Betamax display ad, New York Times, March 30, 1976, at 13. 
  Page 2 of 31 Sheinberg,  the  president  of  Universal,  wasn’t  delighted.    Indeed,  Lardner  reports, 
Sheinberg believed such a device usurped movie studio prerogatives; he didn’t think that 
a home video tape recorder should be marketed at all.  He consulted Universal’s lawyers, 
who agreed that marketing a device that copied television programs seemed to violate 
Universal’s exclusive right to reproduce its works under section 106(1) of the 1976 
Copyright Act.  In a meeting the following week between Sheinberg and Akio Morita, the 
chairman of Sony, to discuss the possibility that Sony would manufacture DiscoVision 
players for MCA, Sheinberg insisted that Sony withdraw the Betamax from the market or 
face a copyright infringement suit.  
 
Universal’s lawyers sent a private investigator to consumer electronics stores to 
pose as a customer and catch sales clerks making recordings of Universal programs.  
Meanwhile, they recruited one of their other clients, William Griffiths, to be a nominal 
individual defendant.  They were concerned that a court might refuse to impose liability 
on Sony unless they were able to show that a Betamax owner had used the device to 
make infringing copies.  Griffiths owned a Betamax.  Universal’s lawyers asked him to 
agree to be sued; Universal would promise, they explained, to seek no damages from him 
in the event it prevailed in the lawsuit. Meanwhile, Universal spoke with other studios in 
search of co-plaintiffs.  Disney agreed to join the suit.  Warner Brothers didn’t want to be 
a named plaintiff, but was willing to contribute money towards legal costs.  
 
On  November  11,  1976,  Universal  and  Disney  filed  suit  against  the  Sony 
Corporation, Sony’s American subsidiary, Sony’s advertising agency, five dealers in 
consumer  electronics,  and  Mr.  Griffiths.  Griffiths  would  later  testify  that  he  had 
purchased his Betamax planning to create a library of taped TV shows, but that the 
expense of blank tapes had persuaded him that it made more sense to watch taped 
programs and then tape over them. 
 
Sony in the Lower Courts 
 
The  trial  began  in  January  of  1979  and  lasted  for  five  weeks.  The  studios 
presented evidence tending to show that consumers were recording programs to keep in 
their video libraries.  When Gone with the Wind was broadcast, one witness testified, 
stores across the U.S. sold out of blank videocassettes. The chairman of Walt Disney 
testified that the company had declined lucrative contracts to broadcast Mary Poppins 
and The Jungle Book on television because they feared that consumers might tape the 
movies.  Sony’s lawyer countered with evidence demonstrating that some copyright 
owners had no objection to home taping.  The studios sought, unsuccessfully, to present 
evidence that Sony could have redesigned the Betamax by installing a jammer to prevent 
recording unless the copyright holder assented, at a cost of about $15 per machine.6 
 
Judge Ferguson’s opinion, handed down on October 2, absolved Sony of liability.  
The copyright law, Judge Ferguson held, did not give copyright holders “a monopoly 
                                                 
6 See Lardner, supra note 3, at 97-106. 
  Page 3 of 31 over an individual’s off-the-air copying in his home for private non-commercial use.”7  
First,  the  court  concluded,  Congress  could  not  have  meant  the  courts  to  interpret 
absolutely literally the statutory language giving copyright owners the exclusive right to 
reproduce their works.  Although legislative history accompanying the addition of sound 
recordings to the list of works entitled to copyright demonstrated that Congress had not 
intended  to  prohibit  non-commercial  home  audio-taping,  the  statute  contained  no 
language expressly exempting it.  By the same token, the judge concluded, Congress had 
not  intended  to  give  copyright  owners  the  right  to  prohibit  home  video  recording.   
“Congress did not find that protection of copyright holders’ rights over reproduction of 
their works was worth the privacy and enforcement problems which restraint of home-use 
recording would create.”8 Even if home video recording were deemed an infringement of 
copyright, it was sheltered by the fair use privilege. Most consumers, the judge found, 
used their videotape recorders to “time-shift” programming – to tape a show in order to 
watch it at a more convenient time and then record over the tape. 
Betamax  owners  use  plaintiffs'  works  noncommercially  and 
privately.  This  use  increases  the  owners'  access  to  material 
voluntarily broadcast to them free of charge over public airwaves. 
Because  the  use  occurs  within  private  homes,  enforcement  of  a 
prohibition  would  be  highly intrusive  and  practically  impossible. 
Such intrusion is particularly unwarranted when plaintiffs themselves 
choose to beam their programs into these homes.9 
 
Further, even if the Copyright Act prohibited home copying, the defendants should not be 
liable for the copies made by consumers.  Judge Ferguson drew an analogy from patent 
law,  where  manufacturers  of  staple  articles  of  commerce  were  not  held  liable  for 
infringement merely because they supplied devices that could be used in infringing 
ways.10  Video  tape  recorders,  like  audio  tape  recorders,  cameras,  typewriters,  and 
photocopy  machines,  were  staple  articles  of  commerce  with  infringing  as  well  as 
noninfringing uses.  Expanding the boundaries of liability to extend to manufacturers of 
staple articles would put an intolerable burden on commerce.11  Judge Ferguson noted 
more than once that plaintiffs conceded that they had not yet suffered harm from the 
Betamax, and that they had failed to show that they would likely suffer harm in the 
future. 
 
The new technology of videotape recording does bring uncertainty and 
change which, quite naturally, induce fear. History, however, shows that this 
fear may be misplaced. … Television production by plaintiffs today is more 
                                                 
7 Universal City Studios v. Sony, 480 F. Supp. 429, 432 (C.D. Cal. 1979), rev’d, 659 F.2d 963 (9th Cir. 
1981), rev’d, 464 U.S. 417 (1984). 
8Id. at 446. 
9 Id. at 454. 
10 See 35 U.S.C. § 271(c) (“staple article or commodity of commerce suitable for substantial noninfringing 
use”). 
11 480 F. Supp. at 461. 
  Page 4 of 31 profitable than it has ever been, and, in five weeks of trial, there was no 
concrete evidence to suggest that the Betamax will change the studios' financial 
picture.12 
 
Universal appealed to the Ninth Circuit, and a unanimous panel reversed.13  The 
court rejected Judge Ferguson’s conclusion that Congress might have meant to protect 
consumers from liability for home taping but had failed to say so explicitly. 
 
The statutory framework is unambiguous; the grant of exclusive 
rights is only limited by the statutory exceptions. Elementary principles 
of statutory construction would indicate that the judiciary should not 
disturb this carefully constructed statutory scheme in the absence of 
compelling reasons to do so. That is, we should not, absent a clear 
direction  from  Congress,  disrupt  this  framework  by  carving  out 
exceptions to the broad grant of rights apart from those in the statute 
itself.14 
 
The court held that consumers who copied television programs off the air for private 
noncommercial use infringed the copyrights in those programs, and that Sony, its U.S. 
subsidiary,  its  advertising  agency,  and  the  retail  store  defendants  were  liable  as 
contributory infringers.  Judge Kilkenny’s opinion dismissed the lower court’s staple 
article of commerce theory as “inappropriate.”15 Videotape recorders were not staple 
articles because they were not suitable for noninfringing use: 
 
Appellees' analogy of videotape records to cameras or photocopying 
machines may have substantial benefit for some purposes, but does not even 
remotely  raise copyright problems. Videotape recorders are manufactured, 
advertised,  and  sold  for  the  primary  purpose  of  reproducing  television 
programming. Virtually all television programming is copyrighted material. 
Therefore, videotape recorders are not "suitable for substantial noninfringing 
use."… That some copyright owners choose, for one reason or another, not to 
enforce their rights does not preclude those who legitimately choose to do so 
from protecting theirs.16  
 
The Ninth Circuit remanded the case to the district court to fashion a suitable remedy, 
noting: 
The relief question is exceedingly complex, and the difficulty in 
fashioning relief may well have influenced the district court's evaluation of 
the  liability  issue.  The  difficulty  of  fashioning  relief  cannot,  however, 
dissuade the federal courts from affording appropriate relief to those whose 
rights have been infringed. … 
                                                 
12 Id. at 469. 
13 Universal City Studios v. Sony, 659 F.2d 963 (9th Cir. 1981), rev’d, 464 U.S. 417 (1984). 
14 Id.  at 966. 
15 Id. at 975. 
16 Id.  
  Page 5 of 31  In  fashioning  relief,  the  district  court  should  not  be  overly 
concerned with the prospective harm to appellees. A defendant has no right 
to expect a return on investment from activities which violate the copyright 
laws.  Once  a  determination  has  been  made  that  an  infringement  is 
involved,  the  continued  profitability  of  appellees'  businesses  is  of 
secondary concern. 
 
The following day, members of Congress introduced legislation in both the House 
and the Senate to legalize home video recording.17 Other legislators weighed in with 
variant bills, and on April 12, 1982, the House Committee on the Judiciary held a special 
hearing in Los Angeles to consider  the six different bills before it. The motion picture 
industry’s chief lobbyist, Jack Valenti, was the first witness.  He appeared armed with a 
49 page legal memorandum authored by Harvard law professor Larry Tribe, which 
argued  that  any  law  that  exempted  home  videotaping  from  liability  for  copyright 
infringement would be an unconstitutional taking of private property in violation of the 
Fifth  Amendment.18  Moreover,  the  memo  continued,  such  an  exemption  would 
“endanger, and might indeed impermissibly abridge, First Amendment rights” because 
“motion picture and television producers will speak less often if the reward for their 
efforts is greatly reduced.”19  Valenti’s testimony was nothing if not colorful: 
Now, we cannot live in a marketplace, Mr. Chairman -- you simply 
cannot live in a marketplace, where there is one unleashed animal in that 
marketplace, unlicensed. It would no longer be a marketplace; it would 
be a kind of a jungle, where this one unlicensed instrument is capable of 
devouring all that people had invested in and labored over and brought 
forth as a film or a television program, and, in short, laying waste to the 
orderly distribution of this product. ….I say to you that the VCR is to the 
American film producer and the American public as the Boston strangler 
is to the woman home alone.20  
By the spring of 1982, when the House convened its Los Angeles hearings, more 
than three million people had purchased home video cassette recorders, and videotape 
rental stores had sprung up across the U.S.  The motion picture industry emphasized that 
studios did “not intend to file any actions against homeowners now or in the future.”21  
Indeed, the industry had thought better of its demand that video tape recorderss be 
                                                 
17 H.R. 4783, 97th Cong. (1981); H.R. 4794, 97th Cong. (1981); S. 1758, 97th Cong. (1981).  See Home 
Recording of Copyrighted Works:  Hearings on H.R. 4783, H.R. 4794 H.R. 4808, H.R. 5250, H.R. 5488, 
and H.R. 5705 before The Subcom. on Courts, Civil Liberties, and The Administration Of Justice of the 
House Comm. on the Judiciary, 97th Cong. 1-3 (1982) (opening statement of Rep. Kastenmeier).   
18 Laurence H. Tribe, Memorandum of Constitutional Law on Copyright Compensation Issues Raised by 
the Proposed Congressional Reversal of the Ninth Circuit’s Betamax Ruling (Dec. 5, 1981), reprinted in 
Copyright Infringements (Audio and Video Recorders): Hearings on S. 1758 Before the Senate Comm. on 
the Judiciary, 97th Cong. 78 (1982). See also Home Recording of Copyrighted Works, supra note 17, at  4-
16, 67-115 (testimony of Jack Valenti, MPAA). 
19 Tribe, supra note 18, at 126. 
20 Home Recording of Copyrighted Works, supra note 17. 
21 See id. (testimony of Jack Valenti, MPAA). 
  Page 6 of 31 outlawed.  Instead, motion picture studios had agreed to support a bill that subjected 
video  recorders  to  a  compulsory  license,  levied  royalties  on  the  sale  of  video  tape 
recorders and blank cassettes, and required copyright owners’ permission for rental or 
lease of videotapes.22 The recording industry began to lobby to expand the legislation to 
impose like royalties on the sales of audio tape recorders and blank audiotapes.23  The 
House and Senate held more hearings. Video recorder dealers organized grass roots 
opposition to the legislation. On June 14, 1982, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the 
Sony case, and members of Congress sat back to wait and see what the Court would do. 
 
Sony in the Supreme Court 
 
By the day of oral argument, more than five million consumers had purchased 
Betamax videocassette recorders. Dean Dunlavey, counsel for Sony, began his argument 
by noting that the studios had not yet sought a remedy against any of the five million 
Betamax owners, but that the decision below put all of them at risk for an award of 
statutory damages for each of the programs they recorded at home for their own private 
viewing.  The gist of Dunlavey’s argument was that the majority of copyright owners had 
no objection to consumer home videotaping, and it would make no sense to let a small 
minority use copyright litigation to force a useful and popular device with significant 
legitimate uses from the market.   
 
Stephen Kroft, arguing on behalf of the studios, assured the Justices that affirming 
the Ninth Circuit’s decision did not mean that the Betamax would be banned.  As he had 
urged in his brief, the Court could instead impose a royalty on the sale of Betamax 
recorders.  Several Justices  asked Kroft to speak to the  staple article of  commerce 
doctrine applied by the trial court.  Kroft vigorously disputed that the staple article of 
commerce doctrine was appropriate.  The doctrine arose in patent law, which, he said, 
was unlike copyright law.  In any event, he insisted,the Betamax wouldn’t qualify as a 
staple article of commerce because it was not suitable for any legitimate uses – it was 
designed  and  marketed  to  make  unauthorized  copies  of  entire  television  programs 
without compensation to the copyright owner.  Kroft suggested that the Court instead 
apply a standard it had articulated the previous term in a trademark case.  In Inwood 
Laboratories v. Ives Laboratories, a case involving the copying of drug capsule colors, 
Kroft claimed, the Court had remarked that selling a product with the implication that it 
could  be  used  to  infringe  a  trademark  might  give  rise  to  liability  for  contributory 
trademark infringement.  Kroft argued that the same standard should apply in copyright 
cases.  Justice Stevens then asked Kroft to address fair use.  Kroft denied that the fair use 
doctrine would apply to home videotaping. When pressed on the issue of harm, Kroft 
complained  that  the  district  court  had  misallocated  the  burden  of  proof,  wrongly 
expecting plaintiffs to prove harm rather than requiring defendants to disprove it. 24 
                                                 
22 See H.R. 5488, 97th Cong. (1982); S. Amdt. 1242 to S. 1758, 97th Cong. (1981). 
23 See H.R. 5705, 97th Cong. (1982); S. Amdt. 1333 to S. 1758, 97th Cong. (1982). 
24 Transcript of Oral Argument, Sony (No. 81-1687), Jan. 18, 1983, available at 1983 U.S. TRANS LEXIS 
89 (citing Inwood Labs. v. Ives Labs., 456 U.S. 844, 851(1982)).  Inwood Labs involved an appeal from a 
lower court decision finding contributory trademark infringement; the Court reversed the judgement on an 
unrelated ground.   Kroft’s reading of the Inwood opinion was something of a stretch.  The passage Kroft 
  Page 7 of 31  
The papers of Supreme Court Justice Harry A Blackmun indicate that when the 
Justices met in conference to discuss the case, three days after oral argument, a majority 
of them were disposed to affirm the Ninth Circuit opinion, at least in part.25  Justices 
Blackmun, Marshall and Rehnquist were comfortable with the conclusion that consumer 
home videotaping taping was illegal infringement, and voted to affirm.  Justice Powell 
felt that home use should be deemed fair use, but saw no way to draw a workable 
distinction  between  fair  and  infringing  uses,  and  he,  too,  voted  to  affirm.    Justice 
O’Connor was also disposed to affirm:  if she were a legislator, she said, she would vote 
to exempt home use, but Congress had not done so in the 1976 Copyright Act.26  Justices 
Brennan,  White  and  Burger  argued  that  time-shifting  was  fair  use,  but  building  a 
videotape library was infringement.27 They were inclined to remand for additional fact-
finding on the issue of Sony’s liability, given  that the Betamax was used for both 
infringing and non-infringing purposes.  Only Justice Stevens insisted that the copyright 
statute did not prohibit consumers from making single copies of copyrighted works for 
their own private use.28 Since consumers’ use of the Betamax did not infringe plaintiffs’ 
copyrights, Stevens argued, Sony could not be held liable as a contributory infringer. 
 
As the senior Justice voting with the majority to affirm the Ninth Circuit decision, 
Justice Thurgood Marshall assigned the majority opinion to Harry Blackmun.  Justice 
Stevens  announced  that  he  would  be  writing  a  dissent.    He  sent  a  note  to  Justice 
Blackmun,  with  copies  to  the  other  seven  Justices,  arguing  that  the  copyright  law 
permitted the making of a single copy for private noncommercial use. A review of the 
1976 Copyright Act’s legislative history, he urged, indicated that Congress never directly 
confronted the issue of private copying, but a variety of sources documented a widely-
shared understanding that it was not illegal for individuals to make single copies for their 
own use.  Moreover, the fact that the statute entitled copyright owners to seek statutory 
damages even from innocent infringers potentially subjected both consumers and the 
                                                                                                                                                
cited merely repeated the standard applied by the lower court.  Elsewhere in the opinion, the Court had 
insisted  that  contributory  trademark  infringement  required  proof  defendant  intentionally  induced 
infringement or continued to supply its products to retailers knowing that the retailers were using them to 
infringe trademarks.  
25 The Library of Congress Manuscript Reading Room houses the Supreme Court papers of Justices Harry 
A. Blackmun, William J. Brennan, and Thurgood Marshall, Jr.  Those papers include handwritten and 
dictated notes, drafts of opinions, memoranda from law clerks and letters and memoranda sent by the 
Justices to one another. For a different, detailed analysis of the genesis of the Sony opinions drawn from the 
papers of Justice Thurgood Marshall, see Jonathan Band & Andrew J. McLaughlin, The Marshall Papers:  
A Peek Behind the Scenes at the Making of Sony v. Universal, 17 COLUM-VLA J. L & ARTS 427 (1994). 
26 Handwritten Notes of Justice Harry A. Blackmun, (Jan. 21, 1983). 
27 Id. See also undated file memo in the papers of Justice William A Brennan. The memo appears to have 
been written or dictated between the January 18, 1983 oral argument and the January 21, 1983 conference.  
In it, Justice Brennan expresses his view that time-shifting is fair use but library building is not, that Sony 
might well be liable for statutory damages or profits as a contributory infringer, and that a flat ban on the 
sale of Betamaxes would be improper. 
28 See Memorandum to the File from Justice John Paul Stevens (Jan. 20, 1983). 
  Page 8 of 31 manufacturers of copying equipment to “truly staggering liability.”29  Justice Powell 
responded in a memo to Blackmun indicating that, while he had voted with Blackmun 
initially, Stevens’s “single copy” argument was giving him pause, and he would wait to 
read  drafts  of  the  majority  and  dissenting  opinions  before  deciding.30 
   
On June 13, Justice Blackmun circulated the first draft of his opinion for the 
Court.  The draft began with a rejection of Stevens’s argument that a single copy made 
for noncommercial purposes did not infringe:  “Although the word “copies” appears in 
the plural in § 106(1), it is clear that the making of even a single unauthorized copy is 
prohibited.”31  Examining the 1976 Act, Blackmun listed a variety of detailed exemptions 
that permitted the making of a single copy.  When Congress intended to excuse the 
making of a single copy, it had said so, and articulated the circumstances under which 
that copy might be made in great detail.  Congress had, moreover, shown no difficulty 
expressly providing special treatment for private use when it concluded it was warranted:  
The 1976 Act limited the copyright owner’s performance right to public performances, 
and the library photocopying provisions include privileges limited to researchers engaged 
in  “private  study,  scholarship  or  research.”32  If  the  law  incorporated  an  implicit 
exemption  for  private  copies,  Blackmun  concluded,  these  provisions  would  be 
completely unnecessary. 
 
Justice Blackmun then rejected the argument that home copying could be excused 
under the fair use doctrine.  The fair use doctrine, he explained, acts as a subsidy, at the 
copyright  owners’  expense,  to  permit  subsequent  authors  to  make  limited  use  of 
copyrighted works for the public good. Fair uses were always productive uses, “reflecting 
some benefit to the public beyond that produced by the first author’s work.” Home taping 
was  not  such  a  use,  so  there  was  no  need  to  subsidize  it  at  the  author’s  expense.  
Unproductive uses might in some circumstances escape liability because they caused 
little or no harm.  Where a use was unproductive, however, courts should not deem it fair 
if the copyright owner produced evidence of a potential for harm.  In that case, the use 
would be found infringing “unless the user can demonstrate affirmatively that permitting 
the use would have no tendency to harm the market for or the value of the copyrighted 
                                                 
29 Letter from Justice John Paul Stevens to Justice Harry A. Blackmun (Jan. 24, 1983). 
30 Letter from Justice Lewis F. Powell to Justice Harry A. Blackmun (Feb. 3, 1983). 
31 1st Draft, Opinion in Sony (No. 81-1687) (circulated by Justice Blackmun, June 13, 1983), at 7. Justice 
Blackmun quoted House and Senate Report statements that the reproduction right “means the right to 
produce a material object in which the work is duplicated, transcribed, imitated, or simulated in a fixed 
form from which it can be ‘perceived, reproduced or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the 
aid of a machine or device.’” Id. at 8 (quoting 1975 Senate Report 58, 1976 House Report 61). 
The making of even a single videotape recording at home falls within this definition; the VTR user 
produces a material object from which the copyrighted work later can be perceived.  Unless 
Congress intended a special exemption for the making of a single copy for personal use, we must 
conclude that VTR recording is contrary to the exclusive rights granted by § 106(1). 
Id. at 8. 
32 Id. at 12-13. 
  Page 9 of 31 work.”33  Thus, unproductive uses could qualify for fair use only when they had no 
potential  to  harm  the  copyright  owner’s  market.    The  introduction  of  evidence  of 
potential harm from an unproductive use would shift the burden of proof to the defendant 
to disprove potential harm. 
 
As for Sony’s liability for consumers’ use of its recorders, Blackmun wrote that 
contributory liability required neither direct involvement with individual infringers nor 
actual  knowledge  of  particular  instances  of  infringement.    “It  is  sufficient  that  the 
defendant have reason to know that infringement is taking place.”34  By advertising the 
Betamax as suitable for the recording of “favorite shows” and “classic movies,” Sony had 
induced copyright infringement by Betamax owners.35 Blackmun conceded that some 
consumers might have used Sony’s recorders for non-infringing as well as infringing 
uses, but “the existence of noninfringing uses does not absolve the manufacturer of a 
product  whose  ‘most  conspicuous  purpose’  is  to  infringe.”36  Since  copyright 
infringement was the Betamax’s primary use, Sony was liable as a contributory infringer. 
 
  Even before Justice Blackmun completed the first draft of the opinion, Justice 
Stevens had prepared his alternative, and he circulated it on the same day.  Justice 
Stevens, apparently hoping to pry a fifth vote loose from Blackmun’s majority, styled his 
draft as a “Memorandum” rather than a dissent.  Stevens argued that Sony could not be 
held liable for making and selling Betamax recorders unless the primary use of the 
Betamax were an infringing one; he concluded that it was not.  Until the Court of 
Appeals  decision  below,  Stevens  began,  no  court  had  ever  held  that  purely  private 
noncommercial copying infringed the reproduction right, and the copyright law had never 
been understood to prohibit it.  While the language of the 1909 Copyright Act appeared 
to give copyright owners control over the making of even a single copy, courts had not 
applied it so literally.37  Litigation challenging the massive photocopying of scientific 
articles by the National Library of Medicine had proceeded on the express assumption 
that individual scholars acted lawfully when they made single copies for their own use.38  
When  Congress  extended  copyright  protection  to  sound  recordings  in  1971,  it  had 
repeatedly affirmed that the Copyright Act did not then reach consumer home taping of 
music, and would not reach it as amended.39 Stevens found it unlikely that Congress 
could possibly have intended the 1976 Act to prohibit private home videotaping.  Nothing 
in  the  language  or  legislative  history  of  the  1976  Act  supported  a  conclusion  that 
                                                 
33 Id. at 22, 26. 
34 Id. at 30-31. 
 
35 Id. at 32-33. 
36 Id at 35. 
37 1st draft, Memorandum of Justice Stevens, Sony (No.81-1687) (circulated June 13, 1983) at 16. 
38 Id. at 5 (citing Williams & Wilkins v. U.S., 487 F.2d 1345 (Ct.Cl. 1973), aff’d by an equally divided 
Court, 420 U.S. 376 (1975)). 
39 Id. at 9-11. 
  Page 10 of 31 Congress intended home video taping to be treated differently from home audio taping.40  
Stevens suggested that Congress would not lightly have elected intrusive regulation of 
noncommercial conduct within the home.  “It would plainly be unconstitutional,” he 
suggested, “to prohibit a person from singing a copyrighted song in the shower or jotting 
down a copyrighted poem he hears on the radio.”41 Moreover, he rejected the argument 
that Congress might have intended to prohibit home taping on the understanding that the 
prohibition  would  never  be  enforced  against  individual  consumers,  like  defendant 
William Griffiths.  
 
It is significant that the Act does not purport to create “safe” 
violations.  It plainly provides that every act of infringement – even if 
performed in complete good faith – gives rise to a minimum statutory 
liability of $100.  That command cannot simply be transformed into a 
matter of indifference because the copyright owners do not intend to 
collect the heavy tribute that is their due.42 
 
Finally, Stevens argued that even if the Court concluded that home taping infringed 
Universal Studios’s copyrights, and that that infringement entitled them to some remedy 
against Sony, it was difficult to imagine a remedy properly within the competence of the 
courts. 
 
In their complaint, respondents pray for an injunction against the 
further manufacture or sale of video cassette records.  They do so despite 
the  fact  that  they  have  suffered  no  tangible  harm.    They  claim  the 
injunction is required by the potential future impact of this innovation.  
Surely that impact can be more precisely gauged by legislators than by 
this Court, on this record.43 
 
Justice Stevens supplemented his draft with a memo noting the areas of agreement 
and  disagreement  between  his  memorandum  and  Justice  Blackmun’s  opinion,  and 
criticizing Blackmun’s formulation of fair use; Blackmun responded with a memo of his 
own suggesting that Stevens had misread the legislative history of the Copyright Act. The 
legislative history, Blackmun argued, indicated that Congress had designed the 1976 Act 
to cover new and unexpected technologies as well as known ones, freeing Congress from 
the obligation to revisit the law each time a new use arose.   Justice Brennan then 
circulated a memo seeking to put a third alternative on the table.  Brennan disputed 
Stevens’s conclusion that Congress had implicitly exempted private, non-commercial 
copying from liability, but thought that that was a point the Court need not address: 
 
  As  Harry  explains,  Sony  can  be  liable  for  contributory 
infringement  only  if  the  Betamax’s  “most  conspicuous  purpose”  or 
“primary use” is an infringing use. … I, however, think that a good deal 
                                                 
40 Id. at 12, 14. 
41 Id. at 17-18. 
42 Id. at 19 (footnote omitted).  
43 Id. at 20 (footnote omitted). 
  Page 11 of 31 of  timeshifting  is  fair  use.    …  I  question  whether  the 
“ordinary”/”productive” distinction can be used to shift the burden of 
proving or disproving economic harm in a broad class of cases…. In my 
view, the Studios’ allegations of potential harm … are simply empty 
when applied to most timeshifting.  Unless the burden is shifted, there is 
no  need  for  a  remand  to  determine  that  a  substantial  amount  of 
timeshifting is fair use.  And if that is true, then I cannot agree that the 
Betamax’s “primary use” is infringement or that Sony’s advertisements 
evince a purpose to profit from infringement.44 
 
   The  following  day,  Blackmun  circulated  a  revised  second  draft,  containing 
additional discussion of the private use and contributory infringement issues, and an 
expanded  treatment  of  how  the  lower  court  might  address  the  remedy  for  Sony’s 
infringement.45  Justices Rehnquist and Marshall agreed to join that opinion.   
 
Justice O’Connor, who had been part of the initial majority voting to affirm the 
Ninth Circuit opinion, had reservations.  She wrote to Blackmun, noting her agreement 
with the draft’s conclusions that Sony violated the studio’s reproduction right and that the 
fair  use  doctrine  did  not  apply.    “However,”  she  continued,  “I  have  considerable 
difficulty in rejecting the District Court’s view that the respondents suffered no harm, 
actual or potential, as a result of Sony’s use.” O’Connor also expressed concern about 
Blackmun’s fair use formulation, indicating that she was not persuaded that the burden of 
proof on the issue of harm should be shifted to Sony; wherever the burden of proof lay, 
however, she read Judge Ferguson’s opinion as finding no harm, actual or potential.46   
 
Justice Blackmun responded with a suggestion that the Court remand the case for 
new factfinding on the issue of harm.  He was unwilling to adopt a standard requiring 
copyright plaintiffs to prove potential harm, but suggested language that clarified that the 
copyright owner’s burden of production was a substantial one, requiring more than mere 
speculation.47  O’Connor responded, questioning whether a remand on the issue of harm 
would be fruitful;  it seemed clear that Judge Ferguson had concluded that there was no 
concrete evidence that the Betamax would harm the studios.48 In the absence of any 
harm, O’Connor preferred the finding of liability against Sony to be reversed outright.   
 
If there were to be a remand, Justice O’Connor continued, it was essential that the 
opinion acknowledge that fair use encompassed unproductive uses as well as productive 
ones. She felt strongly that the burden of proof on the issue of harm should stay with the 
copyright  owner  rather  than  shifting  to  the  alleged  infringer.  Finally,  O’Connor 
questioned Blackmun’s rejection of the “staple article of commerce” doctrine: 
 
                                                 
44 Memorandum from Justice William A. Brennan (June 14, 1983). 
45 2d Draft, Opinion in Sony (No. 81-1687) (circulated by Justice Blackmun, June 15, 1983). 
46 Letter from Justice Sandra Day O’Connor to Justice Harry A Blackmun (June 16, 1983). 
47 Letter from  Justice Harry A. Blackmun to Justice Sandra Day O’Connor (June 16, 1983). 
48 Letter from Justice Sandra Day O’Connor to Justice Harry A. Blackmun (June 18, 1983). 
  Page 12 of 31 I had thought that the “staple article” doctrine developed in order to limit 
the patent holder from depriving society of the good that comes from the 
existence  of  other  enterprises  that  nevertheless  frustrate  the  patent 
holder’s monopoly to some degree.  I see no reason why we should not 
be similarly concerned with what the copyright holder does with his 
monopoly.  If the videorecorder has substantial noninfringing uses, we 
should be reluctant to find vicarious liability.  In addition, I think the 
focus of the inquiry should not be whether virtually all of the copied 
material is copyrighted, but rather, whether virtually all of the copying 
amounts to an infringement.  Even if you do not wish to import the 
“staple article” doctrine directly to the copyright area, I fail to see why 
the  same  standard—whether  the  item  is  capable  of  substantial 
noninfringing use—should not be used.49 
 
Justice Powell sent Blackmun a memo indicating that he was troubled by some of 
the same points Justice O’Connor had raised.50 Blackmun circulated a revised draft 
seeking to meet their concerns,51 reformulating the fair use analysis in an attempt to reach 
a compromise on the burden of proof. For Blackmun, what was crucial was that the law 
not require copyright owners to prove actual harm when a new technology was at issue, 
because that would require them to wait to seek relief until too late.  The legislative 
history of the statute, he insisted, “makes clear that copyright owners are not to be 
deprived of protection simply because the effects of a new technology are unknown.”52  
In order to accommodate O’Connor’s concerns, Blackmun revised the language in his 
draft to put the burden of proof of harm on the plaintiffs, but require them to show only 
“a reasonable possibility of harm.”53  Seeking to find middle ground on the staple article 
of commerce, Blackmun adopted a phrase from Justice O’Connor’s letter:  the focus of a 
contributory  infringement  inquiry  should  be  “whether  virtually  all  of  the  copying 
amounts to infringement.”   
 
Justice O’Connor wrote back the same day, requesting additional changes.54  She 
continued to be dissatisfied with the treatment of the burden of proof on harm.  Justice 
Blackmun’s “reasonable possibility of harm” struck her as allowing copyright plaintiffs 
to prove too little.  She proposed that the opinion instead describe the burden of proof 
using the statutory language, and require plaintiffs to prove “harm to the potential market 
for or value of the copyrighted work.”55  She objected to language implying that the 
studios had already met that burden in the lower court, since Judge Ferguson’s findings 
indicated  that  no  harm  had  been  shown.    Finally,  O’Connor  wrote,  she  “remained 
                                                 
49 Id. at 2-3. 
50 Letter from Justice Lewis F. Powell to Justice Harry A. Blackmun (June 20, 1983). 
51 3d Draft, Opinion in Sony, (No. 81-1687) (circulated by Justice Blackmun, June 21, 1983). 
52 Letter from Justice Harry A. Blackmun to Justices Lewis F Powell and Sandra Day O’Connor (June 21, 
1983).  
53 3d Draft, Opinion in Sony, (No. 81-1687) (circulated by Justice Blackmun, June 21, 1983) at 26. 
54 Letter from Justice Sandra Day O’Connor to Justice Harry A. Blackmun (June 21, 1983). 
55 Id. at 2. 
  Page 13 of 31 convinced that the standard for contributory infringement should be the one I articulated 
in my letter of June 18:  is the VTR capable of substantial non-infringing uses.”56  If 
Blackmun incorporated her suggestions into a fourth draft, O’Connor continued, she 
would join that opinion. 
 
Justice  Blackmun  replied  that  he  was  reluctantly  willing  to  accept  Justice 
O’Connor’s formulation for the standard for contributory infringement, but would not 
yield further on the question of the burden of proof in fair use: 
 
The  statutory  language  to  which  you  refer  comes  into  play  when  a 
productive use is found.  Under your proposal, the copyright owner 
would have to prove actual harm to the value of the copyright or to a 
potential market even for unproductive uses.  The problem with this, as I 
have tried to point out, is that copyright owners would be deprived of 
protection when the technology is a new one and when predictions of 
harm  are  necessarily  imprecise.    I  strongly  feel  that  the  standard 
articulated  in  the  opinion—that  the  copyright  owner  must  show  a 
“reasonable possibility of harm” – is the correct one.57 
 
Meanwhile, Justice White proposed that Justices Brennan and Stevens try to 
assemble a majority for an opinion that took a position between the views that Brennan 
and Stevens had expressed following the oral argument. White suggested that such an 
opinion could reverse the judgment against Sony as a contributory infringer on the 
ground that the studios had failed to prove injury or damages, and leave the question of 
consumer liability unresolved.58 
 
Justice Stevens circulated some new language on June 23.59  The exchange of 
letters between O’Connor and Blackmun had been distributed to all nine Justices, and 
Justice Stevens’s new draft seemed designed to attract O’Connor’s vote by adopting the 
proposals Blackmun had rejected.  Thus, while the draft nominally followed the model 
proposed in Justice Brennan’s June 14 memo, concluding that because time-shifting 
caused the studios no harm, there was no basis for imposing contributory liability on 
Sony,  the  draft  also  incorporated  the  suggestions  that  O’Connor  had  been  trying 
unsuccessfully to persuade Blackmun to include in his opinion.  In particular, after 
emphasizing both the studios’ failure to show any harm from the Betamax, and the trial 
court’s finding that copyright owners other than the studios encouraged consumers to 
time-shift their programs, the draft imported the staple article of commerce doctrine from 
patent law and placed the burden of proof on the question of potential harm in a fair use 
analysis  squarely  on  the  plaintiff.    O’Connor  sent  a  note  to  Blackmun  noting  her 
agreement with Stevens’s treatment of the burden of proof, and suggesting that Blackmun 
                                                 
56 Id. at 3-4 (emphasis in original). 
57 Letter from Justice Harry A Blackmun to Justice Sandra Day O’Connor (June 23, 1983)(emphasis in 
original). 
58 Letter from Justice Byron R. White to Justice William J. Brennan (June 17, 1983) 
59 Memorandum from Justice John Paul Stevens to the Conference (June 23, 1983). 
  Page 14 of 31 incorporate a modified version of it into his opinion.60 “This issue,” she wrote, “is 
significant, because the burden will likely determine the outcome of not only this case but 
most others in the future.  I recognize the delicate balance we must make between 
protection of the copyright owner and encouragement of new technology.” 
 
Three  days  later,  Justice  Blackmun  wrote  back,  refusing  to  make 
additional changes: 
 
I have endeavored of the past several days to accommodate your 
many concerns.  My letter of June 23 to you represents the limit of what I 
am willing to do.  Five votes are not that important to me when I feel that 
proper legal principles are involved.61 
 
Justice Stevens, meanwhile, had circulated his completed draft, which combined 
the Brennan distinction between time-shifting and library building with the O’Connor 
formulations of the burden of proof and staple article of commerce doctrine, all while 
purporting to decide only the contributory infringement issue and leave the question of 
consumer liability for home taping for another day.62  The draft noted that the Court had 
granted certiorari to address whether home videotaping was copyright infringement and, 
if so, whether the manufacturers of videotape recorders were liable for advertising and 
selling them, and whether a judicially imposed royalty was a permissible form of relief.  
Because  the  district  court’s  factual  findings  were  dispositive  on  the  contributory 
infringement issue, the Court need decide only that question: 
In brief, the critical facts are these:  the principal use of the video tape 
recorder is to enable its owner to view a program he would otherwise 
miss;  this  practice,  known  as  “time-shifting,”  enlarges  the  television 
viewing audience.  For that reason, a significant number of producers of 
television programs have no objection to the copying of their program 
for  private  home  viewing.    For  the  same  reason,  even  the  two 
respondents in this case, who do object to time shifting, were unable to 
prove  that  the  practice  has  caused  them  any  harm  or  creates  any 
likelihood of future harm.63  
The  draft  then  discussed  the  doctrine  of  contributory  copyright  infringement,  and 
expressly adopted patent law’s staple article of commerce doctrine.  As framed by Justice 
Stevens, the staple article of commerce doctrine applied to any article that was “widely 
used for legitimate, unobjectionable purposes.  Indeed, if we apply the patent law rule, it 
need merely be capable of significant noninfringing uses.”64 
 
                                                 
60 Letter from Justice Sandra Day O’Connor to Justice Harry A. Blackmun (June 25, 1983) 
61 Letter from Justice Harry A. Blackmun to Justice Sandra Day O’Connor (June 28, 1983). 
62 2d Draft, Memorandum of Justice Stevens in Sony, (No. 81-1687) (circulated by 
Justice Stevens, June 27, 1983).   
63 Id. at 2. 
64 Id. at 24. 
  Page 15 of 31   “The question,” Stevens continued, “is thus whether the Betamax is capable of 
commercially significant noninfringing uses.”  Noncommercial private time-shifting was 
such a use both because much of it was authorized and because even unauthorized time-
shifting qualified as fair use: 
 
Three different factors lead to the conclusion that under a 
“rule of reason” analysis, the respondents failed to carry their 
burden of proving in this case that home time shifting is not fair 
use.  Those factors are (A) their complete failure to show that 
home time shifting would harm the potential market for, or value 
of,  any  identifiable  copyrighted  material,  (B)  the  legislative 
history tending to show that Congress understood such activity 
to  be  fair  use,  and  (C)  the  profoundly  disturbing  policy 
implications of finding that home time shifting is not fair use.65 
 
The draft proceeded to a discussion of the four factors enumerated in section 107.  
It addressed only the final factor, the “effect of the use upon the market for or value of 
the copyrighted work.”  If a use has no effect on the potential market for a work, Stevens 
explained, it has no effect on the author’s incentives to create.  Prohibiting it would 
simply hinder access to the work without any countervailing benefit.   
 
Of  course,  every  commercial  use  of  copyrighted  material  is 
presumptively an exploitation of the monopoly privilege that belongs to 
the owner of the copyright.  But noncommercial uses are a different 
matter.  Any plaintiff seeking to challenge the non-commercial use of a 
copyrighted work should, as a threshold matter, prove either that the 
particular use is harmful or that if it should become widespread, it would 
be more likely than not that some non-minimal damage would result to 
the potential market for, or the value of, his particular copyrighted work. 
Actual present harm need not be shown; such a requirement would leave 
the copyright holder with no defense against predictable damage.  Nor is 
it necessary to show with certainty that future harm will result.  What is 
necessary is a showing by a preponderance of the evidence that some 
meaningful likelihood of future harm exists.  If the intended use is for 
commercial gain, that likelihood may be presumed.  But if it is for purely 
private purposes, however, it must be demonstrated.66 
 
This  formulation  combined  Stevens’s  initial  conclusion  that  noncommercial  private 
copying  should  be  treated  differently  from  commercial  copying  with  O’Connor’s 
insistence that the burden of proof on the issue of harm should be assigned to the 
plaintiff.   
 
The end of June is a busy time at the Supreme Court:  the Court adjourns each 
summer in early July, and by tradition disposes of all of the cases on its calendar before 
adjournment, so by late June the Court is hurrying to finish its work on all remaining 
                                                 
65 Id. at 31. 
66 Id. at 32 (emphasis in original). 
  Page 16 of 31 decisions.  Justice Brennan sent around a memo that did not offer to join Stevens’s most 
recent opinion, but noted  that the draft “came closer to expressing” Brennan’s views.  
Justice Byron White sent a note to Chief Justice Burger suggesting that the Court set the 
case for reargument the following term:  “If this case is to come down this term, I prefer 
John’s submission to any others.  I would much rather, however, have the case reargued.  
It is important, and I would feel more comfortable if we could give the case more 
attention than time will now allow.”67 Justice O’Connor chimed in, noting that she also 
preferred Justice Stevens’s most recent draft to the alternative, but would probably agree 
to  set  the  case  for  reargument.68  Justice  Rehnquist  also  expressed  support  for 
reargument.69 Justice Stevens remained hopeful of resolving the case that term rather than 
holding it over, and he circulated a further draft of his opinion. This draft incorporated 
extensive discussion of the testimony of copyright owners who welcomed consumer 
home taping as a method of expanding their audience, and an expanded discussion of the 
district court’s findings on the studios’ failure to show any harm.70 It otherwise tracked 
the earlier draft. Stevens believed that the draft reflected a consensus of the views of 
Justices Brennan, Burger, White and O’Connor as well as himself.  The Court decided, 
however, to set the case for reargument. 
 
On July 6th, the final day of the 1982 term, copyright lobbyists and journalists 
assembled at the Court to be the first to read the Betamax decision.  There was no 
Betamax decision to read.  The Court issued an order restoring the case to the argument 
calendar.  It asked for no new briefs and identified no new issues it wanted counsel to 
address.71 
 
Sony was reargued on October 3, 1983.  Dean Dunlavey argued first for Sony, and 
noted that by the end of the year 9 ½ million households, or roughly 10% of the 
television viewing audience, would own videotape recorders.  Home taping, he argued, 
was clearly fair use.  Justice O’Connor asked whether the Court needed to resolve the fair 
use issue.  Could the Justices not resolve the contributory infringement question without 
deciding whether home taping was fair use?  Dunlavey agreed that the Court could 
indeed take that approach: “There are two roads to Rome.”  He then returned to his 
discussion of fair use.  Justice White interrupted:  “I’m wondering,” he asked, “do we 
have to reach the questions you’ve been discussing if we agreed with you that this is a 
staple article of commerce and that there’s no contributory infringement?” “If you agreed 
with me,” responded Dunlavey, “you would think this case would be over.” Justice White 
persisted: “Well we wouldn’t have to talk about fair use at all, would we, if we agreed 
                                                 
67 Letter from Justice Byron R. White to Chief Justice Warren Burger (June 28, 1983). 
68 Letter from Justice Sandra Day O’Connor to Chief Justice Warren Burger (June 28, 1983). 
69 Memorandum from Justice William H. Rehnquist to the Conference (June 28, 1983). 
70 3d Draft, Memorandum of Justice Stevens in Sony, (No. 81-1687) (circulated by Justice Stevens, June 
28, 1983) at 24-26, 30-34. 
71 Sony v. Universal, 463 U.S. 1226 (1983).  See Mark Bomnster & Susan March, Betamax Ruling Put on 
Hold, 57 Retailing Home Furnishings (July 11, 1983), at 53. 
  Page 17 of 31 with you that this is a staple article of commerce?”  Dunlavey conceded that that was the 
case.   
 
Stephen  Kroft  stood  up  to  argue  for  the  studios.    “Underneath  all  the  legal 
arguments and legal labels that we’ve thrown around in this case, the case is really very 
simple and straightforward,” he began.  “Petitioners have created a billion dollar industry 
based entirely on the taking of someone else’s property….”72Justices White and Stevens 
had a number of questions about the staple article of commerce test; Kroft insisted that it 
had no application to the case.  Justice O’Connor noted that the district court had found 
no  harm,  and  Kroft  responded  that  under  the  copyright  statute,  plaintiffs  were  not 
required to prove harm.  Rather, Kroft argued, a finding of infringement lead to a 
presumption of harm, shifting the burden to defendants to prove there would not be any 
harm.  Justice Stevens asked for an example of harm that time-shifting might cause, and 
Kroft responded that homemade tapes could compete with pre-recorded cassettes.73  “Fair 
use,” Kroft continued, “was a very narrow doctrine designed for very limited application, 
for  use  in  the  creation  of  scholarly  or  research  works  or  works  for  contemporary 
comment or news reporting purposes, and only when a small amount was taken.  Off the 
air recording for home entertainment purposes doesn’t even come anywhere close to 
fitting that definition.”74 
 
 At the conference following the reargument, according to Justice Blackmun’s 
handwritten notes, only Justices Marshall and Blackmun voted to affirm the Ninth Circuit 
decision.  Justices Powell and Rehnquist favored affirming the portion of the court of 
appeals  decision  holding  that  consumer  home  videotaping  infringed  the  studios’ 
copyrights, but wanted to remand on the issue of contributory infringement.  Justices 
Burger, Brennan, White, O’Connor and Stevens voted to reverse the decision outright. 
Justice Stevens undertook to write the opinion for the Court; Justice Blackmun agreed to 
write the dissent.  
 
The Supreme Court Decision  
 
Justice  Stevens’s  opinion  for  the  Court  characterized  the  lawsuit  as  an 
“unprecedented attempt to impose copyright liability upon the distributors of copying 
equipment,” and rejected “[s]uch an expansion of the copyright privilege” as “beyond the 
limits of the grants authorized by Congress.”75 Stevens’s analysis essentially tracked the 
arguments  made  in  his  June  28  draft,  combining  his  own  solicitude  for  private 
noncommercial copying with Justice Brennan’s distinction between time-shifting and 
library building, and Justice O’Connor’s preference for the staple article of commerce 
                                                 
72 Transcript of Oral Argument, Sony (No. 81-1687) (Oct. 3, 1983), available at 1983 U.S. TRANS LEXIS 
10. 
73 At the time of trial, neither Universal nor Disney had released any programs on pre-recorded cassettes, 
although, beginning in late 1977, several other studios had released older material on videocassette.  Video 
rental stores started springing up shortly thereafter.  See Lardner, supra note 3, at 154-88. 
74 Transcript of Oral Argument, supra note 72. 
75 Sony v. Universal Studios, 464 U.S. 417, 421 (1984). 
  Page 18 of 31 doctrine and conviction that the burden of proof on the issue of harm to the copyright 
owner in a fair use determination should rest on the plaintiff.  Stitching those positions 
together into a coherent opinion was not easy, and while the result the opinion reached 
was immediately clear, the reasoning it relied on was, at best, oblique.  
 
Justice Stevens began by explaining that the courts had been and should be 
reluctant  to  expand  copyright  protection  in  response  to  new  technology  rather  than 
allowing Congress to craft appropriate solutions. There was no precedent in copyright 
law for imposing liability for selling a product that enabled users to make infringing 
copies.  The closest analogy to such a theory of liability was found in patent law, which 
imposed liability for contributory infringement but also exempted the sale of staple 
articles  of  commerce  from  liability.    Although  the  Court  recognized  substantial 
differences between patent and copyright law, both sought to strike a balance between the 
interest in effective protection and the rights of others to engage freely in unrelated areas 
of commerce.  “Accordingly,” the opinion continued, “the sale of copying equipment, 
like the sale of other articles of commerce, does not constitute contributory infringement 
if the product is widely used for legitimate, unobjectionable purposes.  Indeed, it need 
merely be capable of substantial noninfringing uses.”76 
 
As in his earlier draft, Stevens answered the question whether the Betamax was 
capable  of  commercially  significant  noninfringing  uses  by  identifying  private, 
noncommercial time-shifting as one use that satisfied that standard. He reviewed the 
testimony of copyright owners who welcomed time-shifting.  The representative of one 
PBS station had testified that his station published a program guide inviting viewers to 
tape more than half of the programs on its schedule.  Fred Rogers had testified that he had 
absolutely no objection to families’ taping episodes of Mr. Rogers’ Neighborhood. 
 
Of  course,  the  fact  that  other  copyright  holders  may 
welcome  the  practice  of  time-shifting  does  not  mean  that 
respondents should be deemed to have granted a license to copy 
their programs. Third-party conduct would be wholly irrelevant in 
an action for direct infringement of respondents' copyrights. But in 
an  action  for  contributory  infringement  against  the  seller  of 
copying equipment, the copyright holder may not prevail unless 
the relief that he seeks affects only his programs, or unless he 
speaks for virtually all copyright holders with an interest in the 
outcome. In this case, the record makes it perfectly clear that there 
are  many  important  producers  of  national  and  local  television 
programs who find nothing objectionable about the enlargement in 
the size of the television audience that results from the practice of 
time-shifting for private home use.77 
 
Stevens then turned to unauthorized time-shifting, and concluded that it qualified as fair 
use.  Justice Stevens rejected the Ninth Circuit’s position that only productive uses could 
                                                 
76 Id. at 442. 
77 Id. at 446. 
  Page 19 of 31 be deemed fair.78  He focused instead on the distinction between commercial uses and 
non-commercial ones.  “If the Betamax were used to make copies for a commercial or 
profit-making purpose,” he explained, “such use would presumptively be unfair. The 
contrary presumption is appropriate here, however, because the District Court's findings 
plainly establish that time-shifting for private home use must be characterized as a 
noncommercial, nonprofit activity.”79  
 
Even copying for noncommercial purposes may impair the copyright 
holder's ability to obtain the rewards that Congress intended him to have. 
But a use that has no demonstrable effect upon the potential market for, 
or the value of, the copyrighted work need not be prohibited in order to 
protect  the  author's  incentive  to  create.  The  prohibition  of  such 
noncommercial uses would merely inhibit access to ideas without any 
countervailing benefit.80 
 
Thus, while every commercial use should be deemed presumptively unfair, a challenge to 
a noncommercial use required proof of present or potential harm.  The studios had failed 
to  satisfy  that  burden.81  The  Betamax  videotape  recorder  was  therefore  capable  of 
substantial non-infringing uses, and Sony’s sale of it did not constitute contributory 
infringement.82 
 
  Justice Blackmun’s dissent, joined by Justices Marshall, Powell and Rehnquist, 
repeated the arguments he had made the previous spring:  the fair use defense was 
appropriate only when a productive use merited a subsidy at the copyright owner’s 
expense or when the use had no potential to affect the author’s incentive to create.  Time-
shifting, Blackmun argued, was an ordinary use rather than a productive one, and had a 
substantial adverse effect on the potential market for copyrighted television programs.  
By focusing on the potential harm to plaintiffs’ current markets, Blackmun argued, the 
majority had failed to give appropriate weight to the likelihood of harm to the potential 
                                                 
78 Id. at  445 n.40. 
79 Id. at 449. 
80 Id. at 450-51. 
81Id.: 
 Thus, although every commercial use of copyrighted material is presumptively 
an unfair exploitation of the monopoly privilege that belongs to the owner of the 
copyright, noncommercial uses are a different matter. A challenge to a noncommercial 
use of a copyrighted work requires proof either that the particular use is harmful, or 
that if it should become widespread, it would adversely affect the potential market for 
the copyrighted work. Actual present harm need not be shown; such a requirement 
would leave the copyright holder with no defense against predictable damage. Nor is it 
necessary to show with certainty that future harm will result. What is necessary is a 
showing by a preponderance of the evidence that some meaningful likelihood of future 
harm exists. If the intended use is for commercial gain, that likelihood ay be presumed. 
But if it is for a noncommercial purpose, the likelihood must be demonstrated. 
In this case, respondents failed to carry their burden with regard to home time-shifting. 
 
82 Id. at 456.   
  Page 20 of 31 markets created by defendants’ technology. The videotape recorder deprived copyright 
owners  of  the  opportunity  to  exploit  the  market  of  potential  viewers  who  found  it 
inconvenient to watch television programs at the time they are broadcast.  Accordingly, 
even time-shifting should not be deemed a fair use.83  
 
The Immediate Impact of Sony 
 
  The Sony decision was reported widely, and approvingly, in the popular press as 
holding that consumers do not violate the law when they tape television programs off the 
air.84  The decision was less popular with the copyright bar.85 To copyright lawyers, the 
Court’s  opinion  seemed  like  a  sharp  break  with  longstanding  precedent;  from  the 
copyright lawyer’s standpoint, Justice Blackmun’s dissenting opinion was grounded in 
long  copyright  tradition,  while  Justice  Stevens’s  opinion  for  the  Court  had  no  real 
historical foundation.  The majority’s adoption of the staple article of commerce doctrine 
seemed unnecessary and ill-reasoned, and its presumption-mediated treatment of the 
burden of proof in fair use cases seemed ill-advised.86 To people outside of the copyright 
bar, the case came immediately to stand for the proposition that private noncommercial 
copying was fair use.  To many members of the copyright bar, that represented an 
                                                 
83 See id. at 457-93 (Blackmun, J. dissenting).  
84 See, e.g., Fred Barbash, Supreme Court Chooses Not to Stem the Tide of High Technology, WASHINGTON 
POST, January 22, 1983, at A5; Nathaniel C. Nash, Sony Prevails in the Betamax Case, THE NEW YORK 
TIMES, January 22, 1984, at Sec. 3, page 16, col. 3.  The Washington Post’s entertainment critic, Tom 
Shales, put it this way: 
There won't be dancing in the streets. There'll be taping in the living rooms. But 
if there were dancing in the streets and it was shown on television, you could tape it 
in the living room and not have to worry about some trench-coated specter from the 
FBI breaking down the door to your condominium. 
One small step for man, one giant kick in Big Brother's pants.  
Yesterday the Supreme Court ruled, by a frighteningly narrow 5-to-4 majority, 
that the home taping of TV programs and movies broadcast on the air is not illegal. 
Five million VCR users breathed an enormous "whew." Imagine. No more stuffing 
the Betamax machine under the bed at every unexpected ring of the doorbell. No 
more disguising tapes as pornographic magazines. No more  covert  tapings of 
"Remington Steele" with the shades drawn and the windows locked. 
No more midnight meetings of Time-Shifters Anonymous. 
No more worrying if industry lobbyist Jack Valenti and his SWAT team are 
about to surround the house, shine in the big blinding spotlights, and order you by 
bullhorn to come out with your hands, and your recording heads, up. Citizens! Hear 
me! We are free! Free to tape as we choose! To tape as we see fit. To tape till the 
cows come home. 
To tape "Till the Clouds Roll By," that dopey old MGM musical, the next time 
a TV station shows it. 
1984 has been marked down to . . . yes! . . . 1776! 
 
Tom Shales, I'll Tape Tomorrow, And So Will You, Thanks to the Court, WASHINGTON POST, January 18, 
1984, at B1.     
85 See, e.g., WILLIAM F. PATRY, THE FAIR USE PRIVILEGE IN COPYRIGHT LAW 205-10 (1985). 
86 See, e.g., id. at 363-65; Ralph Oman, The 1976 Copyright Act Revisited:  “Lector, si momumentum 
requires, circumspice,” 34 J. COPYRIGHT SOC’Y 29, 32-33 (1986). 
  Page 21 of 31 unwarranted expansion of what they had believed to be a fairly confined privilege.87 The 
motion picture industry vowed to overturn the decision in Congress, but found little 
enthusiasm in the Senate and House for imposing a copyright tax on videocassette 
recorders or blank tapes. 
 
  The Sony Betamax itself was  soon  superseded by a videorecorder using the 
different, and incompatible, VHS format.  In 1988, Sony began phasing out the Betamax 
video tape recorder.  Meanwhile, the motion picture industry grew to rely on the pre-
recorded videocassette market as a significant source of its income.88 Revenues from 
prerecorded videocassettes (and, later, DVDs) came to outstrip revenues from domestic 
theatrical ticket sales. The consumer electronics and computer industries introduced a 
variety of devices – digital audio recorders, digital cameras, computers, MP3 players, and 
peer-to-peer file sharing software – capable of infringing as well as legitimate uses. 
 
  The year after Sony, the Supreme Court decided its second fair use case, Harper 
&  Row  v.  Nation  Enterprises.89  The  case  involved  an  unauthorized  pre-publication 
excerpt from former President Gerald Ford’s memoirs published by The Nation, a small 
political commentary magazine.  The excerpt comprised 300 words from a 400-page 
book.  The Court held, 6-3, that The Nation was not entitled to the shelter of the fair use 
privilege, in part because the news reporting and political commentary it engaged in had 
a commercial purpose rather than a non-profit one.  Justice O’Connor authored the 
opinion.  “The fact that a publication was commercial as opposed to nonprofit is a 
separate factor that tends to weigh against a finding of fair use,” she wrote, “‘[Every] 
commercial use of copyrighted material is presumptively an unfair exploitation of the 
monopoly privilege that belongs to the owner of the copyright.’ Sony Corp. of America v. 
Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S., at 451.” 
 
  The Harper & Row decision represented the high point of Sony’s influence on the 
law  of  fair  use.    The  presumption  against  commercial  fair  use  quickly  proved 
unworkable,  making  fair  use  unavailable  to  biographers,90  parodists,91  and  news 
organizations92 because they published their works for commercial gain.  Ten years after 
Sony, in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music,93 the Court finally abandoned the presumption, 
                                                 
87 See, e.g., Jack C. Goldstein, AIPLA BULLETIN, December 1984 at 635, 636-37. 
88 See Ross Johnson, Getting a Piece of the DVD Windfall, NEW YORK TIMES, Dec. 13, 2004, at C1. 
89 471 U.S. 539 (1985). 
90 See New Era Publications Int'l v. Henry Holt & Co., 873 F.2d 576, 583-84 (2d Cir. 1989). 
91 See Rogers v. Koons, 960 F.2d 301 (2d Cir. 1992); Tin Pan Apple v. Miller Brewing Co., 737 F. Supp. 
826 (S.D.N.Y. 1990); Original Appalachian Artworks v. Topps Chewing Gum, 642 F. Supp. 1031 (N.D.Ga 
1986). 
92 See Hi-Tech Video Productions, Inc. v. Capital Cities/ABC, Inc, 804 F. Supp. 950 (W.D. Mich. 1992). 
93 510 U.S. 569, 584-85 (1994): 
Sony itself called for no hard evidentiary presumption. There, we emphasized the need 
for a "sensitive balancing of interests," 464 U.S. at 455, n.40, noted that Congress had 
"eschewed a rigid, bright-line approach to fair use," id., at  449, n.31, and stated that the 
commercial or nonprofit educational character of a work is "not conclusive," id., at 448-
  Page 22 of 31 along with its twin, the presumption favoring non-commercial fair use.  But before it was 
abandoned, the presumption favoring non-commercial fair use had persuaded the owners 
of copyrights in musical works and recordings to lobby Congress to enact a law that 
levied a royalty on the sale of digital audio recorders and blank digital media, while 
requiring manufacturers of recording devices to incorporate copy protection technology 
that permitted multiple first-generation copies but prevented the devices from copying 
copies.    One  part  of  that  bargain  included  a  prohibition  on  bringing  copyright 
infringement  suits  against  consumers  who  engaged  in  non-commercial  copying  of 
recorded music,94 a concession that seemed cheap when the governing test for fair use 
favored noncommercial copying. 
 
  The same case that discarded the presumption against commercial fair use also 
reversed course on the issue that had lost Justice Blackmun his majority:  the placement 
of the burden of proof.  In Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Justice Souter held that fair use 
is an affirmative defense, and that the burden of proof on the issue of potential harm lies 
with the defendant.95  Finally, in Campbell, the Court acknowledged the importance to 
the fair use inquiry of a distinction between productive and unproductive uses.  Citing 
Blackmun’s Sony dissent, Justice Souter wrote that “the goal of copyright, to promote 
science and the arts, is generally furthered by the creation of transformative works. Such 
works thus lie at the heart of the fair use doctrine's guarantee of breathing space within 
the confines of copyright…, and the more transformative the new work, the less will be 
the significance of other factors, like commercialism,  that may weigh against a finding of 
fair use.”96 Thus, the fair use principles for which the Sony case is known have largely 
been abandoned, and the real estate it takes up in the fair use chapters of copyright 
casebooks has dwindled accordingly.  Fair use law today is much closer to something 
Justice Blackmun might have recognized with approval.   
 
The Court’s holding on liability for contributory infringement, in contrast, is still 
with us.  Networked digital technology has supplied myriad new ways for consumers to 
make unauthorized copies, and whether and under what circumstances the purveyors of 
technology that makes infringement easier should be held liable is one of the most 
important questions facing the copyright law.  The producers of computers, CD and DVD 
                                                                                                                                                
449, but rather a fact to be "weighed along with other[s] in fair use decisions," id., at 449, 
n.32 (quoting House Report, p. 66). The Court of Appeals's elevation of one sentence 
from Sony to a per se rule thus runs as much counter to Sony itself as to the long 
common-law tradition of fair use adjudication. 
94 Audio Home Recording Act, Pub. Law. No.102-563, 106 Stat. 4237, codified at 17 U.S.C. §§ 1001 – 
1010 (2000). 
95 See 510 U.S. at 591-92. Professor Glyn Lunney attributes the reversal of course to poor lawyering on the 
part of Campbell’s counsel, who conceded that he bore the burden of proof without even mentioning that 
Sony had held that the burden should be born by plaintiff.  See Glyn S. Lunney, Fair Use and Market 
Failure:  Sony Revisited, 82 B.U.L. REV. 975, 989&n.70 (2002). Professor Lunney suggests that because 
the burden of proof issue was not contested, Campbell’s characterization of fair use as an affirmative 
defense was nonbonding dicta.  Id.  
96 510 U.S. at 515-16. 
 
  Page 23 of 31 recorders, digital video recorders and MP3 players, the providers of Internet services and 
the designers of peer-to-peer file sharing software supply products and services that both 
facilitate copyright infringement and have substantial legitimate uses.   Copyright lawyers 
have  argued  bitterly  about  whether  and  how  Sony  applied  to  the  distribution  of 
technology that facilitated digital copyright infringement.  Two decades after the Sony  
decision, the Supreme Court agreed to take a second look at the question of contributory 
copyright liability in a case involving consumer copying over digital networks using 
peer-to-peer file sharing software. 
 
The Continuing Importance of Sony Today 
 
Peer-to-peer file sharing poses issues that are startlingly reminiscent of the record 
in Sony.  Consumers use peer-to-peer file sharing networks to make unauthorized copies 
in their homes for their own personal, consumptive use.  If making those copies violates 
the copyright law, then enforcing the law implicates the same privacy concerns that 
Justice  Stevens  raised  in  arguing  that  Congress  had  not  intended  to  prohibit  home 
videotaping. The copying is non-commercial in the same  sense that home Betamax 
recordings were non-commercial.97 As was true in Sony, there already is an enormous 
installed base of ordinary consumers using the technology.   By the time the Sony case 
was first argued in the Supreme Court, Sony claimed to have sold 5 million Betamax 
recorders to American consumers.  Current estimates of the number of peer-to-peer file 
sharers within the United States range from 40 to 60 million American consumers.  A 
number of copyright owners have authorized the exchange of material they own over 
peer-to-peer networks.  Some peer-to-peer file sharing is probably fair use, although the 
proportion of fair to infringing uses is the subject of passionate dispute.  Other material 
transmitted over peer-to-peer is in the public domain.  Studies attempting to measure 
whether and how much harm peer-to-peer file sharing causes to both actual and potential 
markets for recorded music have reached equivocal and conflicting results.98  The owners 
of music copyrights have recently begun to release digital copies of their works in a 
variety of different copy-protected formats, none of them compatible with one another, 
and see peer-to-peer file trading as a threat to plans to persuade the public to invest in 
copy-protected digital music, much as the videocassette recorder appeared to threaten the 
market for laser discs.   
 
Of  course,  there  are  also  significant  differences.    It  would  be  difficult  to 
characterize the transmission of files among 40 to 60 million consumers as “private,” and 
                                                 
97 But see A&M v. Napster, 114 F. Supp. 2d  896, 912 (N.D. Cal. 2000) (finding Napster use commercial 
because “Napster users get for free something they would ordinarily have to buy”), aff’d in part, rev’d in 
part,  239 F.3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2001). 
98 Compare Felix Oberholzer & Koleman Strumpf, The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: An 
Empirical  Analysis  (March  2004),  available  at 
http://www.unc.edu/~cigar/papers/FileSharing_March2004.pdf  (concluding  that  file  sharing  does  not 
reduce and may increase sales), with Stan J. Liebowitz, Pitfalls in Measuring the Impact of File Sharing 
(Oct. 13, 2004) available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=583484 (concluding that 
file sharing harms the sound recording industry),  See also LAWRENCE LESSIG, FREE CULTURE 68-73 
(2004). 
  Page 24 of 31 little of the material consumers exchange is programming they have been invited to view 
free of charge. Further, the economics of data storage suggest that consumers retain 
unauthorized peer-to-peer copies more often than they overwrite them. Most consumers 
engaged in peer-to-peer file sharing are probably building libraries rather than time-
shifting.  It is nonetheless clear that peer-to-peer file sharing software is capable of 
substantial non-infringing uses, and that at least one of those uses – authorized peer-to-
peer distribution-- is commercially significant. Under the Sony standard, then, even if the 
overwhelming majority of peer-to-peer file sharing in fact infringes copyright, holding 
the  purveyors  of  the  technology  contributorily  liable  for  individual  consumers’ 
infringement, solely on the basis of their dissemination of a technology with substantial 
non-infringing uses, is deeply problematic. 
 
  In MGM v. Grokster, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit read Sony to 
preclude the imposition of contributory liability on a distributor of peer-to-peer file 
sharing software where the defendant could not prevent specific incidents of infringement 
at the time it learned about them. Because the software had substantial non-infringing 
uses, and the distributor had no control over the uses consumers made of the software 
once they installed it, the court ruled, defendants could not be held liable merely on the 
basis of their design and distribution of software with both infringing and non-infringing 
applications.99 Imposing liability in such a case, the court noted, would expand the reach 
of contributory and vicarious copyright liability “exponentially,” and would alter general 
copyright law “in profound ways.”100 The court expressed the view that such a change in 
the law would be unwise: 
 
The introduction of new technology is always disruptive to old markets, 
and particularly to those copyright owners whose works are sold through 
well established distribution mechanisms. Yet, history has shown that 
time and market forces often provide equilibrium in balancing interests, 
whether the new technology be a player piano, a copier, a tape recorder, 
a video recorder, a personal computer, a karaoke machine, or an MP3 
player.  Thus,  it  is  prudent  for  courts  to  exercise  caution  before 
restructuring  liability  theories  for  the  purpose  of  addressing  specific 
market abuses, despite their apparent present magnitude.101  
 
Disappointed motion picture studios and record labels petitioned the Supreme Court to 
grant certiorari, arguing that “the Ninth Circuit’s decision threatens the very foundations 
of our copyright system in a digital era.”102 When the Supreme Court agreed to hear the 
                                                 
99 MGM v. Grokster, 380 F.3d 1154 (9th Cir 2004), aff’g  259 F. Supp. 2d 1029 (C.D. Cal. 2003), rev’d, __ 
U.S. __ (2005).  The court noted the record evidence of commercially significant authorized distribution 
through peer-to-peer file sharing and held that that distribution constituted substantial non-infringing use 
under the Sony standard. 
100 380 F. 3d at 1166. 
101 Id. at 1167. 
102 Petition for Certioriari at 3, MGM v. Grokster, __ U.S. __ (2005) (No. 04-480). Meanwhile, the 
recording industry had begun to pursue a different strategy: in the summer of 2003, the Recording Industry 
Association of America launched a wave of lawsuits against individual consumers engaged in peer-to-peer 
file trading.  See Recording Industry Association of America, Press Release: Recording Industry Begins 
  Page 25 of 31 case, consumer electronics and high technology interests reacted with alarm:  the Sony 
decision, they maintained, had for two decades protected innovators from overreaching 
copyright owners.  The motion picture and record industries, they believed, had never 
liked the decision and would use this opportunity to try to persuade the Court to overrule 
it or severely limit its scope.  They showered the Court with amicus briefs; supporters of 
the studios filed almost as many.  
 
  Many of the claims made in the Grokster briefs seemed eerily similar to claims that 
were raised and rejected in the course of the Sony litigation.103  In Sony, the studios had 
argued unsuccessfully that Sony should be required to incorporate a jammer into the 
Betamax to prevent unauthorized recording.104  In Grokster, plaintiffs argued that 
designers and distributors of peer to peer file sharing software should be held liable 
because they declined to design their software to block unauthorized file sharing.105 The 
studios in Sony had argued that Sony had built its business around the theft of 
copyrighted material; 106 the plaintiffs in Grokster made the same argument.107  In Sony, 
                                                                                                                                                
Suing  P2P  File  Sharers  Who  Illegally  Offer  Copyrighted  Music  Online  (Sept.8,  2003),  at  URL: 
http://www.riaa.com/news/newsletter/090803.asp.  A  year  later,  motion  picture  studios  followed  the 
recording industry’s example.  See infra note 126. 
 
103 In Sony, for example, the motion picture studios’ summary of argument explained: 
Even if it were proper in a copyright case to analogize to the staple article doctrine, that 
doctrine would not absolve petitioners of liability here. The staple article theory shields the 
seller of a staple article from contributory infringement liability only if (a) the seller does not 
actively cause, urge, encourage or aid purchasers to use the article for infringing purposes, 
and (b) the article is suitable and actually used for substantial non-infringing uses. The 
uncontroverted evidence and the district court's findings establish both that petitioners cause, 
urge, encourage and aid infringing VTR copying and that VTRs do not have actual, 
substantial non-infringing uses. 
Brief of Respondent Universal City Studios and Walt Disney Production, Sony, at 20.  The motion 
picture studios’ brief in Grokster summarized its argument thus: 
Although Sony-Betamax provides a defense to contributory infringement where 
the defendant sells a staple article of commerce that may be used to infringe but also has 
commercially significant noninfringing uses, 464 U.S. at 442, Grokster and StreamCast 
cannot avail themselves of that defense, for two independent reasons. 
First, Sony-Betamax provides no safe harbor where, as here, a defendant engages 
in conduct that encourages or assists infringement, or intends to facilitate it. Immunizing 
such conduct would be impossible to square with fundamental principles of copyright and 
patent law on which the Court relied in Sony-Betamax. … Second, and in all events, the 
Grokster and StreamCast services lack "commercially significant noninfringing uses."  
 
Brief of Motion Picture Studio and Recording Industry Petitioners,  MGM v. Grokster, ___ U.S. __ (2005) 
(No. 04-480) (filed Jan. 24, 2005), at 18.  
104 See supra note 6 and accompanying text; Brief of Sony Respondents, supra  note 103, at 12 n.4. 
105 See Brief of  MGM v. Grokster Petitioners, supra note 103, at 32-33; Brief for Songwriter and Music 
Publisher Petitioners, MGM v. Grokster, ___ U.S. __ (2005) (No. 04-480) (filed Jan.  24, 2005) at 15-16. 
106 See Brief of Sony Respondents, supra note 103, at 40. 
  Page 26 of 31 the studios had pointed to Betamax ads, brochures and instruction manuals that they 
claimed encouraged consumers to infringe their copyrights;108 in Grokster, the recording 
and motion picture industry claimed that the distributors of peer to peer file sharing 
software had “actively encouraged and assisted” millions of people to commit copyright 
infringement through the design of their software and the promotional materials that 
accompanied it.109 In Sony, the plaintiffs had argued that less than 9% of home video 
recording involved programs of the type that might be copied without their owner’s 
objecting.110 In Grokster, plaintiffs insisted that only a miniscule fraction of the copying 
taking place was authorized.111 In Sony, the studios had insisted “there would be little, if 
any, market for VTRs if they could not be used for infringing purposes.”112  In Grokster, 
plaintiffs argued that peer to peer file sharing software would not be commercially viable 
if it didn’t facilitate massive copyright infringement.113  
 
  Of the Justices who had decided Sony 21 years earlier, only three remained by the 
time Grokster  reached the Court:  Chief Justice Rehnquist, who had joined Justice 
Blackmun’s dissenting opinion, Justices Stevens, who had authored the majority opinion, 
and Justice O’Connor, who had provided much of the majority’s reasoning.  Defendants 
Grokster and Streamcast had made the strategic decision not to contest MGM’s assertion 
that consumers’ use of peer-to-peer file sharing software infringed MGM’s copyrights,114 
so the private copying issue that had been so vexing two decades earlier was not before 
the Court.   
 
  Plaintiffs sought to distinguish Sony, arguing that the Betamax, unlike peer-to-peer 
file sharing software, had been a legitimate product with predominantly legal uses 
(conveniently forgetting that the studios in Sony had not seen it that way).115 They urged 
the Court that Sony’s staple article of commerce doctrine should shield defendants only 
when a product’s principal use was non-infringing.  Indeed, Petitioners urged, Sony 
should not protect producers of products or services whose commercially viability 
depended on infringement.  Moreover, they argued, Sony should have no application to 
                                                                                                                                                
107 See, e.g., Brief of  MGM v. Grokster Petitioners, supra note 103, at 43-44; Brief for Songwriter and 
Music Publisher Petitioners, supra note 105, at 10-13.   
108 See Brief of Sony Respondents, supra  note 103, at 20.  
109 See Brief of MGM v. Grokster Petitioners, supra note 103, at 27-29, 31. 
110 See Brief of Sony Respondents, supra  note 103, at 48 n.113. 
111 See Brief of  MGM v. Grokster Petitioners, supra note 103,  at 36-37. 
112 See Brief of Sony Respondents, supra  note 103, at 50. 
113 See Brief of  MGM v. Grokster Petitioners, supra note 103, at 30-36. 
114 See MGM v. Groskter, __ U.S. __ (2005), slip op. at 5. 
115 See Brief of  MGM v. Grokster Petitioners, supra note 103, at 18-19, 30-31. 
  Page 27 of 31 cases in which defendants actively encouraged infringing uses. 116   
 
  Grokster and Streamcast emphasized the benefits of peer-to-peer software and the 
importance of Sony in protecting innovation.  Sony, they insisted, precluded contributory 
liability for distributing any product that was capable of non-infringing uses.  Any 
weakening of that rule would undermine the careful balance that the Court had struck. 
They urged the Court to leave any revision of the Sony standard to Congress.117 The 
Solicitor General of the United States weighed in, arguing that Sony required the courts to 
compare the relative significance of the infringing and non-infringing uses.118 More than 
fifty amici curiae filed briefs.  The majority of them urged the Court to retain the Sony 
standard, but differed sharply on just what that standard provided. 
 
Toward the end of the term, newspapers, copyright lawyers, and members of the 
entertainment, information and electronics industries waited nervously for the Grokster 
decision.  The Court held it back until the final day of the term and then announced a 
unanimous decision, reversing the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, but leaving 
Sony – at least officially -- undisturbed.   
 
The question is under what circumstances the distributor of a product 
capable  of  both  lawful  and  unlawful  use  is  liable  for  acts  of  copyright 
infringement by third parties using the product. We hold that one who distributes 
a device with the object of promoting its use to infringe copyright, as shown by 
clear expression or other affirmative steps taken to foster infringement, is liable 
for the resulting acts of infringement by third parties.119 
 
Justice Souter’s opinion for the Court explained that  Sony had  set the  standard for 
imposing contributory liability for the design, production or sale of a product that was 
suitable for both infringing and non-infringing uses,120 but that the case didn’t displace 
older lines of authority imposing contributory liability for intentionally inducing third 
parties to commit infringement.121 Congress had codified the principle of contributory 
                                                 
116 See id. at 26-32. 
117 See Brief for Respondents, MGM v. Grokster, ___ U.S. __ (2005) (No. 04-480) (filed March 1, 2005), at 
6-7, 24-25, 40-50. 
118 See Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae Supporting Petitioners, MGM v. Grokster, ___ U.S. __ 
(2005) (No. 04-480) (filed Jan. 24, 2005), at 14-20.  
119 MGM v. Grokster, __ U.S. __ (2005), slip op. at 1, available at 
http://a257.g.akamaitech.net/7/257/2422/27jun20051200/www.supremecourtus.gov/opinions/04pdf/04-
480.pdf. 
120 See id. at 15.  Justice Souter explained that the doctrine announced in Sony 
 absolves the equivocal conduct of selling an item with substantial lawful as well as 
unlawful uses, and limits liability to instances of more acute fault than the mere 
understanding that some of one’s products will be misused.  It leaves breathing room for 
innovation and a vigorous commerce. 
121 See id. at __, slip. op. at 17: 
Sony's  rule  limits  imputing  culpable  intent  as  a  matter  of  law  from  the 
characteristics or uses of a distributed product. But nothing in Sony requires courts to 
  Page 28 of 31 liability for intentional inducement in the patent statute, and for the same reasons it made 
sense in Sony to adopt patent law’s staple article of commerce doctrine, it made sense 
here to import patent’s intentional inducement rule into copyright law.122  Since the 
record in Grokster revealed ample evidence of “purposeful, culpable expression and 
conduct,” designed to cause others to infringe plaintiffs’ copyrights, Sony did not shield 
defendants from liability.123 
Because Sony did not displace other theories of secondary liability, and 
because  we find below that it was error to grant summary judgment to the 
companies on MGM's inducement claim, we do not revisit Sony further, as MGM 
requests, to add a more quantified description of the point of balance between 
protection  and  commerce  when  liability  rests  solely  on  distribution  with 
knowledge that unlawful use will occur. It is enough to note that the Ninth 
Circuit's judgment rested on an erroneous understanding of Sony and to leave 
further consideration of the Sony rule for a day when that may be required.124 
 
Only the concurring opinions betrayed the dispute among the Justices as to what 
Sony had held and how that holding should apply to the case before it.  Justice Ginsburg’s 
concurrence (joined by Rehnquist, who had voted with Blackmun, as well as by Justice 
Kennedy) argued that Grokster and Streamcast had failed to show that their software was 
capable of “substantial” non-infringing use under Sony, because infringing uses dwarfed 
non-infringing ones.  Justice Breyer’s concurrence (joined by Stevens and O’Connor), in 
contrast, criticized Justice Ginsburg’s opinion as an effort to narrow Sony.  In Breyer’s 
view, Grokster and Streamcast had indeed proved their software capable of substantial 
non-infringing use.  Nor did he believe the standard should be changed:  “Sony's rule, as I 
interpret it, has provided entrepreneurs with needed assurance that they will be shielded 
from copyright liability as they bring valuable new technologies to market.”125  The two 
concurrences reflected the persistent split about Sony’s meaning among members of the 
copyright bar.  Justice Ginsburg’s narrowing interpretation followed the stingy reading of 
Sony long favored by lawyers for businesses in the entertainment industry, while Justice 
Breyer’s more generous interpretation echoed the broader reading advanced by lawyers 
for high technology, library and consumer interests. The opinion for the Court avoided 
the  issue  entirely,  inviting  an  inference  that  the  Justices  were  able  to  agree  on  a 
unanimous opinion only by avoiding the invitation to narrow, broaden, clarify or apply 
the Sony rule – whatever that rule might be. 
 
                                                                                                                                                
ignore evidence of intent if there is such evidence, and the case was never meant to 
foreclose rules of fault-based liability derived from the common law.  
 
122 Id.  at __, slip. op. at 19, 
123 Justice Souter cited evidence that, he said, revealed an unmistakable purpose to encourage users to use 
defendants’ software in infringing rather than non-infringing ways.  See id at __, slip op. at 20-23. 
124 Id. at __, slip op. at 17. 
125 Id. at __ (Breyer, J., concurring), slip op. at 9. 
  Page 29 of 31   Justice Souter’s articulation of the inducement basis for liability seems designed 
to catch only the most egregious contributory infringers.  Some observers, though, have 
expressed alarm that the test invites extensive discovery about the intent and business 
models of copyright defendants.  This, they fear, will make it easier for disgruntled 
copyright owners to bankrupt developers of innovative technology by subjecting them to 
ruinously expensive litigation.   It remains to be seen how lower courts will apply it.  
Meanwhile, at least officially, the Sony standard shields other defendants from liability 
for technology capable of substantial non-infringing use.  It will likely be years before we 
will get a peek at Supreme Court papers and learn what went on inside the Court in 
Grokster, but the opinions themselves suggest that the Justices found themselves no more 
able to clarify what Sony should mean than the litigants before them, and were able to 
issue a unanimous opinion only by agreeing to leave the meaning of Sony unmodified and 
unclear.  
 
Conclusion 
 
The initial drafts of Justice Blackmun’s majority opinion and Justice Stevens’s 
dissent in Sony were elegantly written, tightly reasoned, and clear.  The Supreme Court 
decision, in contrast, is an awkward amalgamation of different arguments and rationales, 
while the dissent reads like a compilation of passages rescued from a draft opinion for the 
Court, interspersed with pot shots at each of the majority’s conclusions.  Reviewing the 
history of the opinions within the Court reveals that Justice Stevens cobbled together 
points advanced by other Justices in order to build a majority, and Justice Blackmun 
turned his original majority opinion into a dissent. It makes for an interesting tale, if one 
is a Court-watcher or a copyright nerd, but does it tell us anything important about the 
meaning of Sony twenty years later? 
 
Although the Supreme Court voted to hear the Betamax case to decide whether 
consumer home videotaping violated the copyright statute, the majority of the Justices 
came to conclude that fashioning the appropriate test for contributory infringement was 
as important as resolving the legality of home copying.  As the Justices struggled to apply 
the statute to consumer home copying and to draw the lines of secondary liability for 
purveyors of new copying devices, it became clear that the Court’s decision would affect 
future cases whenever copyright law clashed with new technology.  Justice O’Connor in 
particular appreciated that the task of interpreting the copyright law required attention not 
only to the protection of authors and copyright owners but also to the encouragement of 
new technology.  In her view, and ultimately in the view of the majority, that concern 
required the Court to adopt a test that limited contributory liability so that it would not 
make it illegal to distribute products that were capable of substantial non-infringing uses.   
 
Sony v. Universal Studios is famous for its treatment of fair use.  Its fair use 
analysis,  however,  proved  to  be  neither  workable  nor  particularly  long-lived.   Two 
decades after the Sony decision, copyright law still has not resolved how it should treat 
consumer home copying.  Justice Stevens’s specter of massive invasions of consumer 
privacy  by  the  copyright  police  attempting  to  enforce  the  copyright  statute  against 
millions of 21st Century William Griffithses has become a real danger.  In November of 
2004, twenty-eight years after the first suit filed against William Griffiths, motion picture 
  Page 30 of 31 studios did what Jack Valenti had promised they would not do:  they filed lawsuits 
against individual consumers.126   
 
Sony’s analysis of secondary liability, in contrast, proved to be as important as 
Justice O’Connor suspected that it might.  More than two decades later, though, the 
standard the Court adopted continues to be the subject of dispute.  Perhaps the Sony 
standard is unclear at least in part because, in an effort to attract and hold five votes, 
Justice Stevens incorporated multiple rationales into the majority opinion.  Perhaps it is 
unclear in part because the case was tried when the technology was still in its infancy, 
and its potential to harm or enhance the copyright owner’s market was not yet clear.   In 
either case, it seems that the passage of time has not made it easier to identify the 
appropriate balance.  In Grokster, the Supreme Court had an opportunity to clarify the 
Sony standard, but was unable to do so.  Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice Souter 
observed:  “The more artistic protection is favored, the more technological innovation 
may be discouraged; the administration of copyright law is an exercise in managing the 
trade-off.”127  Precisely how copyright law manages the trade-off remains to be seen. 
                                                 
126 See, e.g., Twentieth Century Fox v. Doe, No. C 04-04862 WHA (N.D. Cal. filed Nov. 16, 2004); 
Universal City Studios v. Doe, No. 1:2004cv03343 (N.D. Ga. filed Nov. 15, 2004); Metro Goldwyn Mayer 
Pictures v. Doe, No. 1:2004cv02006 (D. D.C. filed Nov. 15, 2004). 
127 See Grokster, __ U.S. at __, slip op. at 10. 
  Page 31 of 31 